
1. Bioessays. 2016 Mar 22. doi: 10.1002/bies.201500162. [Epub ahead of print]

Mutations and deletions of PRC2 in prostate cancer.

Jain P(1,)(2), Di Croce L(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and
Technology, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona,
Spain. (3)Institucio Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avancats, Barcelona, Spain.

The Polycomb group of proteins (PcGs) are transcriptional repressor complexes
that regulate important biological processes and play critical roles in cancer.
Mutating or deleting EZH2 can have both oncogenic and tumor suppressive functions
by increasing or decreasing H3K27me3. In contrast, mutations of SUZ12 and EED are
reported to have tumor suppressive functions. EZH2 is overexpressed in many
cancers, including prostate cancer, which can lead to silencing of tumor
suppressors, genes regulating epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), and
interferon signaling. In some cases, EZH2 overexpression also leads to its use of
non-histone substrates. Lastly, PRC2 associated factors can influence the
progression of cancer through progressive mutations or by specific binding to
certain target genes. Here, we discuss which mutations and deletions of the PRC2 
complex have been detected in different cancers, with a specific focus on the
overexpression of EZH2 in prostate cancer.

© 2016 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 27000413  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Invest Dermatol. 2016 Mar 16. pii: S0022-202X(16)30872-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jid.2016.02.809. [Epub ahead of print]

Dissecting the Roles of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 Subunits in the Control of 
Skin Development.

Dauber KL(1), Perdigoto CN(1), Valdes VJ(1), Santoriello FJ(1), Cohen I(1),
Ezhkova E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Department of Developmental and Regenerative
Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(2)Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Department of Developmental and Regenerative
Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
Electronic address: elena.ezhkova@mssm.edu.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is an essential regulator of cell
physiology. While there have been numerous studies on PRC2 function in somatic
tissue development and stem cell control, these have focused on the loss of a
single PRC2 subunit. Recent studies, however, have shown that PRC2 subunits may
function independently of the PRC2 complex. To investigate the function of PRC2
in the control of skin development, we generated and analysed three conditional
knockout mouse lines, in which the essential PRC2 subunits EED, Suz12, or Ezh1/2 
are conditionally ablated in the embryonic epidermal progenitors that give rise
to the epidermis, hair follicles, and Merkel cells. Our studies showed that the
observed loss-of-function phenotypes are shared between the three knockouts,
indicating that in the skin epithelium, EED, Suz12, and Ezh1/2 function largely
as subunits of the PRC2 complex. Interestingly, the absence of PRC2 results in
dramatically different phenotypes across the different skin lineages: premature
acquisition of a functional epidermal barrier, formation of ectopic Merkel cells,
and defective postnatal development of hair follicles. The strikingly different
roles of PRC2 in the formation of three lineages exemplify the complex outcomes
that the lack of PRC2 can have in a somatic stem cell system.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26994968  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Mod Pathol. 2016 Mar 18. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2016.45. [Epub ahead of print]

Loss of H3K27 tri-methylation is a diagnostic marker for malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors and an indicator for an inferior survival.

Cleven AH(1), Sannaa GA(2), Briaire-de Bruijn I(1), Ingram DR(2), van de Rijn
M(3), Rubin BP(4), de Vries MW(5), Watson KL(6), Torres KE(6), Wang WL(2), van
Duinen SG(1), Hogendoorn PC(1), Lazar AJ(2), Bovée JV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Stanford University 
Medical Center, Stanford, CA, USA. (4)Robert J. Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic and Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland,
OH, USA. (5)Department of Otolaryngology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. (6)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are aggressive sarcomas that
can show overlapping features with benign neurofibromas as well as high-grade
sarcomas. Additional diagnostic markers are needed to aid in this often
challenging differential diagnosis. Recently mutations in two critical components
of the polycomb repressor 2 (PRC2) complex, SUZ12 and EED, were reported to occur
specifically in MPNSTs while such mutations are absent in neurofibromas, both in 
the setting of neurofibromatosis (NF) and sporadic cases. Furthermore, both SUZ12
and EED mutations in MPNSTs were associated with loss of H3K27 tri-methylation, a
downstream target of PRC2. Therefore, we tested whether H3K27me3
immunohistochemistry is useful as a diagnostic and prognostic marker for MPNSTs. 
We performed H3K27me3 immunohistochemistry in 162 primary MPNSTs, 97
neurofibromas and 341 other tumors using tissue microarray. We observed loss of
H3K27me3 in 34% (55/162) of all MPNSTs while expression was retained in all
neurofibromas including atypical (n=8) and plexiform subtypes (n=24). Within
other tumors we detected loss of H3K27me3 in only 7% (24/341). Surprisingly, 60% 
(9/15) of synovial sarcomas and 38% (3/8) of fibrosarcomatous dermatofibrosarcoma
protuberans (DFSP) showed loss of H3K27 trimethylation. Only 1 out of 44
schwannomas showed loss of H3K27me3 and all 4 perineuriomas showed intact
H3K27me3. Furthermore, MPNSTs with loss of H3K27 tri-methylation showed inferior 
survival compared with MPNSTs with intact H3K27 tri-methylation, which was
validated in two independent cohorts. Our results indicate that H3K27me3
immunohistochemistry is useful as a diagnostic marker, in which loss of H3K27me3 
favors MPNST above neurofibroma. However, H3K27me3 immunohistochemistry is not
suitable to distinguish MPNST from its morphological mimicker synovial sarcoma or
fibrosarcomatous DFSP. Since loss of H3K27 tri-methylation was related to poorer 
survival in MPNST, chromatin modification mediated by this specific histone seems
to orchestrate more aggressive tumour biology.Modern Pathology advance online
publication, 18 March 2016; doi:10.1038/modpathol.2016.45.

PMID: 26990975  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Histopathology. 2016 Mar 17. doi: 10.1111/his.12966. [Epub ahead of print]

The application of next generation-sequencing-based molecular diagnostics in
endometrial stromal sarcoma.

Li X(1), Anand M(1), Haimes JD(2), Manoj N(2), Berlin AM(2), Kudlow BA(2), Nucci 
MR(3), Ng TL(4), Stewart CJ(5), Lee CH(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (2)ArcherDX, Inc, Boulder, Colorado, United States.
(3)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
United States. (4)Department of Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital and
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (5)Department of
Histopathology, King Edward Memorial Hospital and School for Women's and Infants'
Health, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Royal Alexandra Hospital,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

AIMS: Endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESS) are divided into low-grade and
high-grade subtypes with the latter exhibiting more aggressive clinical behavior.
While histology and immunophenotype can aid in the diagnosis of these tumors,
genetic studies can provide additional diagnostic insights as low-grade ESS
frequently harbor fusions involving JAZF1/SUZ12 and/or JAZF1/PHF1, whereas
high-grade ESS are defined by YWHAE-NUTM2A/B fusions. The aim of this study is to
evaluate the utility of a next generation sequencing (NGS)-based assay in
identifying ESS fusions in archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor
samples.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We applied NGS-based fusion transcript detection assay
(Archer FusionPlex Sarcoma Panel) that target YWHAE and JAZF1 fusions in a series
of low-grade ESS (n=11) and high-grade ESS (n=5) that were previously confirmed
to harbor genetic rearrangements by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
and/or reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analyses. The
fusion assay identified junctional fusion transcript sequences that corresponded 
to the known FISH/RT-PCR results in all cases. Four low-grade ESS harbored
JAZF1-PHF1 fusions with different junctional sequences and all were correctly
identified because of the open-ended nature of the assay design using anchored
multiplex PCR. Seven non-ESS sarcomas were also included as negative controls and
no strong ESS fusion candidates were identified in these cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate good sensitivity and specificity of
NGS-based gene fusion assay in the detection of ESS fusion transcripts. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26990025  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 3;11(3):e0150518. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150518.
eCollection 2016.

Involvement of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 in Maturation of Induced Pluripotent
Stem Cells during Reprogramming of Mouse and Human Fibroblasts.

Khazaie N(1), Massumi M(2,)(3), Wee P(4), Salimi M(1), Mohammadnia A(1), Yaqubi
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic Engineering 
and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of Physiology, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (3)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount
Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. (4)Department of Medical Genetics and Signal
Transduction Research Group, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) provide a reliable source for the study of
regenerative medicine, drug discovery, and developmental biology. Despite
extensive studies on the reprogramming of mouse and human fibroblasts into iPSCs,
the efficiency of reprogramming is still low. Here, we used a bioinformatics and 
systems biology approach to study the two gene regulatory waves governing the
reprogramming of mouse and human fibroblasts into iPSCs. Our results revealed
that the maturation phase of reprogramming was regulated by a more complex
regulatory network of transcription factors compared to the initiation phase.
Interestingly, in addition to pluripotency factors, the polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) members Ezh2, Eed, Jarid2, Mtf2, and Suz12 are crucially
recruited during the maturation phase of reprogramming. Moreover, we found that
during the maturation phase of reprogramming, pluripotency factors, via the
expression and induction of PRC2 complex members, could silence the
lineage-specific gene expression program and maintain a ground state of
pluripotency in human and mouse naïve iPSCs. The findings obtained here provide
us a better understanding of the gene regulatory network (GRN) that governs
reprogramming, and the maintenance of the naïve state of iPSCs.

PMCID: PMC4777544
PMID: 26938987  [PubMed - in process]


6. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 22. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7567. [Epub ahead of print]

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate targets cancer stem-like cells and enhances
5-fluorouracil chemosensitivity in colorectal cancer.

Toden S(1), Tran HM(1), Tovar-Camargo OA(1), Okugawa Y(1), Goel A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gastrointestinal Research, Center for Epigenetics, Cancer
Prevention and Cancer Genomics, Baylor Research Institute and Charles A. Sammons 
Cancer Center, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

Resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy is a major cause of mortality in colorectal 
cancer (CRC) patients. A small subset of cancer cells, termed "cancer stem cells"
(CSCs), are believed to be key contributors of chemoresistance and tumor
recurrence. Recently, epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), an active catechin
present in green tea, has been shown to suppress CSC growth in various cancers,
but whether it can specifically target CSCs and subsequently sensitize
chemoresistant CRC cells to standard of care chemotherapeutic treatments remains 
unknown. Herein, we investigated the chemosensitizing effects of EGCG in
5-fluorouracil (5FU)-resistant (5FUR) CRC cells and spheroid-derived CSCs
(SDCSCs), and interrogated the underlying molecular mechanisms responsible for
its chemopreventive activity. EGCG enhanced 5FU-induced cytotoxicity and
inhibited proliferation in 5FUR cell lines through enhancement of apoptosis and
cell cycle arrest. The 5FUR cells showed higher spheroid forming capacity
compared to parental cells, indicating higher CSC population. EGCG treatment in
these cells resulted in suppression of SDCSC formation and enhanced 5FU
sensitivity to SDCSCs. Furthermore, EGCG suppressed Notch1, Bmi1, Suz12, and
Ezh2, and upregulated self-renewal suppressive-miRNAs, miR-34a, miR-145, and
miR-200c, which are some of the key pathways targeted in 5FUR CRC cells. These
findings were validated in vivo, wherein EGCG treatment resulted in inhibited
tumor growth in a SDCSC xenograft model. Collectively our data provide novel and 
previously unrecognized evidence for EGCG-induced sensitization to 5FU through
targeting of CSCs in CRC. Our data highlight that in addition to its
chemopreventive ability, EGCG may serve as an adjunctive treatment to
conventional chemotherapeutic drugs in CRC patients.

PMID: 26930714  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Mol Cancer. 2016 Feb 16;15(1):15. doi: 10.1186/s12943-016-0500-z.

Mutation of epigenetic regulators TET2 and MLL3 in patients with HTLV-I-induced
acute adult T-cell leukemia.

Yeh CH(1), Bai XT(1), Moles R(1), Ratner L(2), Waldmann TA(3), Toshiki W(4),
Nicot C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Center for Viral Oncology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Molecular Oncology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, 63110, USA. (3)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch,
Center for Cancer Research, National Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room
4 N/115, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. (4)Department of Medical
Genome Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of Pathology,
Center for Viral Oncology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow
Boulevard, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. cnicot@kumc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic regulators play a critical role in the maintenance of
specific chromatin domains in an active or repressed state. Disruption of
epigenetic regulatory mechanisms is widespread in cancer cells and largely
contributes to the transformation process through active repression of tumor
suppressor genes. While mutations of epigenetic regulators have been reported in 
various lymphoid malignancies and solid cancers, mutation of these genes in
HTLV-I-associated T-cell leukemia has not been investigated.
METHOD: Here we used whole genome next generation sequencing (NGS) of uncultured 
freshly isolated ATL samples and identified the presence of mutations in SUZ12,
DNMT1, DNMT3A, DNMT3B, TET1, TET2, IDH1, IDH2, MLL, MLL2, MLL3 and MLL4.
RESULTS: TET2 was the most frequently mutated gene, occurring in 32 % (10/31) of 
ATL samples analyzed. Interestingly, NGS revealed nonsense mutations accompanied 
by loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in TET2 and MLL3, which was further confirmed by 
cloning and direct sequencing of DNA from uncultured cells. Finally, direct
sequencing of matched control and tumor samples revealed that TET2 mutation was
present only in ATL tumor cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that inactivation of MLL3 and TET2 may play an
important role in the tumorigenesis process of HTLV-I-induced ATL.

PMCID: PMC4754821
PMID: 26880370  [PubMed - in process]


8. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2016 Feb 16;11(1):15. doi: 10.1186/s13023-016-0400-8.

JAZF1/SUZ12 gene fusion in endometrial stromal sarcomas.

Hrzenjak A(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonology, Medical University
of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 15, A-8036, Graz, Austria.
andelko.hrzenjak@medunigraz.at. (2)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Lung Vascular
Research, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
andelko.hrzenjak@medunigraz.at.

Endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESSs) belong to the rarest uterine malignancies
(prevalence category <1-9/1,000,000). According to the new 2014 World Health
Organisation (WHO) classification, they are separated into four categories;
benign endometrial stromal nodules (ESNs), low grade endometrial stromal sarcomas
(LG-ESSs), high-grade endometrial stromal sarcomas (HG-ESSs) and undifferentiated
uterine sarcomas (UUSs). Due to heterogeneous histopathologic appearance these
tumors still represent diagnostic challenge, even for experienced pathologists.
ESSs are genetically very heterogeneous and several chromosomal translocations
and gene fusions have so far been identified in these malignancies. To date the
JAZF1/SUZ12 gene fusion is by far the most frequent and seems to be the
cytogenetic hallmark of ESN and LG-ESS. Based on present literature data this
gene fusion is present in approximately 75 % of ESN, 50 % of LG-ESS and 15 % of
HG-ESS cases. The frequency of JAZF1/SUZ12 appearance varies between classic ESS 
and different morphologic variants. This gene fusion is suggested to become a
specific diagnostic tool, especially in difficult borderline cases. In
combination with the recently described YWHAE/FAM22 gene fusion the JAZF1/SUZ12
fusion could be used to differentiate between LG-ESS and HG-ESS. The purpose of
this review is to summarize literature data published in last two and a half
decades about this gene fusion, as a contribution to our understanding of ESS
genetics and pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4754953
PMID: 26879382  [PubMed - in process]


9. Indian J Cancer. 2015 Jan-Mar;52(1):27-31. doi: 10.4103/0019-509X.175566.

Evaluating of suppressor of zeste 12 and chromobox homolog 8 genes expression
showed two possible origins for gastric cancer development.

Ghalandary M, Behmanesh M(1), Sadeghizadeh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran.

CONTEXT: Changes in genome, made by multiple genetic and epigenetic alterations
result to the cancer initiation and progression. Suppressor of zeste 12 (SUZ12)
and chromobox homolog 8 (CBX8) proteins are two components of epigenetic
regulators that their function in the initiation and progression of cancers are
not well-understood.
AIMS: The role of SUZ12 and its target CBX8 is examined.
SETTINGS AND DESIGN: Comparing the expression levels of SUZ12 and CBX8 between 30
gastric tumor and their marginal tissues.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction technique was performed.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: Statistical comparison was carried out using Statistical
Program for Social Sciences software 16.0 (Released 2007, SPSS for Windows. SPSS 
Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) and (GraphPad Prism version 5 for Windows, GraphPad
Software, La Jolla, California USA, ww.graphpad.com).
RESULTS: Despite the obvious differences in the expression of these genes in each
sample for tumor and its marginal tissue, statistical analysis did not show
significant differences in the mean of expression for SUZ12 and CBX8 genes in
total. Due to the variation in expression levels, the samples could be divided
into two groups for each gene; group 1, in which the genes were overexpressed in 
tumor and group 2, in which the genes were down regulated in tumor samples.
CONCLUSION: We found that in each group, the difference in the SUZ12 and CBX8
genes expression were significantly divergent between tumors and their marginal
tissues. It means that the regulatory mechanisms involved in developing and
controlling the process of gastric cancer pathogenesis is more complex than it
thought. These results also bring new evidence on the possible double origin for 
gastric cancer development, bone-marrow-derived cells and tissue stem cells.

PMID: 26837964  [PubMed - in process]


10. J Biol Chem. 2016 Feb 26;291(9):4523-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.677930. Epub 2016 
Jan 5.

Histone Deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) Negatively Regulates Thermogenic Program in Brown
Adipocytes via Coordinated Regulation of Histone H3 Lysine 27 (H3K27)
Deacetylation and Methylation.

Li F(1), Wu R(1), Cui X(1), Zha L(1), Yu L(2), Shi H(3), Xue B(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Obesity Reversal, Department of Biology, Georgia State
University, Atlanta, Georgia 30303 and. (2)the Department of Animal and Avian
Science, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742. (3)From the Center
for Obesity Reversal, Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta,
Georgia 30303 and hshi3@gsu.edu. (4)From the Center for Obesity Reversal,
Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia 30303 and
bxue@gsu.edu.

Inhibiting class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) increases energy expenditure,
reduces adiposity, and improves insulin sensitivity in obese mice. However, the
precise mechanism is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that HDAC1 is a
negative regulator of the brown adipocyte thermogenic program. The Hdac1 level is
lower in mouse brown fat (BAT) than white fat, is suppressed in mouse BAT during 
cold exposure or ß3-adrenergic stimulation, and is down-regulated during brown
adipocyte differentiation. Remarkably, overexpressing Hdac1 profoundly blocks,
whereas deleting Hdac1 significantly enhances, ß-adrenergic activation-induced
BAT-specific gene expression in brown adipocytes. ß-Adrenergic activation in
brown adipocytes results in a dissociation of HDAC1 from promoters of
BAT-specific genes, including uncoupling protein 1 (Ucp1) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> co-activator 1a (Pgc1a), leading to increased
acetylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27), an epigenetic mark of gene
activation. This is followed by dissociation of the polycomb repressive
complexes, including the H3K27 methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homologue
(EZH2), suppressor of zeste 12 (SUZ12), and ring finger protein 2 (RNF2) from
(and concomitant recruitment of H3K27 demethylase ubiquitously transcribed
tetratricopeptide repeat on chromosome X (UTX) to) Ucp1 and Pgc1a promoters,
leading to decreased H3K27 trimethylation, a histone transcriptional repression
mark. Thus, HDAC1 negatively regulates the brown adipocyte thermogenic program,
and inhibiting Hdac1 promotes BAT-specific gene expression through a coordinated 
control of increased acetylation and decreased methylation of H3K27, thereby
switching the transcriptional repressive state to the active state at the
promoters of Ucp1 and Pgc1a. Targeting HDAC1 may be beneficial in prevention and 
treatment of obesity by enhancing BAT thermogenesis.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 26733201  [PubMed - in process]


11. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Mar;15(3):878-91. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.053207. Epub
2015 Dec 29.

Characterization of Two Distinct Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase (NuRD)
Complex Assemblies in Embryonic Stem Cells.

Bode D(1), Yu L(1), Tate P(2), Pardo M(3), Choudhary J(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK; (2)§Stem Cell Engineering,
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SA, 
UK. (3)From the Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK; mp3@sanger.ac.uk.

Pluripotency and self-renewal, the defining properties of embryonic stem cells,
are brought about by transcriptional programs involving an intricate network of
transcription factors and chromatin remodeling complexes. The Nucleosome
Remodeling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex plays a crucial and dynamic role in the
regulation of stemness and differentiation. Several NuRD-associated factors have 
been reported but how they are organized has not been investigated in detail.
Here, we have combined affinity purification and blue native polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis followed by protein identification by mass spectrometry and
protein correlation profiling to characterize the topology of the NuRD complex.
Our data show that in mouse embryonic stem cells the NuRD complex is present as
two distinct assemblies of differing topology with different binding partners.
Cell cycle regulator Cdk2ap1 and transcription factor Sall4 associate only with
the higher mass NuRD assembly. We further establish that only isoform Sall4a, and
not Sall4b, associates with NuRD. By contrast, Suz12, a component of the PRC2
Polycomb repressor complex, associates with the lower mass entity. In addition,
we identify and validate a novel NuRD-associated protein, Wdr5, a regulatory
subunit of the MLL histone methyltransferase complex, which associates with both 
NuRD entities. Bioinformatic analyses of published target gene sets of these
chromatin binding proteins are in agreement with these structural observations.
In summary, this study provides an interesting insight into mechanistic aspects
of NuRD function in stem cell biology. The relevance of our work has broader
implications because of the ubiquitous nature of the NuRD complex. The strategy
described here can be more broadly applicable to investigate the topology of the 
multiple complexes an individual protein can participate in.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 26714524  [PubMed - in process]


12. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Apr;40(4):479-89. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000564.

Loss of H3K27me3 Expression Is a Highly Sensitive Marker for Sporadic and
Radiation-induced MPNST.

Prieto-Granada CN(1), Wiesner T, Messina JL, Jungbluth AA, Chi P, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology §Medicine Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center <U+2225>Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY Moffitt Cancer Center (MCC), Tampa, FL.

Most malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) exhibit combined
inactivation of NF1, CDKN2A, and polycomb repressive complex 2 component genes
(Embryonic Ectoderm Development [EED] and Suppressor of Zeste 12 [SUZ12]).
Mutations in EED and SUZ12 induce loss of trimethylation at lysine 27 of histone 
3 (H3K27me3), with subsequent aberrant transcriptional activation of polycomb
repressive complex 2-repressed homeobox master regulators. These findings
prompted us to investigate the performance of an anti-H3K27me3 monoclonal
antibody clone C36B11 as an immunohistochemical marker for MPNSTs. We assessed
the C36B11 reactivity pattern in a pathologically and genetically
well-characterized cohort of 68 MPNSTs, spanning various clinical presentations, 
such as type 1 neurofibromatosis (NF1), radiotherapy, and sporadic MPNSTs. We
found that 69% (n=47) of all MPNSTs demonstrated loss of H3K27me3 expression,
with 42 (61%) showing complete loss and 5 (7%) showing partial loss, whereas 31% 
(n=21) retained H3K27me3 expression. Among the NF1-related high-grade MPNSTs, 60%
demonstrated loss of expression. In contrast, the majority of both sporadic (95%)
and radiotherapy-related (91%) MPNSTs showed loss of H3K27me3 expression. Two of 
the 3 low-grade MPNSTs and all neurofibromas showed retained expression.
Furthermore, all 5 epithelioid MPNSTs retained H3K27me3 labeling. The specificity
of H3K27me3 loss as a marker for MPNSTs was studied by testing a large spectrum
of lesions included in MPNST differential diagnosis, such as spindle/desmoplastic
melanomas, synovial sarcomas, myoepithelial tumors, and other mesenchymal
neoplasms, all of which retained expression of H3K27me3. We conclude that
immunohistochemical analysis of H3K27me3 has good sensitivity and robust
specificity for the diagnosis of MPNST, particularly outside of NF1 clinical
history, which represents the most challenging diagnostic setting.

PMID: 26645727  [PubMed - in process]


13. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 4;10(12):e0144398. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144398.
eCollection 2015.

The Role of H3K4me3 in Transcriptional Regulation Is Altered in Huntington's
Disease.

Dong X(1), Tsuji J(1), Labadorf A(2,)(3), Roussos P(4,)(5), Chen JF(2), Myers
RH(2,)(3,)(6), Akbarian S(4), Weng Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States of America. (2)Department of
Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States of
America. (3)Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, MA, United States 
of America. (4)Friedman Brain Institute, Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States of America. (5)Department of
Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY,
United States of America. (6)Genome Science Institute, Boston University School
of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States of America.

Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal-dominant neurodegenerative disorder
resulting from expansion of CAG repeats in the Huntingtin (HTT) gene. Previous
studies have shown mutant HTT can alter expression of genes associated with
dysregulated epigenetic modifications. One of the most widely studied chromatin
modifications is trimethylated lysine 4 of histone 3 (H3K4me3). Here, we
conducted the first comprehensive study of H3K4me3 ChIP-sequencing in neuronal
chromatin from the prefrontal cortex of six HD cases and six non-neurologic
controls, and its association with gene expression measured by RNA-sequencing. We
detected 2,830 differentially enriched H3K4me3 peaks between HD and controls,
with 55% of them down-regulated in HD. Although H3K4me3 signals are expected to
be associated with mRNA levels, we found an unexpected discordance between
altered H3K4me3 peaks and mRNA levels. Gene ontology (GO) term enrichment
analysis of the genes with differential H3K4me3 peaks, revealed statistically
significantly enriched GO terms only in the genes with down-regulated signals in 
HD. The most frequently implicated biological process terms are organ
morphogenesis and positive regulation of gene expression. More than 9,000 H3K4me3
peaks were located not near any recognized transcription start sites and
approximately 36% of these "distal" peaks co-localized to known enhancer sites.
Six transcription factors and chromatin remodelers are differentially enriched in
HD H3K4me3 distal peaks, including EZH2 and SUZ12, two core subunits of the
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). Moreover, PRC2 repressive state was
significantly depleted in HD-enriched peaks, suggesting the epigenetic role of
PRC2 inhibition associated with up-regulated H3K4me3 in Huntington's disease. In 
summary, our study provides new insights into transcriptional dysregulation of
Huntington's disease by analyzing the differentiation of H3K4me3 enrichment.

PMCID: PMC4670094
PMID: 26636336  [PubMed - in process]


14. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 15;5(9):2730-44. eCollection 2015.

MiR-449a suppresses cell invasion by inhibiting MAP2K1 in non-small cell lung
cancer.

You J(1), Zhang Y(1), Li Y(1), Fang N(1), Liu B(1), Zu L(1), Zhou Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Lung Cancer Metastasis and Tumor Microenvironment,
Tianjin Lung Cancer Institute, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital
Tianjin 300052, China.

Increasing evidence reveals that deregulation of miRNAs contributes to
carcinogenesis of the human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Our study
discovered that the expression of miR-449a was markedly decreased in NSCLC cells 
with high metastatic capacity and tissues of positive lymph node metastasis.
Moreover, our results showed that miR-449a could act as a tumor suppressor by
inhibiting the invasion of NSCLC cells in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically,
miR-449a inhibited the expression of MAP2K1 by direct targeting its 3'UTR, and
regulated the activity of MEK1/ERK1/2/c-Jun pathway through an auto-regulatory
feedback loop. Furthermore, the histone methylation mediated the decreased
expression of miR-449a through SUZ12. Taken together, the novel connection
between miR-449a and MAP2K1 demonstrated here provided a new, potential
therapeutic target for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC4633902
PMID: 26609480  [PubMed]


15. Mod Pathol. 2016 Jan;29(1):4-13. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.134. Epub 2015 Nov
20.

Loss of H3K27 trimethylation distinguishes malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors from histologic mimics.

Schaefer IM(1), Fletcher CD(1), Hornick JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

The diagnosis of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor is challenging,
particularly in the sporadic setting. Inactivation of the polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2), resulting from inactivating mutations of its constituents SUZ12
or EED1, has recently been identified in 70-90% of malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors. Homozygous PRC2 inactivation results in loss of histone H3K27
trimethylation (H3K27me3). PRC2 inactivation promotes tumor progression and may
render patients sensitive to epigenetic-based targeted therapies. H3K27me3 loss
has not yet been validated as a diagnostic marker. We evaluated
immunohistochemistry for H3K27me3 in 100 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors
(70 sporadic, 10 neurofibromatosis type 1-associated, 10 radiation-associated, 10
epithelioid) and 200 other spindle cell neoplasms representing potential mimics
(20 each monophasic synovial sarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, dedifferentiated
liposarcoma, malignant solitary fibrous tumor, low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma,
cellular schwannoma, spindle cell melanoma, unclassified postradiation sarcoma;
10 each atypical neurofibroma, spindle cell rhabdomyosarcoma, gastrointestinal
stromal tumor, fibrosarcomatous dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans). In total, 51
(51%) malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, including 34 (49%) sporadic, 7
(70%) neurofibromatosis type 1-associated, and 10 (100%) radiation-associated,
but no epithelioid malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, were negative for
H3K27me3. An additional 6 (6%) tumors showed heterogeneous H3K27me3 expression.
Among the 90 sporadic, neurofibromatosis type 1-associated, and
radiation-associated malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, complete H3K27me3 
loss was observed in 29% of low-grade, 59% of intermediate-grade, and 83% of
high-grade tumors (low vs intermediate/high grade, P=0.0003). Among other tumor
types, 4 (20%) unclassified postradiation sarcomas were negative for H3K27me3,
whereas all other neoplasms were positive. Loss of H3K27me3 is highly specific
for malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (although only modestly more
sensitive than S-100 protein and SOX10) and may be a useful diagnostic marker.
Our findings suggest that PRC2 inactivation in malignant peripheral nerve sheath 
tumor may occur during progression to higher grades.

PMID: 26585554  [PubMed - in process]


16. Cancer Res. 2016 Jan 15;76(2):275-82. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1938. Epub
2015 Nov 13.

PRC2 Epigenetically Silences Th1-Type Chemokines to Suppress Effector T-Cell
Trafficking in Colon Cancer.

Nagarsheth N(1), Peng D(2), Kryczek I(1), Wu K(3), Li W(4), Zhao E(4), Zhao L(5),
Wei S(2), Frankel T(2), Vatan L(2), Szeliga W(2), Dou Y(6), Owens S(6), Marquez
V(7), Tao K(3), Huang E(8), Wang G(3), Zou W(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor,
Michigan. Graduate Programs in Immunology and Cancer Biology, University of
Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (2)Department of Surgery,
University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (3)Department of 
Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, China. (4)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan
School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Department of Surgery, Union Hospital,
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
China. (5)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan School of Medicine,
Ann Arbor, Michigan. (6)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan School of
Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (7)Chemical Biology Laboratory, Center for Cancer 
Research, NCI-Frederick, Frederick, Maryland. (8)Departments of Colorectal
Surgery and Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio. (9)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan
School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Graduate Programs in Immunology and
Cancer Biology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan School
of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan. wzou@med.umich.edu.

Infiltration of tumors with effector T cells is positively associated with
therapeutic efficacy and patient survival. However, the mechanisms underlying
effector T-cell trafficking to the tumor microenvironment remain poorly
understood in patients with colon cancer. The polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2) is involved in cancer progression, but the regulation of tumor immunity by
epigenetic mechanisms has yet to be investigated. In this study, we examined the 
relationship between the repressive PRC2 machinery and effector T-cell
trafficking. We found that PRC2 components and demethylase JMJD3-mediated histone
H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) repress the expression and subsequent
production of Th1-type chemokines CXCL9 and CXCL10, mediators of effector T-cell 
trafficking. Moreover, the expression levels of PRC2 components, including EZH2, 
SUZ12, and EED, were inversely associated with those of CD4, CD8, and Th1-type
chemokines in human colon cancer tissue, and this expression pattern was
significantly associated with patient survival. Collectively, our findings reveal
that PRC2-mediated epigenetic silencing is not only a crucial oncogenic
mechanism, but also a key circuit controlling tumor immunosuppression. Therefore,
targeting epigenetic programs may have significant implications for improving the
efficacy of current cancer immunotherapies relying on effective T-cell-mediated
immunity at the tumor site. Cancer Res; 76(2); 275-82. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4715964 [Available on 2017-01-15]
PMID: 26567139  [PubMed - in process]


17. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.423. [Epub ahead of print]

DNA methylation reactivates GAD1 expression in cancer by preventing CTCF-mediated
polycomb repressive complex 2 recruitment.

Yan H(1), Tang G(2), Wang H(3), Hao L(3), He T(4), Sun X(1), Ting AH(5), Deng
A(1), Sun S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Changhai Hospital, The Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, China. (2)Institute of Genetics, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Colorectal Surgery,
Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Division of Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, Changhai Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, China. (5)Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner
Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Levels of <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamic acid decarboxylase 1 (GAD1),
the enzyme that synthesizes GABA, are significantly increased in neoplastic
tissues. However, the mechanism underlying this increase remains elusive. Instead
of silencing gene transcription, we showed that the GAD1 promoter was
hypermethylated in both colon and liver cancer cells, leading to the production
of high levels of GAD1. GAD1 is a target gene that is silenced by H3K27me3. The
key locus responsible for GAD1 reactivation was mapped to a DNA
methylation-sensitive CTCF-binding site (CTCF-BS3) within the third intron of
GAD1. Chromosome configuration capture (3C) analysis indicated that an
intrachromosomal loop was formed by CTCF self-dimerisation in normal cells (CTCF 
binds to both unmethylated CTCF-BS3 and CTCF-BS2). The CTCF dimer then interacted
with suppressor of zeste 12 homologue (SUZ12), which is a domain of Polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), promoting the methylation of H3K27 and the silencing
of GAD1 expression. This silencing was shown to be inhibited by DNA methylation
in cancer cells. These findings strongly suggest that GAD1 is reactivated by DNA 
methylation, which provided a model for DNA methylation and the active
orchestration of oncogenic gene expression by CTCF in cancer cells.Oncogene
advance online publication, 9 November 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.423.

PMID: 26549033  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Dec 4-11;468(1-2):269-73. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.115. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

3-Deazaneplanocin A suppresses aggressive phenotype-related gene expression in an
oral squamous cell carcinoma cell line.

Hatta M(1), Naganuma K(2), Kato K(3), Yamazaki J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Science and Molecular Biology, Fukuoka Dental
College, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic address: hatta@college.fdcnet.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Fukuoka Dental College, Fukuoka,
Japan. (3)Department of Physiological Science and Molecular Biology, Fukuoka
Dental College, Fukuoka, Japan.

In tumor tissues, alterations of gene expression caused by aberrant epigenetic
modifications confer phenotypic diversity on malignant cells. Although
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) has been shown to reactivate tumor suppressor genes
in several cancer cells, it remains unclear whether DZNep attenuates the
malignant phenotypes of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells. In this study,
we investigated the effect of DZNep on the expression of genes related to
aggressive phenotypes, such as epithelial-mesenchymal transition, in OSCC cells. 
We found that DZNep reduced the cellular levels of polycomb group proteins (EZH2,
SUZ12, BMI1, and RING1A) and the associated trimethylation of Lys27 on histone H3
and monoubiquitination of Lys119 on histone H2A in the poorly differentiated OSCC
cell line SAS. Immunocytochemical staining demonstrated that DZNep induced the
reorganization of filamentous actin and the membrane localization of E-cadherin
associated with cell-cell adhesions. We also found an inhibitory effect of DZNep 
on cell proliferation using a WST assay. Finally, quantitative RT-PCR analysis
demonstrated that genes involved in the aggressive phenotypes (TWIST2, EGFR,
ACTA2, TGFB1, WNT5B, and APLIN) were down-regulated, whereas epithelial phenotype
genes (CDH1, CLDN4, IVL, and TGM1) were up-regulated in SAS cells treated with
DZNep. Collectively, our findings suggest that DZNep reverses the aggressive
characteristics of OSCC cells through the dynamic regulation of epithelial
plasticity via the reprogramming of gene expression patterns.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26505792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2015 Dec;37:42-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2015.10.003. Epub 2015 
Nov 11.

PRC2 mediated H3K27 methylations in cellular identity and cancer.

Conway E(1), Healy E(1), Bracken AP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(2)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.
Electronic address: adrian.bracken@tcd.ie.

The Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) is a multiprotein chromatin modifying
complex that is essential for vertebrate development and differentiation. It is
composed of a trimeric core of SUZ12, EED and EZH1/2 and is responsible for
catalysing both di-methylation and tri-methylation of Histone H3 at lysine 27
(H3K27me2/3). Both H3K27 methylations contribute to the role of PRC2 in
maintaining cellular identity. In all cell types, the H3K27me3 modification is
associated with repression of genes encoding regulators of alternative lineages. 
The less well-characterised H3K27me2 modification is ubiquitous throughout the
genome and is thought to act like a protective blanket to maintain the repression
of non-H3K27me3 associated genes and cell-type-specific enhancers of alternative 
lineages. Recent cancer genome sequencing studies highlighted that several genes 
encoding PRC2 components as well as Histone H3 are mutated in multiple cancer
types. Intriguingly, these cancers have changes in the global levels of the
H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 modifications as well as genome-wide redistributions.
Exciting new studies suggest that these changes confer context dependent blocks
in cellular differentiation and increased vulnerability to aberrant cancer
signalling pathways.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26497635  [PubMed - in process]


20. Science. 2015 Oct 16;350(6258):aac4383. doi: 10.1126/science.aac4383. Epub 2015
Oct 15.

Structural basis of histone H3K27 trimethylation by an active polycomb repressive
complex 2.

Jiao L(1), Liu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cecil H. and Ida Green Center for Reproductive Biology Sciences and Division
of Basic Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Department of
Biophysics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390,
USA. (2)Cecil H. and Ida Green Center for Reproductive Biology Sciences and
Division of Basic Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and
Department of Biophysics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. xin.liu@utsouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2015 Oct 16;350(6258):278-9.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) catalyzes histone H3K27 trimethylation
(H3K27me3), a hallmark of gene silencing. Here we report the crystal structures
of an active PRC2 complex of 170 kilodaltons from the yeast Chaetomium
thermophilum in both basal and stimulated states, which contain Ezh2, Eed, and
the VEFS domain of Suz12 and are bound to a cancer-associated inhibiting H3K27M
peptide and a S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine cofactor. The stimulated complex also
contains an additional stimulating H3K27me3 peptide. Eed is engulfed by a
belt-like structure of Ezh2, and Suz12(VEFS) contacts both of these two subunits 
to confer an unusual split active SET domain for catalysis. Comparison of PRC2 in
the basal and stimulated states reveals a mobile Ezh2 motif that responds to
stimulation to allosterically regulate the active site.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26472914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Biol Chem. 2015 Nov 20;290(47):28489-501. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.658237. Epub
2015 Oct 6.

Tumor Suppressive Function of p21-activated Kinase 6 in Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Liu W(1), Liu Y(1), Liu H(2), Zhang W(3), Fu Q(1), Xu J(4), Gu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and. (2)the
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine Related Diseases,
Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200011, China. 
(3)Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai
200032 and. (4)From the Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and
jjxufdu@fudan.edu.cn. (5)From the Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology and jxgu@shmu.edu.cn.

Our previous studies identified the oncogenic role of p21-activated kinase 1
(PAK1) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
Contrarily, PAK6 was found to predict a favorable prognosis in RCC patients.
Nevertheless, the ambiguous tumor suppressive function of PAK6 in
hepatocarcinogenesis remains obscure. Herein, decreased PAK6 expression was found
to be associated with tumor node metastasis stage progression and unfavorable
overall survival in HCC patients. Additionally, overexpression and silence of
PAK6 experiments showed that PAK6 inhibited xenografted tumor growth in vivo, and
restricted cell proliferation, colony formation, migration, and invasion and
promoted cell apoptosis and anoikis in vitro. Moreover, overexpression of kinase 
dead and nuclear localization signal deletion mutants of PAK6 experiments
indicated the tumor suppressive function of PAK6 was partially dependent on its
kinase activity and nuclear translocation. Furthermore, gain or loss of function 
in polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) components, including EZH2, SUZ12, and
EED, elucidated epigenetic control of H3K27me3-arbitrated PAK6 down-regulation in
hepatoma cells. More importantly, negative correlation between PAK6 and EZH2
expression was observed in hepatoma tissues from HCC patients. These data
identified the tumor suppressive role and potential underlying mechanism of PAK6 
in hepatocarcinogenesis.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4653705 [Available on 2016-11-20]
PMID: 26442588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):33319-28. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5384.

Genomic landscape of endometrial stromal sarcoma of uterus.

Choi YJ(1), Jung SH(2,)(3), Kim MS(1), Baek IP(2,)(3), Rhee JK(4), Lee SH(5), Hur
SY(6), Kim TM(4), Chung YJ(2,)(3,)(7), Lee SH(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Cancer Evolution
Research Center, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul
137-701, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Integrated Research Center for
Genome Polymorphism, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul
137-701, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Medical Informatics, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Hospital Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University
of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea. (6)Department of
Obstetrics/Gynecology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea,
Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea. (7)Department of Microbiology, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea.

Although recurrent gene fusions such as JAZF1-JJAZ1 are considered driver events 
for endometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS) development, other genomic alterations
remain largely unknown. In this study, we performed whole-exome sequencing,
transcriptome sequencing and copy number profiling for five ESSs (three low-grade
ESS (LG-ESS) and two undifferentiated uterine sarcomas (UUSs)). All three LG-ESSs
exhibited either one of JAZF1-SUZ12, JAZF1-PHF1 and MEAF6-PHF1 fusions, whereas
the two UUSs did not. All ESSs except one LG-ESS exhibited copy number
alterations (CNAs), many of which encompassed cancer-related genes. In UUSs, five
CNAs encompassing cancer-related genes (EZR, CDH1, RB1, TP53 and PRKAR1A)
accompanied their expressional changes, suggesting that they might stimulate UUS 
development. We found 81 non-silent mutations (35 from LG-ESSs and 46 from UUSs) 
that included 15 putative cancer genes catalogued in cancer-related databases,
including PPARG and IRF4 mutations. However, they were non-recurrent and did not 
include any well-known mutations, indicating that point mutations may not be a
major driver for ESS development. Our data show that gene fusions and CNAs are
the principal drivers for LG-ESS and USS, respectively, but both may require
additional genomic alterations including point mutations. These differences may
explain the different biologic behaviors between LG-ESS and UUS. Our findings
suggest that ESS development requires point mutations and CNAs as well as the
gene fusions.

PMCID: PMC4741768
PMID: 26429873  [PubMed - in process]


23. J Biol Chem. 2015 Nov 6;290(45):27067-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.684753. Epub 2015
Sep 29.

Histone Deacetylase 3 Coordinates Deacetylase-independent Epigenetic Silencing of
Transforming Growth Factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) to Orchestrate Second Heart Field
Development.

Lewandowski SL(1), Janardhan HP(1), Trivedi CM(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605.
(2)From the Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605
chinmay.trivedi@umassmed.edu.

About two-thirds of human congenital heart disease involves second heart
field-derived structures. Histone-modifying enzymes, histone deacetylases
(HDACs), regulate the epigenome; however, their functions within the second heart
field remain elusive. Here we demonstrate that histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3)
orchestrates epigenetic silencing of Tgf-ß1, a causative factor in congenital
heart disease pathogenesis, in a deacetylase-independent manner to regulate
development of second heart field-derived structures. In murine embryos lacking
HDAC3 in the second heart field, increased TGF-ß1 bioavailability is associated
with ascending aortic dilatation, outflow tract malrotation, overriding aorta,
double outlet right ventricle, aberrant semilunar valve development, bicuspid
aortic valve, ventricular septal defects, and embryonic lethality. Activation of 
TGF-ß signaling causes aberrant endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition and altered
extracellular matrix homeostasis in HDAC3-null outflow tracts and semilunar
valves, and pharmacological inhibition of TGF-ß rescues these defects. HDAC3
recruits components of the PRC2 complex, methyltransferase EZH2, EED, and SUZ12, 
to the NCOR complex to enrich trimethylation of Lys-27 on histone H3 at the
Tgf-ß1 regulatory region and thereby maintains epigenetic silencing of Tgf-ß1
specifically within the second heart field-derived mesenchyme. Wild-type HDAC3 or
catalytically inactive HDAC3 expression rescues aberrant
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition and epigenetic silencing of Tgf-ß1 in
HDAC3-null outflow tracts and semilunar valves. These findings reveal that
epigenetic dysregulation within the second heart field is a predisposing factor
for congenital heart disease.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4646383 [Available on 2016-11-06]
PMID: 26420484  [PubMed - in process]


24. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Nov 1;338(2):214-21. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.09.016. Epub
2015 Sep 25.

Restoration of IGF2 imprinting by polycomb repressive complex 2 docking factor
SUZ12 in colon cancer cells.

Wang H(1), Ge S(2), Qian G(2), Li W(3), Cui J(3), Wang G(3), Hoffman AR(4), Hu
JF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, PR China; Stanford University
Medical School, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.
(2)Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200025, PR China. (3)Stem Cell and Cancer Center, First Affiliated
Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130061, PR China. (4)Stanford
University Medical School, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304, 
USA. Electronic address: arhoffman@stanford.edu. (5)Stem Cell and Cancer Center, 
First Affiliated Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130061, PR China;
Stanford University Medical School, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto,
CA 94304, USA. Electronic address: jifan@stanford.edu.

The insulin-like growth factor II (IGF2) gene is aberrantly expressed in tumors
as a result of loss of imprinting (LOI). Reactivation of the normally-suppressed 
maternal allele may lead to IGF2 upregulation and increased tumor growth,
particularly in colon cancer. However, the mechanisms underlying IGF2 LOI in
tumors are poorly defined. In this report, we identified polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) docking factor SUZ12 as a critical factor in regulating IGF2
imprinting in tumors. Human colon cancer cell lines (HRT18 and HT29) show loss of
IGF2 imprinting. Ectopic expression of SUZ12 restored normal monoallelic
expression of IGF2 in these two colon cancer cell lines. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and chromatin conformation capture (3C), we found that
the virally-expressed SUZ12 bound to IGF2 promoters, coordinating with endogenous
CTCF to orchestrate a long range intrachromosomal loop between the imprinting
control region (ICR) and the IGF2 promoters. The histone methyltransferase EZH2
was recruited to the IGF2 promoters, where it induced H3K27 hypermethylation,
suppressing one allele, leading to the restoration of IGF2 imprinting. These data
demonstrate that SUZ12 is a key molecule in the regulation of monoallelic
expression of IGF2, suggesting a novel epigenetic therapeutic strategy for
modulating IGF2 production in human tumors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26407907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genes (Basel). 2015 Sep 7;6(3):812-40. doi: 10.3390/genes6030812.

Epigenetic Heterogeneity of B-Cell Lymphoma: DNA Methylation, Gene Expression and
Chromatin States.

Hopp L(1), Löffler-Wirth H(2), Binder H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre for Bioinformatics, Universität Leipzig, Härtelstr.
16-18, 04107 Leipzig, Germany. hopp@izbi.uni-leipzig.de. (2)Interdisciplinary
Centre for Bioinformatics, Universität Leipzig, Härtelstr. 16-18, 04107 Leipzig, 
Germany. wirth@izbi.uni-leipzig.de. (3)Interdisciplinary Centre for
Bioinformatics, Universität Leipzig, Härtelstr. 16-18, 04107 Leipzig, Germany.
binder@izbi.uni-leipzig.de.

Mature B-cell lymphoma is a clinically and biologically highly diverse disease.
Its diagnosis and prognosis is a challenge due to its molecular heterogeneity and
diverse regimes of biological dysfunctions, which are partly driven by epigenetic
mechanisms. We here present an integrative analysis of DNA methylation and gene
expression data of several lymphoma subtypes. Our study confirms previous results
about the role of stemness genes during development and maturation of B-cells and
their dysfunction in lymphoma locking in more proliferative or immune-reactive
states referring to B-cell functionalities in the dark and light zone of the
germinal center and also in plasma cells. These dysfunctions are governed by
widespread epigenetic effects altering the promoter methylation of the involved
genes, their activity status as moderated by histone modifications and also by
chromatin remodeling. We identified four groups of genes showing characteristic
expression and methylation signatures among Burkitt's lymphoma, diffuse large B
cell lymphoma, follicular lymphoma and multiple myeloma. These signatures are
associated with epigenetic effects such as remodeling from transcriptionally
inactive into active chromatin states, differential promoter methylation and the 
enrichment of targets of transcription factors such as EZH2 and SUZ12.

PMCID: PMC4584331
PMID: 26371046  [PubMed]


26. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):32646-55. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5066.

Acquisition of a single EZH2 D1 domain mutation confers acquired resistance to
EZH2-targeted inhibitors.

Baker T(1), Nerle S(1), Pritchard J(1), Zhao B(1), Rivera VM(1), Garner A(1),
Gonzalvez F(1).

Author information: 
(1)ARIAD Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Although targeted therapies have revolutionized cancer treatment, overcoming
acquired resistance remains a major clinical challenge. EZH2 inhibitors (EZH2i), 
EPZ-6438 and GSK126, are currently in the early stages of clinical evaluation and
the first encouraging signs of efficacy have recently emerged in the clinic. To
anticipate mechanisms of resistance to EZH2i, we used a forward genetic platform 
combining a mutagenesis screen with next generation sequencing technology and
identified a hotspot of secondary mutations in the EZH2 D1 domain (Y111 and
I109). Y111D mutation within the WT or A677G EZH2 allele conferred robust
resistance to both EPZ-6438 and GSK126, but it only drove a partial resistance
within the Y641F allele. EZH2 mutants required histone methyltransferase (HMT)
catalytic activity and the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) components, SUZ12
and EED, to drive drug resistance. Furthermore, D1 domain mutations not only
blocked the ability of EZH2i to bind to WT and A677G mutant, but also abrogated
drug binding to the Y641F mutant. These data provide the first cellular
validation of the mechanistic model underpinning the oncogenic function of WT and
mutant EZH2. Importantly, our findings suggest that acquired-resistance to EZH2i 
may arise in WT and mutant EZH2 patients through a single mutation that remains
targetable by second generation EZH2i.

PMCID: PMC4741719
PMID: 26360609  [PubMed - in process]


27. BMC Genomics. 2015 Sep 4;16(1):679. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1862-0.

Lasting effects of early exposure to temperature on the gonadal transcriptome at 
the time of sex differentiation in the European sea bass, a fish with mixed
genetic and environmental sex determination.

Díaz N(1,)(2), Piferrer F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Ciències del Mar, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas 
(CSIC), Passeig Marítim, 37-49, 08003, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Present address: Max 
Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, 48149, Münster, Germany. (3)Institut 
de Ciències del Mar, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC),
Passeig Marítim, 37-49, 08003, Barcelona, Spain. piferrer@icm.csic.es.

BACKGROUND: Sex in fish is plastic and in several species can be influenced by
environmental factors. In sensitive species, elevated temperatures have a
masculinizing effect. Previous studies on the effects of temperature on gene
expression have been restricted to a few cognate genes, mostly related to testis 
or ovarian development, and analyzed in gonads once they had completed the
process of sex differentiation. However, studies on the effect of temperature at 
the whole gonadal transcriptomic level are scarce in fish and, in addition,
temperature effects at the time of sex differentiation at the transcriptomic
level are also unknown. Here, we used the European sea bass, a gonochoristic
teleost with a polygenic sex determination system influenced by temperature, and 
exposed larvae to elevated temperature during the period of early gonad
formation. Transcriptomic analysis of the gonads was carried out about three
months after the end of temperature exposure, shortly after the beginning of the 
process of sex differentiation.
RESULTS: Elevated temperature doubled the number of males with respect to
untreated controls. Transcriptomic analysis of early differentiating female
gonads showed how heat caused: 1) an up-regulation of genes related to
cholesterol transport (star), the stress response (nr3c1) and testis
differentiation (amh, dmrt, etc.), 2) a decrease in the expression of genes
related to ovarian differentiation such as cyp19a1a, and 3) an increase in the
expression of several genes related to epigenetic regulatory mechanisms (hdac11, 
dicer1, ehmt2, jarid2a, pcgf2, suz12, mettl22).
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, the results of this study contribute to the
understanding of how the early environment sets permanent changes that result in 
long-lasting consequences, in this case in the sexual phenotype. Results also
show the usefulness of comparing the effects of heat on the behavior of cognate
genes related to sex differentiation as well as that of genes involved in
establishing and maintaining cell identity through epigenetic mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4560065
PMID: 26338702  [PubMed - in process]


28. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep 4. [Epub ahead of print]

The role of the polycomb repressive complex pathway in T and NK cell lymphoma:
biological and prognostic implications.

Kim SH(1), Yang WI, Min YH, Ko YH, Yoon SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 50-1,
Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 120-752, South Korea.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2; formed by EZH2, SUZ12, and EED protein
subunits) and PRC1 (BMI1 protein) induce gene silencing through histone
modification, primarily H3K27me3, and deregulation of PRC pathways leads to
tumorigenesis. In the present study, activation of PRC2, H3K27me3, and BMI1 was
investigated by immunohistochemistry in 175 cases of T and natural killer (NK)
cell lymphoma. Activation of PRC proteins was analyzed according to c-MYC
activation, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection, CD30 activation, and survival.
Among all T and NK cell lymphomas, high expression rates of 54.7 % for EZH2,
33.3 % for SUZ12, 85.7 % for EED, 40.5 % for H3K27me3, and 30.9 % for BMI1 were
discovered. Activation of PRC2, H3K27me3, and BMI1 showed positive correlations
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Activation of c-MYC was associated with activation of SUZ12 and
triple coactivation of all PRC2 protein subunits
(EZH2(high)/SUZ12(high)/EED(high)) (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). In EBV-positive tumors, activation
of EZH2 and H3K27me3 showed greater association (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). H3K27me3 and BMI1
showed a negative association in tumors expressing CD30 (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). With respect 
to survival, BMI1 activation was independently associated with poor prognosis in 
T and NK cell lymphomas (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002). In conclusion, T and NK cell lymphomas were 
associated with activation of PRC pathway markers, for which c-MYC activation and
EBV infection could be suggested as possible causes. PRC pathway markers may be
potential therapeutic targets and prognostic markers in T and NK cell lymphoma.

PMID: 26337274  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. J Biol Chem. 2015 Oct 9;290(41):25151-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.662650. Epub 2015
Aug 25.

The Histone Demethylase UTX Promotes Brown Adipocyte Thermogenic Program Via
Coordinated Regulation of H3K27 Demethylation and Acetylation.

Zha L(1), Li F(2), Wu R(2), Artinian L(2), Rehder V(2), Yu L(3), Liang H(4), Xue 
B(5), Shi H(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Oncology and Southwest Cancer Center, Southwest
Hospital, The Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China,
Department of Biology and Center for Obesity Reversal, Georgia State University, 
Atlanta, Georgia 30303, and. (2)Department of Biology and Center for Obesity
Reversal, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia 30303, and. (3)Department of
Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742. 
(4)From the Department of Oncology and Southwest Cancer Center, Southwest
Hospital, The Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China,
lianghoujie@sina.com. (5)Department of Biology and Center for Obesity Reversal,
Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia 30303, and bxue@gsu.edu. (6)Department
of Biology and Center for Obesity Reversal, Georgia State University, Atlanta,
Georgia 30303, and hshi3@gsu.edu.

Brown adipocytes function to dissipate energy as heat through adaptive
thermogenesis. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the brown fat
thermogenic program may provide insights for the development of therapeutic
approaches in the treatment of obesity. Most studies investigating the mechanisms
underlying brown fat development focus on genetic mechanisms; little is known
about the epigenetic mechanisms in this process. We have discovered that
ubiquitously transcribed tetratricopeptide repeat on chromosome X (UTX), a
histone demethylase for di- or tri-methylated histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27me2/3),
plays a potential role in regulating brown adipocyte thermogenic program. We
found that UTX is up-regulated during brown adipocyte differentiation and by cold
exposure in both brown adipose tissue (BAT) and white adipose tissue (WAT) of
mice, suggesting a potential role in thermogenesis. Inactivation of UTX
down-regulates brown fat specific gene expression, while overexpression of UTX
does the opposite. Notably, activation of ß adrenergic signaling recruits UTX to 
the UCP1 and PGC1a promoters, leading to decreased H3K27me3, a histone
transcriptional repressive mark. UTX demethylates H3K27me3 and subsequently
interacts with the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) protein CBP, resulting in
increased H3K27 acetylation (H3K27ac), a histone transcriptional active mark. UTX
positively regulate brown adipocyte thermogenic program through coordinated
control of demethylating H3K27me3 and acetylating H3K27, switching the
transcriptional repressive state to the transcriptional active state at the
promoters of UCP1 and PGC1a. We conclude that UTX may play a potential role in
regulation of brown adipocyte gene expression and may mediate ß adrenergic
activation of brown fat function.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4599018 [Available on 2016-10-09]
PMID: 26306033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015 Nov;100(5):1839-48; discussion 1848. doi:
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2015.05.089. Epub 2015 Aug 20.

Pulmonary Metastases Exhibit Epigenetic Clonality: Implications for Precision
Cancer Therapy.

Reardon ES(1), Hong JA(1), Straughan DM(1), Azoury SC(1), Zhang M(1), Schrump
DS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Epigenetics Laboratory, Thoracic and GI Oncology Branch, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland. (2)Thoracic
Epigenetics Laboratory, Thoracic and GI Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland. Electronic address:
david.schrump@nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Development of effective cancer therapies may be limited by
intratumoral heterogeneity, which facilitates outgrowth and organ-specific
dissemination of treatment resistant clones. At present, limited information is
available regarding epigenetic landscapes of pulmonary metastases. This study was
undertaken to characterize epigenetic signatures of pulmonary metastases and to
identify potential therapeutic targets.
METHODS: RNA and DNA were extracted from 65 pulmonary metastases resected from 12
patients (5 with sarcoma, 7 with adrenocortical carcinoma). Quantitative reverse 
transcription polymerase chain reaction techniques were used to evaluate
expression levels of cancer-testis (CT) genes (NY-ESO-1, MAGE-A3, MAGE-A9,
MAGE-A12, GAGE1, CT-45, SSX-1, and SSX-2), tumor suppressor (TS) genes (p16 and
RASSF1A), and genes encoding epigenetic modifiers (DNMT1, DNMT3A, DNMT3B, EZH2,
EED, and SUZ12), aberrantly expressed in human malignant diseases. Pyrosequencing
techniques were used to quantitate DNA methylation levels in LINE1, NBL2, and
D4Z4 repetitive sequences and promoter methylation status of differentially
regulated genes. Results of these analyses were compared with a standardized
panel of normal lung tissues.
RESULTS: Pulmonary metastases exhibited histologically related and
patient-specific global DNA demethylation. Significant interpatient heterogeneity
of gene expression was observed even among patients with similar tumor histologic
features. Epigenetic signatures appeared consistent among metastases from the
same patient, irrespective of the time of resection (synchronous/metachronous) or
the anatomic location. EZH2, EED, and SUZ12 (core components of Polycomb
repressive complex-2 [PRC-2]) were upregulated in the majority of metastases.
CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary metastases exhibit patient-specific epigenetic clonality, 
which may be exploited for precision therapies targeting aberrant CT or TS gene
expression. PRC-2 may be a shared target for epigenetic therapy of pulmonary
metastases.

Copyright © 2015 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 26298164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Haematologica. 2015 Nov;100(11):1442-50. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2015.129692. Epub 
2015 Aug 20.

Pediatric T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia evolves into relapse by clonal selection,
acquisition of mutations and promoter hypomethylation.

Kunz JB(1), Rausch T(2), Bandapalli OR(1), Eilers J(3), Pechanska P(3),
Schuessele S(3), Assenov Y(4), Stütz AM(5), Kirschner-Schwabe R(6), Hof J(7),
Eckert C(6), von Stackelberg A(6), Schrappe M(8), Stanulla M(9), Koehler R(10),
Avigad S(11), Elitzur S(11), Handgretinger R(12), Benes V(13), Weischenfeldt
J(14), Korbel JO(15), Muckenthaler MU(16), Kulozik AE(17).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, Children's
Hospital, University of Heidelberg, Germany Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit, 
EMBL-University of Heidelberg, Germany German Cancer Consortium (DKTK),
Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit, EMBL-University of
Heidelberg, Germany European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Genome Biology 
Unit, Heidelberg, Germany European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Genomics 
Core Facility, Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Department of Pediatric Oncology,
Hematology and Immunology, Children's Hospital, University of Heidelberg, Germany
Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit, EMBL-University of Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Division of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk Factors, The German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit,
EMBL-University of Heidelberg, Germany European Molecular Biology Laboratory
(EMBL), Genome Biology Unit, Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Department of Pediatric
Oncology/Hematology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany. (7)Department
of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany. (8)Pediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein,
Campus Kiel, Germany. (9)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Medical
School Hannover, Germany. (10)Department of Human Genetics, University of
Heidelberg, Germany. (11)Molecular Oncology, Felsenstein Medical Research Center 
and Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel,
Petah Tikva, Israel. (12)Children's Hospital, University Hospital Tübingen,
Germany. (13)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Genomics Core
Facility, Heidelberg, Germany. (14)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), 
Genome Biology Unit, Heidelberg, Germany. (15)Molecular Medicine Partnership
Unit, EMBL-University of Heidelberg, Germany European Molecular Biology
Laboratory (EMBL), Genome Biology Unit, Heidelberg, Germany
Martina.Muckenthaler@med.uni-heidelberg.de Andreas.Kulozik@med.uni-heidelberg.de 
jan.korbel@embl-heidelberg.de. (16)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology
and Immunology, Children's Hospital, University of Heidelberg, Germany Molecular 
Medicine Partnership Unit, EMBL-University of Heidelberg, Germany
Martina.Muckenthaler@med.uni-heidelberg.de Andreas.Kulozik@med.uni-heidelberg.de 
jan.korbel@embl-heidelberg.de. (17)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology
and Immunology, Children's Hospital, University of Heidelberg, Germany Molecular 
Medicine Partnership Unit, EMBL-University of Heidelberg, Germany German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany Martina.Muckenthaler@med.uni-heidelberg.de
Andreas.Kulozik@med.uni-heidelberg.de jan.korbel@embl-heidelberg.de.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2015 Nov;100(11):1373-5.

Relapsed precursor T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia is characterized by
resistance against chemotherapy and is frequently fatal. We aimed at
understanding the molecular mechanisms resulting in relapse of T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia and analyzed 13 patients at first diagnosis, remission and
relapse by whole exome sequencing, targeted ultra-deep sequencing, multiplex
ligation dependent probe amplification and DNA methylation array. Compared to
primary T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, in relapse the number of single
nucleotide variants and small insertions and deletions approximately doubled from
11.5 to 26. Targeted ultra-deep sequencing sensitively detected subclones that
were selected for in relapse. The mutational pattern defined two types of
relapses. While both are characterized by selection of subclones and acquisition 
of novel mutations, 'type 1' relapse derives from the primary leukemia whereas
'type 2' relapse originates from a common pre-leukemic ancestor. Relapse-specific
changes included activation of the nucleotidase NT5C2 resulting in resistance to 
chemotherapy and mutations of epigenetic modulators, exemplified by SUZ12, WHSC1 
and SMARCA4. While mutations present in primary leukemia and in relapse were
enriched for known drivers of leukemia, relapse-specific changes revealed an
association with general cancer-promoting mechanisms. This study thus identifies 
mechanisms that drive progression of pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia to relapse and may explain the characteristic treatment resistance of
this condition.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMID: 26294725  [PubMed - in process]


32. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Aug 20;6:e1858. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.203.

A novel lncRNA, LUADT1, promotes lung adenocarcinoma proliferation via the
epigenetic suppression of p27.

Qiu M(1,)(2), Xu Y(1,)(3), Wang J(1,)(4), Zhang E(5), Sun M(5), Zheng Y(1,)(6),
Li M(1), Xia W(1,)(2), Feng D(1,)(2), Yin R(1), Xu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Cancer
Hospital, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular and Translational Cancer Research, 
Cancer Institute of Jiangsu Province, Baiziting 42, Nanjing 210009, China. (2)The
Fourth Clinical College of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210000, China.
(3)The First Clinical College of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210000,
China. (4)Department of Scientific Research, Nanjing Medical University
Affiliated Cancer Hospital, Cancer Institute of Jiangsu Province, Nanjing 210009,
China. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210000, China. (6)Department of Nursing, Nanjing Medical
University Affiliated Cancer Hospital, Cancer Institute of Jiangsu Province,
Nanjing 210009, China.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are known to regulate the development and
progression of various cancers. However, few lncRNAs have been well characterized
in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). Here, we identified the expression profile of
lncRNAs and protein-coding genes via microarrays analysis of paired LUAD tissues 
and adjacent non-tumor tissues from five female non-smokes with LUAD. A total of 
498 lncRNAs and 1691 protein-coding genes were differentially expressed between
LUAD tissues and paired adjacent normal tissues. A novel lncRNA, LUAD transcript 
1 (LUADT1), which is highly expressed in LUAD and correlates with T stage, was
characterized. Both in vitro and in vivo data showed that LUADT1 knockdown
significantly inhibited proliferation of LUAD cells and induced cell cycle arrest
at the G0-G1 phase. Further analysis indicated that LUADT1 may regulate cell
cycle progression by epigenetically inhibiting the expression of p27. RNA
immunoprecipitation and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that
LUADT1 binds to SUZ12, a core component of polycomb repressive complex 2, and
mediates the trimethylation of H3K27 at the promoter region of p27. The negative 
correlation between LUADT1 and p27 expression was confirmed in LUAD tissue
samples. These data suggested that a set of lncRNAs and protein-coding genes were
differentially expressed in LUAD. LUADT1 is an oncogenic lncRNA that regulates
LUAD progression, suggesting that dysregulated lncRNAs may serve as key
regulatory factors in LUAD progression.

PMCID: PMC4558496
PMID: 26291312  [PubMed - in process]


33. J Clin Pathol. 2016 Feb;69(2):155-63. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2015-203177. Epub
2015 Aug 19.

Megakaryocytic hyperplasia in myeloproliferative neoplasms is driven by
disordered proliferative, apoptotic and epigenetic mechanisms.

Malherbe JA(1), Fuller KA(1), Arshad A(1), Nangalia J(2), Romeo G(3), Hall SL(3),
Meehan KS(1), Guo B(1), Howman R(3), Erber WN(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Western Australia, 
Crawley, Western Australia, Australia. (2)Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research and Wellcome Trust/MRC Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK. (3)School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia, Australia PathWest Laboratory
Medicine, Western Australia, Australia.

AIMS: Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are a heterogeneous group of clonal
proliferative bone marrow diseases characterised by extensive megakaryocytic
hyperplasia and morphological atypia. Despite knowledge of genomic defects, the
pathobiological processes driving these megakaryocytic abnormalities in MPN
remain poorly explained. We have explored the proliferative, apoptotic and
epigenetic profiles of megakaryocytes in human MPN.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining was performed on bone marrow trephine
biopsies of 81 MPN (with and without JAK2(V617F) and CALR mutations) and 15
normal controls to assess the megakaryocytic expression of biomarkers associated 
with proliferation (Ki67), apoptosis (Bcl-XL, BNIP-3) and epigenetic regulation
(EZH2, SUZ12).
RESULTS: Myeloproliferative megakaryocytes showed significantly greater
expression of proliferative Ki67 and anti-apoptotic Bcl-XL, reduced pro-apoptotic
BNIP-3 and increased SUZ12 compared with controls. In essential thrombocythaemia,
large-giant megakaryocytes with hyperlobated nuclei showed a trend towards a
proliferative signature. In contrast, myelofibrotic megakaryocytes with condensed
nuclear chromatin, and cases with CALR mutations, had significant reductions in
pro-apoptotic BNIP-3.
CONCLUSIONS: Uncontrolled megakaryocytic expansion in MPN results from a
combination of increased proliferation, attenuated apoptosis and defective
epigenetic regulation with CALR mutations favouring apoptotic failure. The higher
platelet counts reported to be seen in MPN with CALR mutations may be due to
greater dysregulation of megakaryocyte apoptosis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26290261  [PubMed - in process]


34. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 14;34:83. doi: 10.1186/s13046-015-0191-0.

EZH2 is increased in paediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and is a
suitable molecular target in combination treatment approaches.

D'Angelo V(1), Iannotta A(2), Ramaglia M(3), Lombardi A(4), Zarone MR(5),
Desiderio V(6), Affinita MC(7), Pecoraro G(8), Di Martino M(9), Indolfi P(10),
Casale F(11), Caraglia M(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Woman, Child and General and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric
Oncology Unit - Second University of Naples, Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138,
Naples, Italy. velia.dangelo@unina2.it. (2)Department of Woman, Child and General
and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric Oncology Unit - Second University of Naples,
Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138, Naples, Italy. adriana.iannotta@unina2.it.
(3)Department of Woman, Child and General and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric
Oncology Unit - Second University of Naples, Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138,
Naples, Italy. maria.ramaglia@unina2.it. (4)Department of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and General Pathology, Second University of Naples, Via S.M.
Costantinopoli, 16, 80138, Naples, Italy. angela.lombardi@unina2.it.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and General Pathology, Second
University of Naples, Via S.M. Costantinopoli, 16, 80138, Naples, Italy.
mayra.zarone@alice.it. (6)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of
Biotechnology and Medical Histology and Embryology, Second University of Naples, 
Naples, Italy. vincenzo.desiderio@unina2.it. (7)Department of Woman, Child and
General and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric Oncology Unit - Second University of
Naples, Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138, Naples, Italy. draffinita@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Woman, Child and General and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric
Oncology Unit - Second University of Naples, Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138,
Naples, Italy. drgiuliapecoraro@gmail.com. (9)Department of Woman, Child and
General and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric Oncology Unit - Second University of
Naples, Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138, Naples, Italy.
martinadimartino@libero.it. (10)Department of Woman, Child and General and
Specialized Surgery, Pediatric Oncology Unit - Second University of Naples, Via
Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138, Naples, Italy. paolo.indolfi@unina2.it.
(11)Department of Woman, Child and General and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric
Oncology Unit - Second University of Naples, Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138,
Naples, Italy. fiorina.casale@unina2.it. (12)Department of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and General Pathology, Second University of Naples, Via S.M.
Costantinopoli, 16, 80138, Naples, Italy. michele.caraglia@unina2.it.

BACKGROUND: T-cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) represents about 10-15 % of
pediatric ALL cases. EZH2, one of the components of Polycomb group proteins
(PRC2) complex, catalyzes the trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 that is
associated with transcriptional repression and tumor development.
METHODS: We examined the expression levels of PRC2 complex in primary samples of 
T cells ALL at diagnosis by western blotting and real time PCR. We evaluated the 
effect of 3-deazaneplanocin-A (DZNep), an EZH2 inhibitor, alone and in
combination with Daunoblastine on cell viability, apoptotic death and cell cycle 
distribution of T cell established Jurkat cell line.
RESULTS: EZH2 was expressed in 75 % samples at different extents mainly with high
expression level. SUZ12 was expressed in 60 % samples and EED in all samples,
respectively. The Kaplan-Meier analysis shows that T-ALL expressing EZH2 had a
lower probability of disease-free survival (DFS) compared to T-ALL negative for
EZH2 (23 % vs 100 %) (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01). The EZH2 inhibitor DZNep used in combination
with Daunoblastine was synergistic in inducing growth inhibition and increasing
the apoptosis in T-ALL Jurkat cells at 48 and 72 h paralleled by EZH2 decreased
expression. Moreover, the combination decreased the activity of Erk-1/2
proliferation enzymes with no effects on Akt survival pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: The evaluation of EZH2 expression in pediatric T-ALL can be useful
in predict the clinical outcome of the patients and EZH2 can be a useful target
to improve the efficacy of conventional chemotherapy in this subset of patients
with bad prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4535295
PMID: 26268310  [PubMed - in process]


35. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Dec 1;21(23):5391-403. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2680. 
Epub 2015 Aug 12.

Activation of EZH2 and SUZ12 Regulated by E2F1 Predicts the Disease Progression
and Aggressive Characteristics of Bladder Cancer.

Lee SR(1), Roh YG(1), Kim SK(2), Lee JS(3), Seol SY(1), Lee HH(1), Kim WT(1), Kim
WJ(4), Heo J(5), Cha HJ(6), Kang TH(1), Chung JW(1), Chu IS(7), Leem SH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Dong-A University, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(2)Korean Bioinformation Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Systems Biology,
Division of Cancer Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. (4)Department of Urology, College of Medicine, Chungbuk National 
University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea. (5)Departments of Molecular Biology and 
Immunology, College of Medicine, Kosin University, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(6)Departments of Parasitology and Genetics, Kosin University College of
Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea. (7)Korean Bioinformation Center, Korea
Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
shleem@dau.ac.kr chu@kribb.re.kr. (8)Department of Biological Science, Dong-A
University, Busan, Republic of Korea. shleem@dau.ac.kr chu@kribb.re.kr.

PURPOSE: Previous study identified E2F1 as a key mediator of non-muscle-invasive 
bladder cancer (NMIBC) progression. The aim of this study was to identify the
E2F1-related genes associated with poor prognosis and aggressive characteristics 
of bladder cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Microarray analysis was performed to find E2F1-related genes
associated with tumor progression and aggressiveness in the gene expression data 
from 165 primary patients with bladder cancer. The biologic activity of
E2F1-related genes in tumor progression and aggressiveness was confirmed with
experimental assays using bladder cancer cells and tumor xenograft assay.
RESULTS: The expression of E2F1 was significantly associated with EZH2 and SUZ12.
The overexpression of E2F1, EZH2, and SUZ12 enhanced cancer progression including
cell colony formation, migration, and invasiveness. Knockdown of these genes
reduced motility, blocked invasion, and decreased tumor size in vivo. E2F1 bound 
the proximal EZH2 and SUZ12 promoter to activate transcription, suggesting that
E2F1 and its downstream effectors, EZH2 and SUZ12, could be important mediators
for the cancer progression. In addition, we confirmed an association between
these genes and aggressive characteristics. Interestingly, the treatment of
anticancer drugs to the cells overexpressing E2F1, EZH2, and SUZ12 induced the
expression of CD44, KLF4, OCT4, and ABCG2 known as cancer stem cell (CSC)-related
genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The link between E2F1, EZH2, and/or SUZ12 revealed that E2f1
directly regulates transcription of the EZH2 and SUZ12 genes. The signature of
E2F1-EZH2-SUZ12 shows a predictive value for prognosis in bladder tumors and the 
E2F1-EZH2-SUZ12-driven transcriptional events may regulate the cancer
aggressiveness and chemo-resistance, which may provide opportunity for
development of new treatment modalities.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26268246  [PubMed - in process]


36. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Aug 4;112(31):E4216-25. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1503690112. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

The Xist RNA-PRC2 complex at 20-nm resolution reveals a low Xist stoichiometry
and suggests a hit-and-run mechanism in mouse cells.

Sunwoo H(1), Wu JY(2), Lee JT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute; Department of Molecular Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114; Department of Genetics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute; Department 
of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138;
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
02138. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute; Department of Molecular Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114; Department of Genetics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; lee@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.

X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) is initiated by the long noncoding RNA Xist,
which coats the inactive X (Xi) and targets Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) 
in cis. Epigenomic analyses have provided significant insight into Xist binding
patterns and chromatin organization of the Xi. However, such epigenomic analyses 
are limited by averaging of population-wide dynamics and do not inform behavior
of single cells. Here we view Xist RNA and the Xi at 20-nm resolution using
STochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (STORM) in mouse cells. We observe
dynamics at the single-cell level not predicted by epigenomic analysis. Only ~50 
hubs of Xist RNA occur on the Xi in the maintenance phase, corresponding to
50-100 Xist molecules per Xi and contrasting with the chromosome-wide "coat"
observed by deep sequencing and conventional microscopy. Likewise, only ~50 hubs 
PRC2 are observed. PRC2 and Xist foci are not randomly distributed but showed
statistically significant spatial association. Knock-off experiments enable
visualization of the dynamics of dissociation and relocalization onto the Xi and 
support a functional tethering of Xist and PRC2. Our analysis reveals that
Xist-PRC2 complexes are less numerous than expected and suggests methylation of
nucleosomes in a hit-and-run model.

PMCID: PMC4534268
PMID: 26195790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. RNA Biol. 2015;12(9):959-65. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1069463.

Cryptic RNA-binding by PRC2 components EZH2 and SUZ12.

Betancur JG(1,)(2,)(3), Tomari Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences; The University of Tokyo ;
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo , Japan. (2)b Department of Medical Genome Sciences ; The
University of Tokyo ; Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo , Japan. (3)c Present affiliation:
Laboratory for Developmental Genetics; RIKEN-IMS ; Tsurumi-ku; Yokohama ,
Kanagawa , Japan.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a histone-modifying complex that
di/tri-methylates histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27), a mark of transcriptionally
repressed chromatin. However, how PRC2 is specifically recruited to its target
loci remains controversial, although it has been postulated that long non-coding 
RNAs (lncRNAs) can function as guides. Here we purified individual components of 
PRC2 from human cultured cells and found that EZH2 and SUZ12 can directly bind to
RNAs. In agreement with recent evidence, our results support the notion that
these two PRC2 subunits have RNA-binding activity, with general preference for
longer RNAs. However, the length alone does not explain their cryptic substrate
preference. Our data highlight the difficulty of characterizing the RNA-binding
activity of PRC2.

PMCID: PMC4615636 [Available on 2016-07-15]
PMID: 26177152  [PubMed - in process]


38. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 8;5:11724. doi: 10.1038/srep11724.

Bridging Links between Long Noncoding RNA HOTAIR and HPV Oncoprotein E7 in
Cervical Cancer Pathogenesis.

Sharma S(1), Mandal P(1), Sadhukhan T(1), Roy Chowdhury R(2), Ranjan Mondal N(2),
Chakravarty B(2), Chatterjee T(2), Roy S(3), Sengupta S(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Netaji Subhas Sanatorium, 2nd
Floor, P.O. N.S.S, Kalyani 741251, West Bengal, India. (2)Department of
Gynecology, Saroj Gupta Cancer Centre and Research Institute, Kolkata,India.
(3)Sri Aurobindo Seva Kendra, 1H, Gariahat Road (S) Jodhpur Park, Kolkata-700068,
West Bengal, India.

Human Papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 oncoprotein E7 plays a major role in cervical 
carcinogenesis by interacting with and functionally inactivating various host
regulatory molecules. Long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) HOTAIR is one such regulator
that recruits chromatin remodelling complex PRC2, creating gene silencing
H3K27<U+2009>me3 marks. Hence, we hypothesized that HOTAIR could be a potential target
of E7, in HPV16 related cervical cancers (CaCx). We identified significant linear
trend of progressive HOTAIR down-regulation through HPV negative controls, HPV16 
positive non-malignants and CaCx samples. Majority of CaCx cases portrayed HOTAIR
down-regulation in comparison to HPV negative controls, with corresponding
up-regulation of HOTAIR target, HOXD10, and enrichment of cancer related
pathways. However, a small subset had significantly higher HOTAIR expression,
concomitant with high E7 expression and enrichment of metastatic pathways.
Expression of HOTAIR and PRC2-complex members (EZH2 and SUZ12), showed
significant positive correlation with E7 expression in CaCx cases and E7
transfected C33A cell line, suggestive of interplay between E7 and HOTAIR.
Functional inactivation of HOTAIR by direct interaction with E7 could also be
predicted by in silico analysis and confirmed by RNA-Immunoprecipitation. Our
study depicts one of the causal mechanisms of cervical carcinogenesis by HPV16
E7, through modulation of HOTAIR expression and function.

PMCID: PMC4495428
PMID: 26152361  [PubMed - in process]


39. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Jul 2;6:e1802. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.150.

LincHOTAIR epigenetically silences miR34a by binding to PRC2 to promote the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in human gastric cancer.

Liu YW(1), Sun M(1), Xia R(1), Zhang EB(2), Liu XH(1), Zhang ZH(3), Xu TP(3), De 
W(1), Liu BR(4), Wang ZX(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China. (2)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital
of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China. (3)Department of
Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu, PR China. (4)Department of Oncology, Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of
Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China.

lncRNAs play important roles in the epigenetic regulation of carcinogenesis and
progression. Previous studies suggest that HOTAIR contributes to gastric cancer
(GC) development, and the overexpression of HOTAIR predicts a poor prognosis. In 
this study, we found that HOTAIR was more highly expressed in diffuse-type GC
than in intestinal type (P=0.048). In the diffuse type, there is significant
relationship between HOTAIR expression and DFS (P<0.001). CDH1 was downregulated 
in diffuse-type GC tissues (P=0.0007) and showed a negative relationship with
HOTAIR (r(2)=0.154, P=0.0354). In addition, HOTAIR knockdown significantly
repressed migration, invasion and metastasis both in vitro and vivo and reversed 
the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in GC cells. We also showed that HOTAIR 
recruiting and binding to PRC2 epigenetically represses miR34a, which controls
the targets C-Met (HGF/C-Met/Snail pathway) and Snail, thus contributing to GC
cell-EMT process and accelerating tumor metastasis. Moreover, it is demonstrated 
that HOTAIR crosstalk with microRNAs during epigenetic regulation. Our results
suggest that HOTAIR acts as an EMT regulator and may be a candidate prognostic
biomarker and a target for new therapies in GC patients.

PMCID: PMC4650715
PMID: 26136075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 14;464(1):256-62. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.06.136. Epub 2015 Jun 23.

A new kinetochore component CENP-W interacts with the polycomb-group protein EZH2
to promote gene silencing.

Koh W(1), Park B(1), Lee S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, College of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 305-764, Republic of Korea. 
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, College of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 305-764, Republic of Korea. 
Electronic address: leesoojin@cnu.ac.kr.

Polycomb recessive complex 2 (PRC2) plays a central roles in chromatin compaction
and remodeling. EZH2, the catalytic subunit of PRC2, is frequently overexpressed 
in many human tumors. Together with another essential core component, SUZ12, EZH2
trimethylates histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me3). CENP-W was originally
identified as a putative oncogene overexpressed in various human tumors, and
later characterized as an essential factor for the formation of functional
kinetochore during mitosis. In this study, we found that CENP-W associates with
EZH2 to subsequently enhance the protein stability of EZH2. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed that ectopically expressed CENP-W bound the promoter
of EZH2 target genes to enhance EZH2-mediated transcriptional repression,
possibly by facilitating the recruitment of EZH2 to its target genes.
Collectively, this study suggests CENP-W is a novel kinetochore component that
may be involved in the EZH2-mediated silencing machinery.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26111449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 31;290(31):19343-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.637389. Epub
2015 Jun 12.

BAF250a Protein Regulates Nucleosome Occupancy and Histone Modifications in
Priming Embryonic Stem Cell Differentiation.

Lei I(1), West J(2), Yan Z(3), Gao X(4), Fang P(4), Dennis JH(5), Gnatovskiy
L(1), Wang W(3), Kingston RE(2), Wang Z(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Cardiac Surgery, Cardiovascular Research Center,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109. (2)the Department of Molecular
Biology and. (3)the Genome Instability and Chromatin Remodeling Section, NIA,
National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, and. (4)Cardiovascular 
Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02114. (5)the Department of Biological Science, Florida State
University, Tallahassee, Florida 32306. (6)From the Department of Cardiac
Surgery, Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109, zhongw@med.umich.edu.

The unique chromatin signature of ES cells is fundamental to the pluripotency and
differentiation of ES cells. One key feature is the poised chromatin state of
master developmental genes that are transcriptionally repressed in ES cells but
ready to be activated in response to differentiation signals. Poised chromatin in
ES cells contains both H3 Lys-4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and H3 Lys-27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) methylation, indicating activating and repressing
potential. However, the contribution of non-covalent chromatin structure to the
poised state is not well understood. To address whether remodeling of nucleosomes
is important to the poised state, we characterized the function of BAF250a, a key
regulatory subunit of the ES cell ATP-dependent Brahma-associated factor (BAF)
chromatin remodeling complex (esBAF). Acute deletion of BAF250a disrupted the
differentiation potential of ES cells by altering the expression timing of key
developmental genes and pluripotent genes. Our genome-wide nucleosome and histone
modification analyses indicated that the disruption of gene expression timing was
largely due to changes of chromatin structures at poised genes, particularly
those key developmental genes mediated by BAF250a. Specifically, BAF250a deletion
caused a nucleosome occupancy increase at H3K4me3- and/or H3K27me3-associated
promoters. Moreover, H3K27me3 levels and the number of bivalent promoter genes
were reduced in BAF250a KO ES cells. We revealed that BAF250a ablation led to
elevated Brg1 but reduced Suz12 recruitment at nucleosome occupancy-increased
regions, indicating an unexpected and complicated role of BAF250a in regulating
esBAF and Polycomb repressive complex (PRC) activities. Together, our studies
identified that BAF250a mediates esBAF and PRC functions to establish the poised 
chromatin configuration in ES cells, which is essential for the proper
differentiation of ES cells.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4521052 [Available on 2016-07-31]
PMID: 26070559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jul 27;43(13):6270-84. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv574. Epub 2015
Jun 1.

PRC2 regulates RNA polymerase III transcribed non-translated RNA gene
transcription through EZH2 and SUZ12 interaction with TFIIIC complex.

Liu C(1), Li S(1), Dai X(1), Ma J(1), Wan J(1), Jiang H(1), Wang P(1), Liu Z(1), 
Zhang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of
Education and State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking
University Health Science Center, #38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing 100191, China
Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology and Tumor Biology, Department of Anatomy,
Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University
Health Science Center, #38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing 100191, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of Education
and State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking University
Health Science Center, #38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing 100191, China Laboratory of
Molecular Cell Biology and Tumor Biology, Department of Anatomy, Histology and
Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science
Center, #38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing 100191, China Hongquan.Zhang@bjmu.edu.cn.

Polycomb repression complex 2 (PRC2) component EZH2 tri-methylates H3K27 and
exerts epigenetic repression on target gene expression. EZH2-mediated epigenetic 
control of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcribed coding gene transcription has
been well established. However, little is known about EZH2-mediated epigenetic
regulation of RNA polymerase III (Pol III) transcription. Here we present a
paradigm that EZH2 is involved in the repression of Pol III transcription via
interaction with transcriptional factor complex IIIC (TFIIIC). EZH2 and H3K27me3 
co-occupy the promoter of tRNA(Tyr), 5S rRNA and 7SL RNA genes. Depletion of EZH2
or inhibition of EZH2 methyltransferase activity led to upregulation of Pol III
target gene transcription. EZH2-mediated repression of Pol III transcribed gene
expression requires presence of SUZ12. SUZ12 was able to interact with TFIIIC
complex and knockdown of SUZ12 decreased occupancy of EZH2 and H3K27me3 at the
promoter of Pol III target genes. Our findings pointed out a previously
unidentified role of PRC2 complex in suppressing transcription of Pol III
transcribed non-translated RNA genes, putting Pol III on a new layer of
epigenetic regulation.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4513857
PMID: 26038315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Blood. 2015 Jul 9;126(2):167-75. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-12-615898. Epub 2015 Jun
2.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 component Suz12 is required for hematopoietic stem 
cell function and lymphopoiesis.

Lee SC(1), Miller S(2), Hyland C(2), Kauppi M(1), Lebois M(2), Di Rago L(2),
Metcalf D(1), Kinkel SA(1), Josefsson EC(1), Blewitt ME(3), Majewski IJ(1),
Alexander WS(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia; Department of Medical Biology and. (2)The Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia; (3)The Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia; Department of
Medical Biology and Department of Genetics, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC, Australia.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a chromatin modifier that regulates stem 
cells in embryonic and adult tissues. Loss-of-function studies of PRC2 components
have been complicated by early embryonic dependence on PRC2 activity and the
partial functional redundancy of enhancer of zeste homolog 1 (Ezh1) and enhancer 
of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2), which encode the enzymatic component of PRC2. Here, we
investigated the role of PRC2 in hematopoiesis by conditional deletion of
suppressor of zeste 12 protein homolog (Suz12), a core component of PRC2.
Complete loss of Suz12 resulted in failure of hematopoiesis, both in the embryo
and the adult, with a loss of maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). In 
contrast, partial loss of PRC2 enhanced HSC self-renewal. Although Suz12 was
required for lymphoid development, deletion in individual blood cell lineages
revealed that it was dispensable for the development of granulocytic, monocytic, 
and megakaryocytic cells. Collectively, these data reveal the multifaceted role
of PRC2 in hematopoiesis, with divergent dose-dependent effects in HSC and
distinct roles in maturing blood cells. Because PRC2 is a potential target for
cancer therapy, the significant consequences of modest changes in PRC2 activity, 
as well as the cell and developmental stage-specific effects, will need to be
carefully considered in any therapeutic context.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26036803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 1;10(6):e0126466. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126466.
eCollection 2015.

Cancer Cells Hijack PRC2 to Modify Multiple Cytokine Pathways.

Abou El Hassan M(1), Huang K(1), Eswara MB(1), Zhao M(1), Song L(1), Yu T(1), Liu
Y(1), Liu JC(2), McCurdy S(3), Ma A(4), Wither J(5), Jin J(4), Zacksenhaus E(6), 
Wrana JL(1), Bremner R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mt Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (2)Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mt Sinai
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Lab Medicine and Pathobiology, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Department of Structural and 
Chemical Biology, Icahn School of Medicine, Mt Sinai Hospital, New York, New
York, United States of America. (5)Toronto Western Research Institute, University
Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (6)Toronto General Research Institute, 
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Lab Medicine
and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (7)Lunenfeld
Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mt Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
Department of Lab Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) is an epigenetic regulator induced in many
cancers. It is thought to drive tumorigenesis by repressing division, stemness,
and/or developmental regulators. Cancers evade immune detection, and diverse
immune regulators are perturbed in different tumors. It is unclear how such
cell-specific effects are coordinated. Here, we show a profound and
cancer-selective role for PRC2 in repressing multiple cytokine pathways. We find 
that PRC2 represses hundreds of IFN<U+03B3> stimulated genes (ISGs), cytokines and
cytokine receptors. This target repertoire is significantly broadened in cancer
vs non-cancer cells, and is distinct in different cancer types. PRC2 is therefore
a higher order regulator of the immune program in cancer cells. Inhibiting PRC2
with either RNAi or EZH2 inhibitors activates cytokine/cytokine receptor
promoters marked with bivalent H3K27me3/H3K4me3 chromatin, and augments
responsiveness to diverse immune signals. PRC2 inhibition rescues immune gene
induction even in the absence of SWI/SNF, a tumor suppressor defective in ~20% of
human cancers. This novel PRC2 function in tumor cells could profoundly impact
the mechanism of action and efficacy of EZH2 inhibitors in cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC4450877
PMID: 26030458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 28;34:56. doi: 10.1186/s13046-015-0139-4.

ARE/SUZ12 dual specifically-regulated adenoviral TK/GCV system for CML blast
crisis cells.

Zu B(1), Shi Y(2), Xu M(3), You G(4), Huang Z(5), Gao M(6), Feng W(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Hematology, Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medical
Diagnostics of Ministry of Education, Chongqing Medical University, No.1,
Yixueyuan Road, Chongqing, 400016, People's Republic of China.
zubailing@sina.com. (2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai Pudong
Hospital, Fudan University Pudong Medical Center, Shanghai, China.
shiyi19755@126.com. (3)Department of Clinical Hematology, Key Laboratory of
Laboratory Medical Diagnostics of Ministry of Education, Chongqing Medical
University, No.1, Yixueyuan Road, Chongqing, 400016, People's Republic of China. 
740938405@qq.com. (4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai Children's
Medical Center, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
yuanlaoyoucai@126.com. (5)Department of Clinical Hematology, Key Laboratory of
Laboratory Medical Diagnostics of Ministry of Education, Chongqing Medical
University, No.1, Yixueyuan Road, Chongqing, 400016, People's Republic of China. 
huangzhenlan123@126.com. (6)Department of Clinical Hematology, Key Laboratory of 
Laboratory Medical Diagnostics of Ministry of Education, Chongqing Medical
University, No.1, Yixueyuan Road, Chongqing, 400016, People's Republic of China. 
565715711@qq.com. (7)Department of Clinical Hematology, Key Laboratory of
Laboratory Medical Diagnostics of Ministry of Education, Chongqing Medical
University, No.1, Yixueyuan Road, Chongqing, 400016, People's Republic of China. 
fengwlcqmu@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Treatment of blast phase chronic myeloid leukemia (BP-CML) remains a 
challenge, and the median survival is less than 6 months. Because effective
treatments are lacking, we studied tight targeting of blast crisis CML cells
using adenoviral (Ad) vectors expressing a HSV-TK system under dual control of a 
specific SUZ12 promoter and an antioxidant response element (ARE).
METHODS: A potential SUZ12 promoter fragment was designed with bioinformatics
databases and identified with a luciferase assay. Next, we cloned the ARE element
of the NQO1 gene and developed Ad vectors expressing TK kinase or luciferase
under the dual control of a specific SUZ12 promoter and an ARE element. An in
vitro transfection assay with Ad-ARE/SUZ12-Luc was used to determine promoter
activity of ARE/SUZ12 regulatory element in blast crisis CML cells. After
incubating human BP-CML-derived cells with Ad-ARE/SUZ12-TK and ganciclovir,
Western blot, CCK8, Immunofluorescent assays and Annexin V assays were conducted 
to assess the efficacy of an ARE/SUZ12 dual-specific TK/GCV system for BP-CML
cell lines.
RESULTS: Here, luciferase data confirmed significantly higher and specificer
promoter activity of the ARE/SUZ12 composite component in CML blast
crisis-derived cell lines (K562, KCL22, and K562/G01) compared to HepG2 cells,
and Ad-AS-TK/GCV system could exhibit enhanced apoptotic effects and decreased
cell viability for BP-CML cell lines. Additionally, Ad-AS-TK/GCV system altered
expression of cycle-related and apoptosis-related proteins in BP-CML cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, ARE/SUZ12 dual targeting TK/GCV system was effective in
killing BP-CML cells. Moreover, efficacy and specificity of CML cell eradication 
were enhanced by synergistic effects of ARE/SUZ12 dual-specific regulation. We
conclude that suicide gene-targeted therapy might hold promise for BP-CML
treatment.

PMCID: PMC4456766
PMID: 26017281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biochem. 2015 Nov;158(5):373-84. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvv055. Epub 2015 May 22.

Mediator complex cooperatively regulates transcription of retinoic acid target
genes with Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 during neuronal differentiation.

Fukasawa R(1), Iida S(1), Tsutsui T(2), Hirose Y(1), Ohkuma Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan;
(2)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan; Department
of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, UCSD School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive,
La Jolla, California 92093, USA; and. (3)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Graduate 
School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630
Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan; Department of Biochemistry, Nagasaki University
School of Medicine, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan
ohkumay@pha.u-toyama.ac.jp.

The Mediator complex (Mediator) plays key roles in transcription and functions as
the nexus for integration of various transcriptional signals. Previously, we
screened for Mediator cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)-interacting factors and
identified three proteins related to chromatin regulation. One of them, SUZ12 is 
required for both stability and activity of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2).
PRC2 primarily suppresses gene expression through histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation, resulting in stem cell maintenance and differentiation;
perturbation of this process leads to oncogenesis. Recent work showed that
Mediator contributes to the embryonic stem cell state through DNA loop formation,
which is strongly associated with chromatin architecture; however, it remains
unclear how Mediator regulates gene expression in cooperation with chromatin
regulators (i.e. writers, readers and remodelers). We found that Mediator CDKs
interact directly with the PRC2 subunit EZH2, as well as SUZ12. Known PRC2 target
genes were deregulated by Mediator CDK knockdown during neuronal differentiation,
and both Mediator and PRC2 complexes co-occupied the promoters of developmental
genes regulated by retinoic acid. Our results provide a mechanistic link between 
Mediator and PRC2 during neuronal differentiation.

© The Authors 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Japanese Biochemical Society. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26002960  [PubMed - in process]


47. Oncoimmunology. 2014 Dec 21;3(11):e970025. eCollection 2014.

Ectopic expression of embryonic stem cell and other developmental genes in
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

Litvinov IV(1), Netchiporouk E(1), Cordeiro B(1), Zargham H(1), Pehr K(1),
Gilbert M(2), Zhou Y(3), Moreau L(1), Woetmann A(4), Ødum N(4), Kupper TS(5),
Sasseville D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology; McGill University Health Centre ; Montréal, QC
Canada. (2)Division of Dermatology; Université Laval ; Québec City, QC Canada.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Skin Science; University of British Columbia ;
Vancouver, BC Canada. (4)Department of International Health, Immunology, and
Microbiology; University of Copenhagen ; Copenhagen, Denmark. (5)Department of
Dermatology; Harvard Skin Disease Research Center; Brigham and Women's Hospital; 
Harvard University ; Boston, MA USA.

Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) is a potentially devastating malignancy. The
pathogenesis of this cancer remains poorly elucidated. Previous studies focused
on analysis of expression and function of known oncogenes and tumor suppressor
genes. However, emerging reports highlight that it is also important to analyze
the expression of genes that are ectopically expressed in CTCL (e.g., embryonic
stem cell genes (ESC), cancer testis (CT) genes, etc.). Currently, it is not
known whether ESC genes are expressed in CTCL. In the current work, we analyze by
RT-PCR the expression of 26 ESC genes, many of which are known to regulate
pluripotency and promote cancer stem cell-like phenotype, in a historic cohort of
60 patients from Boston and in a panel of 11 patient-derived CTCL cell lines and 
compare such expression to benign inflammatory dermatoses that often clinically
mimic CTCL. Our findings document that many critical ESC genes including NANOG,
SOX2, OCT4 (POU5F1) and their upstream and downstream signaling members are
expressed in CTCL. Similarly, polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) genes (i.e.,
EZH2, EED, and SUZ12) are also expressed in CTCL lesional skin. Furthermore,
select ESC genes (OCT4, EED, TCF3, THAP11, CHD7, TIP60, TRIM28) are
preferentially expressed in CTCL samples when compared to benign skin biopsies.
Our work suggests that ESC genes are ectopically expressed together with CT
genes, thymocyte development genes and B cell-specific genes and may be working
in concert to promote tumorigenesis. Specifically, while ESC genes may be
promoting cancer stem cell-like phenotype, CT genes may be contributing to
aneuploidy and genomic instability by producing aberrant chromosomal
translocations. Further analysis of ESC expression and function in this cancer
will greatly enhance our fundamental understanding of CTCL and will help us
identify novel therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4368148
PMID: 25941598  [PubMed]


48. Cell Rep. 2015 Apr 21;11(3):474-85.

PARTICLE, a Triplex-Forming Long ncRNA, Regulates Locus-Specific Methylation in
Response to Low-Dose Irradiation.

O'Leary VB, Ovsepian SV, Carrascosa LG, Buske FA, Radulovic V, Niyazi M, Moertl
S, Trau M, Atkinson MJ, Anastasov N.

Exposure to low-dose irradiation causes transiently elevated expression of the
long ncRNA PARTICLE (gene PARTICLE, promoter of MAT2A-antisense radiation-induced
circulating lncRNA). PARTICLE affords both a cytosolic scaffold for the tumor
suppressor methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT2A) and a nuclear genetic platform 
for transcriptional repression. In situ hybridization discloses that PARTICLE and
MAT2A associate together following irradiation. Bromouridine tracing and presence
in exosomes indicate intercellular transport, and this is supported by ex vivo
data from radiotherapy-treated patients. Surface plasmon resonance indicates that
PARTICLE forms a DNA-lncRNA triplex upstream of a MAT2A promoter CpG island. We
show that PARTICLE represses MAT2A via methylation and demonstrate that the
radiation-induced PARTICLE interacts with the transcription-repressive complex
proteins G9a and SUZ12 (subunit of PRC2). The interplay of PARTICLE with MAT2A
implicates this lncRNA in intercellular communication and as a recruitment
platform for gene-silencing machineries through triplex formation in response to 
irradiation.

PMID: 25900080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 11;35(6):715-26. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.122. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Hepatitis B virus X protein induces EpCAM expression via active DNA demethylation
directed by RelA in complex with EZH2 and TET2.

Fan H(1,)(2), Zhang H(1,)(2), Pascuzzi PE(3), Andrisani O(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN,
USA. (2)Department of Purdue Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN, USA. (3)Purdue University Libraries, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major risk factor for developing
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and HBV X protein (HBx) acts as cofactor in
hepatocarcinogenesis. In liver tumors from animals modeling HBx- and HBV-mediated
hepatocarcinogenesis, downregulation of chromatin regulating proteins SUZ12 and
ZNF198 induces expression of several genes, including epithelial cell adhesion
molecule (EpCAM). EpCAM upregulation occurs in HBV-mediated HCCs and hepatic
cancer stem cells, by a mechanism not understood. Herein we demonstrate HBx
induces EpCAM expression via active DNA demethylation. In hepatocytes, EpCAM is
silenced by polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and ZNF198/LSD1/Co-REST/HDAC1
chromatin-modifying complexes. Cells with stable knockdown of SUZ12, an essential
PRC2 subunit, upon HBx expression demethylate a CpG dinucleotide located adjacent
to NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA half-site. This NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA site is in a CpG island downstream from 
EpCAM transcriptional start site (TSS). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays demonstrate HBx-dependent RelA occupancy of NF-<U+03BA>B half-site, whereas RelA 
knockdown suppresses CpG demethylation and EpCAM expression. Tumor necrosis
factor-a activates RelA, propagating demethylation to nearby CpG sites, shown by 
sodium bisulfite sequencing. RelA-dependent demethylation occurring upon HBx
expression requires methyltrasferase EZH2, TET2 a key factor in cytosine
demethylation and inactive DNMT3L, shown by knockdown assays and sodium bisulfite
sequencing. Co-immunoprecipitations and sequential ChIP assays demonstrate that
RelA in the presence of HBx forms a complex with EZH2, TET2 and DNMT3L, although 
the role of DNMT3L remains to be understood. Interestingly, the human EpCAM gene 
also has a CpG island downstream from its TSS, and a NF-<U+03BA>B-binding site flanked
by CpGs. HepG2 cells derived from human HCC exhibit demethylation of these
NF-<U+03BA>B-flanking CpG sites, and HBV replication propagates demethylation to nearby 
CpG sites. DLK1, another PRC2 target gene, also upregulated in HBV-mediated HCCs,
is demethylated in liver tumors at CpG dinucleotides flanking the NF-<U+03BA>B-binding
sequence, supporting that this active DNA demethylation mechanism functions
during oncogenic transformation.

PMCID: PMC4615262 [Available on 2016-08-11]
PMID: 25893293  [PubMed - in process]


50. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2015 Mar 21;6:42. doi: 10.1186/s13287-015-0045-x.

Predicting involvement of polycomb repressive complex 2 in direct conversion of
mouse fibroblasts into induced neural stem cells.

Yaqubi M(1), Mohammadnia A(2), Fallahi H(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran. moein.yaqubi@yahoo.com. (2)Department of
Molecular Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran. shakour.biology@yahoo.com. (3)Department of 
Biology, School of Science, Razi University, Kermanshah, Iran.
h.fallahi@razi.ac.ir. (4)Medical Biology Research Center, Kermanshah University
of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran. h.fallahi@razi.ac.ir.

INTRODUCTION: Mouse fibroblasts could be directly converted into induced neural
stem cells (iNSCs), by introducing a set of known transcription factors (TFs).
This process, known as direct reprogramming, is an alternative source of NSCs
production for cell therapy applications, hence, more common sources for such
cells including embryonic stem cell (ESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cell
(iPSCs) are also in use. Despite their importance, the exact role of different
TFs involved in the conversion of fibroblasts into iNSCs and the interactions
between these factors has not been studied.
METHODS: Here, we have used available microarray data to construct a gene
regulatory network to understand the dynamic of regulatory interactions during
this conversion. We have implemented other types of data such as information
regarding TFs binding sites and valid protein-protein interactions to improve the
network reliability. The network contained 1857 differentially expressed (DE)
genes, linked by11054 interactions. The most important TFs identified based on
topology analysis of the network. Furthermore, in selecting such TFs, we have
also considered their role in the regulation of nervous system development.
RESULTS: Based on these analyses, we found that Ezh2, Jarid2, Mtf2, Nanog,
Pou5f1, Sall4, Smarca4, Sox2, Suz12, and Tcf3 are the main regulators of direct
conversion of mouse fibroblasts into iNSCs. Because, members of the polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) were present in the most effective TFs' list, we have
concluded that this complex is one of the major factors in this conversion.
Additionally, gene expression profiling of iNSCs, obtained from a different data 
sets, showed that Sox2 and Ezh2 are two main regulators of the direct
reprogramming process.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide an insight into molecular events that occur
during direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into iNSCs. This information could be 
useful in simplifying the production of iNSCs, by reducing the number of required
factors, for use in regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC4397673
PMID: 25890371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Epigenetics. 2015;10(6):484-95. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1040619. Epub 2015 Apr
16.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 epigenomic signature defines age-associated
hypermethylation and gene expression changes.

Dozmorov MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biostatistics; Virginia Commonwealth University ; Richmond ,
VA , USA.

Although age-associated gene expression and methylation changes have been
reported throughout the literature, the unifying epigenomic principles of aging
remain poorly understood. Recent explosion in availability and resolution of
functional/regulatory genome annotation data (epigenomic data), such as that
provided by the ENCODE and Roadmap Epigenomics projects, provides an opportunity 
for the identification of epigenomic mechanisms potentially altered by
age-associated differentially methylated regions (aDMRs) and regulatory
signatures in the promoters of age-associated genes (aGENs). In this study we
found that aDMRs and aGENs identified in multiple independent studies share a
common Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 signature marked by EZH2, SUZ12, CTCF
binding sites, repressive H3K27me3, and activating H3K4me1 histone modification
marks, and a "poised promoter" chromatin state. This signature is depleted in RNA
Polymerase II-associated transcription factor binding sites, activating H3K79me2,
H3K36me3, H3K27ac marks, and an "active promoter" chromatin state. The PRC2
signature was shown to be generally stable across cell types. When considering
the directionality of methylation changes, we found the PRC2 signature to be
associated with aDMRs hypermethylated with age, while hypomethylated aDMRs were
associated with enhancers. In contrast, aGENs were associated with the PRC2
signature independently of the directionality of gene expression changes. In this
study we demonstrate that the PRC2 signature is the common epigenomic context of 
genomic regions associated with hypermethylation and gene expression changes in
aging.

PMCID: PMC4623031 [Available on 2016-04-16]
PMID: 25880792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Immunol. 2015 May 15;194(10):5007-13. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1403247. Epub 2015 
Apr 10.

Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 Confers BRG1 Dependency on the CIITA Locus.

Abou El Hassan M(1), Yu T(1), Song L(1), Bremner R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario
M5G1X5, Canada; (2)Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 
Toronto, Ontario M5G1X5, Canada; Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada; and
Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario M5T 3A9, Canada bremner@lunenfeld.ca.

CIITA (or MHC2TA) coordinates constitutive and IFN-<U+03B3>-induced expression of MHC
class II genes. IFN-<U+03B3> responsiveness of CIITA requires BRG1 (SMARCA4), the ATPase
engine of the chromatin remodeling SWI/SNF complex (also called BAF). SWI/SNF is 
defective in many human cancers, providing a mechanism to explain IFN-<U+03B3>
resistance. BRG1 dependency is mediated through remote elements. Short CIITA
reporters lacking these elements respond to IFN-<U+03B3>, even in BRG1-deficient cells, 
suggesting that BRG1 counters a remote repressive influence. The nature of this
distal repressor is unknown, but it would represent a valuable therapeutic target
to reactivate IFN-<U+03B3> responsiveness in cancer. In this article, we show that the
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) components EZH2 and SUZ12, as well as the
associated histone mark H3K27me3, are codetected at interenhancer regions across 
the CIITA locus. IFN-<U+03B3> caused a BRG1-dependent reduction in H3K27me3, associated 
with nucleosome displacement. SUZ12 knockdown restored IFN-<U+03B3> responsiveness in
BRG1-null cells, and it mimicked the ability of BRG1 to induce active histone
modifications (H3K27ac, H3K4me) at the -50-kb enhancer. Thus, PRC2 confers BRG1
dependency on the CIITA locus. Our data suggest that, in addition to its known
roles in promoting stemness and proliferation, PRC2 may inhibit immune
surveillance, and it could be targeted to reactivate CIITA expression in SWI/SNF 
deficient cancers.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25862816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 1;75(11):2363-74. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2928. Epub
2015 Apr 8.

PLK1 and HOTAIR Accelerate Proteasomal Degradation of SUZ12 and ZNF198 during
Hepatitis B Virus-Induced Liver Carcinogenesis.

Zhang H(1), Diab A(1), Fan H(1), Mani SK(1), Hullinger R(1), Merle P(2),
Andrisani O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences and Purdue Center for Cancer Research,
Purdue University, West Lafayette Indiana. (2)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie
de Lyon, UMR INSERM 1052, CNRS 5286, Lyon Cedex, France. (3)Department of Basic
Medical Sciences and Purdue Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University, West
Lafayette Indiana. andrisao@purdue.edu.

Elucidating mechanisms of hepatitis B virus (HBV)-mediated hepatocarcinogenesis
is needed to gain insights into the etiology and treatment of liver cancer. Cells
where HBV is replicating exhibit increased expression of Plk1 kinase and reduced 
levels of two transcription repression factors, SUZ12 and ZNF198. SUZ12 is an
essential subunit of the transcription repressive complex PRC2. ZNF198 stabilizes
the transcription repressive complex composed of LSD1, Co-REST, and HDAC1. These 
two transcription repressive complexes are held together by binding the long
noncoding RNA HOTAIR. In this study, we linked these regulatory events
mechanistically by showing that Plk1 induces proteasomal degradation of SUZ12 and
ZNF198 by site-specific phosphorylation. Plk1-dependent ubiquitination of SUZ12
and ZNF198 was enhanced by expression of HOTAIR, significantly reducing SUZ12 and
ZNF198 stability. In cells expressing the HBV X protein (HBx), downregulation of 
SUZ12 and ZNF198 mediated global changes in histone modifications. In turn,
HBx-expressing cells propagated an altered chromatin landscape after cell
division, as exemplified by changes in histone modifications of the EpCAM
promoter, a target of PRC2 and LSD1/Co-REST/HDAC1 complexes. Notably, liver
tumors from X/c-myc bitransgenic mice exhibited downregulation of SUZ12 and
ZNF198 along with elevated expression of Plk1, HOTAIR, and EpCAM. Clinically,
similar effects were documented in a set of HBV-related liver tumors consistent
with the likelihood that downregulation of SUZ12 and ZNF198 leads to epigenetic
reprogramming of infected hepatocytes. Because both Plk1 and HOTAIR are elevated 
in many human cancers, we propose that their combined effects are involved in
epigenetic reprogramming associated broadly with oncogenic transformation.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4452430 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25855382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015 May;22(5):370-6. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.3005. Epub 2015 Apr 
6.

A lncRNA regulates alternative splicing via establishment of a splicing-specific 
chromatin signature.

Gonzalez I(1), Munita R(2), Agirre E(1), Dittmer TA(3), Gysling K(2), Misteli
T(3), Luco RF(1).

Author information: 
(1)ATIP-AVENIR team, Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS UPR 1142, Montpellier,
France. (2)Faculty of Biological Sciences, Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile, Santiago, Chile. (3)National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Alternative pre-mRNA splicing is a highly cell type-specific process essential to
generating protein diversity. However, the mechanisms responsible for the
establishment and maintenance of heritable cell-specific alternative-splicing
programs are poorly understood. Recent observations point to a role of histone
modifications in the regulation of alternative splicing. Here we report a new
mechanism of chromatin-mediated splicing control involving a long noncoding RNA
(lncRNA). We have identified an evolutionarily conserved nuclear antisense
lncRNA, generated from within the human FGFR2 locus, that promotes
epithelial-specific alternative splicing of FGFR2. The lncRNA acts through
recruitment of Polycomb-group proteins and the histone demethylase KDM2a to
create a chromatin environment that impairs binding of a repressive
chromatin-splicing adaptor complex important for mesenchymal-specific splicing.
Our results uncover a new function for lncRNAs in the establishment and
maintenance of cell-specific alternative splicing via modulation of chromatin
signatures.

PMID: 25849144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Tumour Biol. 2015 Aug;36(8):6497-505. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3340-3. Epub 2015
Apr 2.

Down-regulation of miR-489 contributes into NSCLC cell invasion through targeting
SUZ12.

Xie Z(1), Cai L, Li R, Zheng J, Wu H, Yang X, Li H, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of
Jiangnan University, The Forth People's Hospital of Wuxi City, No. 200, Huihe
Road, Wuxi, 214062, China.

microRNAs are small, non-coding RNAs that contribute into various biological
processes during cancer progression. However, the potential role of miR-489 in
the development of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) is not demonstrated. In
present study, miR-489 was down-regulated both in tumor tissues and cells.
Inhibition of miR-489 promoted cells invasion by using an invasion assay.
Furthermore, miR-489 could regulate SUZ12 as shown by luciferase reporter and
Western blot assays. Aberrant miR-489 expression could regulate the molecular
changes (E-cadherin, N-cadherin, and Vimentin) of epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT). In conclusion, our study revealed that miR-489 may play an
essential role in the progression of NSCLC.

PMID: 25833694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Front Neurol. 2015 Mar 10;6:46. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2015.00046. eCollection 2015.

Transcriptional Response of Polycomb Group Genes to Status Epilepticus in Mice is
Modified by Prior Exposure to Epileptic Preconditioning.

Reynolds JP(1), Miller-Delaney SF(1), Jimenez-Mateos EM(1), Sano T(2), McKiernan 
RC(1), Simon RP(3), Henshall DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland , Dublin , Ireland. (2)Department of Physiology and Medical Physics,
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland , Dublin , Ireland ; Department of
Neurosurgery, Mie University School of Medicine , Tsu, Mie , Japan. (3)Morehouse 
School of Medicine , Atlanta, GA , USA.

Exposure of the brain to brief, non-harmful seizures can activate protective
mechanisms that temporarily generate a damage-refractory state. This process,
termed epileptic tolerance, is associated with large-scale down-regulation of
gene expression. Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are master controllers of gene
silencing during development that are re-activated by injury to the brain. Here, 
we explored the transcriptional response of genes associated with polycomb
repressive complex (PRC) 1 (Ring1A, Ring1B, and Bmi1) and PRC2 (Ezh1, Ezh2, and
Suz12), as well as additional transcriptional regulators Sirt1, Yy1, and Yy2, in 
a mouse model of status epilepticus (SE). Findings were contrasted to changes
after SE in mice previously given brief seizures to evoke tolerance. Real-time
quantitative PCR showed SE prompted an early (1<U+2009>h) increase in expression of
several genes in PRC1 and PRC2 in the hippocampus, followed by down-regulation of
many of the same genes at later times points (4, 8, and 24<U+2009>h). Spatio-temporal
differences were found among PRC2 genes in epileptic tolerance, including
increased expression of Ezh2, Suz12, and Yy2 relative to the normal injury
response to SE. In contrast, PRC1 complex genes including Ring 1B and Bmi1
displayed differential down-regulation in epileptic tolerance. The present study 
characterizes PcG gene expression following SE and shows prior seizure exposure
produces select changes to PRC1 and PRC2 composition that may influence
differential gene expression in epileptic tolerance.

PMCID: PMC4354380
PMID: 25806020  [PubMed]


57. Blood. 2015 Jun 18;125(25):3937-48. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-11-612507. Epub 2015 
Mar 16.

ICL-induced miR139-3p and miR199a-3p have opposite roles in hematopoietic cell
expansion and leukemic transformation.

Alemdehy MF(1), Haanstra JR(1), de Looper HW(1), van Strien PM(1),
Verhagen-Oldenampsen J(1), Caljouw Y(1), Sanders MA(1), Hoogenboezem R(1), de Ru 
AH(2), Janssen GM(2), Smetsers SE(3), Bierings MB(4), van Veelen PA(2), von
Lindern M(1), Touw IP(1), Erkeland SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center Cancer Institute, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands; (2)Department of Immunohematology and Blood
Transfusion, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands;
(3)Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands; and. (4)Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; and Dutch Childhood Oncology Group, The
Hague, The Netherlands.

Interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are toxic DNA lesions that cause severe genomic
damage during replication, especially in Fanconi anemia pathway-deficient cells. 
This results in progressive bone marrow failure and predisposes to acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML). The molecular mechanisms responsible for these defects are
largely unknown. Using Ercc1-deficient mice, we show that Trp53 is responsible
for ICL-induced bone marrow failure and that loss of Trp53 is leukemogenic in
this model. In addition, Ercc1-deficient myeloid progenitors gain elevated levels
of miR-139-3p and miR-199a-3p with age. These microRNAs exert opposite effects on
hematopoiesis. Ectopic expression of miR-139-3p strongly inhibited proliferation 
of myeloid progenitors, whereas inhibition of miR-139-3p activity restored
defective proliferation of Ercc1-deficient progenitors. Conversely, the
inhibition of miR-199a-3p functions aggravated the myeloid proliferation defect
in the Ercc1-deficient model, whereas its enforced expression enhanced
proliferation of progenitors. Importantly, miR-199a-3p caused AML in a
pre-leukemic mouse model, supporting its role as an onco-microRNA. Target genes
include HuR for miR-139-3p and Prdx6, Runx1, and Suz12 for miR-199a-3p. The
latter genes have previously been implicated as tumor suppressors in de novo and 
secondary AML. These findings show that, in addition to TRP53-controlled
mechanisms, miR-139-3p and miR-199a-3p are involved in the defective
hematopoietic function of ICL-repair deficient myeloid progenitors.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25778535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Hepatogastroenterology. 2014 Nov-Dec;61(136):2416-20.

SUZ12 RNA interference inhibits the invasion of gastric carcinoma cells.

Xu XT, Tao ZZ, Song QB, Yao Y, Ruan P.

In order to observe the regulation effects of SUZ12 gene to the invasion of
gastric carcinoma cells and the mechanisms, the expressions of SUZ12 protein in
86 patients with different infiltrating degree (Tis-T4), lymph node metastasis
(N0-N3) and far metastasis (M0-M1) were detected by immunohistochemical staining.
The siRNA to SUZ12 was designed and synthesized and transfected into MKN28 cells.
The effects of SUZ12 siRNA to cell invasion were detected by soft agar colony
forming test and Transwell cabin model. The related protein was detected by
Western-Blot. We found the expression of SUZ12 in gastric carcinoma tissues
(23.58±9.89%) was obviously higher than that in para-cancer tissue (1.12%±0.12%) 
(p<0.01). The expression of SUZ12 was related to the infiltrating degree, and
demonstrated an increasing tendency from Tis-T4, or from N0-N3. The expression of
SUZ12 in M0 was obviously lower than in M1, p<0.01. The level of SUZ12 was
descent obviously after transfected SUZ12 siRNA (p<0.01). The number of cell
clone was reduced in dose dependent of siRNA and the cells permeated through
filter membrane were decreased after transfected siRNA. Inhibition of SUZ12
caused an obviously descent of VEGF, MMP-2 and MMP-9 (0.22±0.06, 0.12±0.03,
0.08±0.02) compared to non transfected group (0.87±0.08, 0.92±0.16, 1.05±0.18)
respectively (p<0.01). We draw the conclusion that the expression of SUZ12 is
increasing along with the degree of infiltrating and metastasis of gastric
carcinoma. SUZ12 siRNA inhibits the invasion of gastric carcinoma cells and the
expression of VEGF, MMP-2 and MMP-9.

PMID: 25699394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Mar 11;43(5):2590-602. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv103. Epub 2015
Feb 17.

Epigenetic remodeling in B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia occurs in two tracks
and employs embryonic stem cell-like signatures.

Lee ST(1), Muench MO(2), Fomin ME(3), Xiao J(4), Zhou M(4), de Smith A(4),
Martín-Subero JI(5), Heath S(6), Houseman EA(7), Roy R(8), Wrensch M(9), Wiencke 
J(9), Metayer C(10), Wiemels JL(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California at San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul 120752, Republic of Korea. (2)Blood Systems
Research Institute, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94158, USA Liver Center and Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (3)Blood Systems
Research Institute, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94158, USA. (4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (5)Unidad de
Hematopatología, Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Clínic, Universitat de
Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS),
Barcelona 08036, Spain. (6)Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico, Parc Científic
de Barcelona, Barcelona 08036, Spain. (7)Department of Public Health, Oregon
State University, Corvallis, OR, 97331 USA. (8)Cancer Research Institute,
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(9)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California at San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (10)Division of Epidemiology, School of Public
Health, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(11)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California at San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA Department of Neurological Surgery,
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
joe.wiemels@ucsf.edu.

We investigated DNA methylomes of pediatric B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias 
(B-ALLs) using whole-genome bisulfite sequencing and high-definition microarrays,
along with RNA expression profiles. Epigenetic alteration of B-ALLs occurred in
two tracks: de novo methylation of small functional compartments and
demethylation of large inter-compartmental backbones. The deviations were
exaggerated in lamina-associated domains, with differences corresponding to
methylation clusters and/or cytogenetic groups. Our data also suggested a pivotal
role of polycomb and CTBP2 in de novo methylation, which may be traced back to
bivalency status of embryonic stem cells. Driven by these potent epigenetic
modulations, suppression of polycomb target genes was observed along with
disruption of developmental fate and cell cycle and mismatch repair pathways and 
altered activities of key upstream regulators.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4357708
PMID: 25690899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2015 Feb 25;67(1):83-9.

[DZNep raises miR-200c expression to delay the invasion and migration of MGC-803 
gastric carcinoma cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Ning XH(1), Guo R(1), Han L(2), Zhang AL(2), Liu X(1), Li ZX(1), Kang CS(2),
Zhang QY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital,
Tianjin 300052, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University 
General Hospital and Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological
Institute, Tianjin 300052, China. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, Tianjin
Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin 300052, China. zhangqy@tijmu.edu.cn.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the regulatory effects of histone
methylation modifications on the expression of miR-200c, as well as invasion and 
migration of gastric carcinoma cells. Gastric carcinoma cell line, MGC-803, were 
treated by 2.5 µmol/L histone methyltransferase inhibitor, DZNep. The expression 
of miR-200c was detected by real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR). The
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) indicators (ZEB1/2 and E/N-cadherin),
EZH2, EED, SUZ12 and H3K27me3 expressions were detected by Western blot. Cell
migration and invasion abilities were detected by Transwell and scratch tests.
The result showed that, compared with DMSO (control) group, DZNep significantly
increased the expression of miR-200c to about 2.1 times, inhibited ZEB1, ZEB2,
and N-cadherin expressions, and activated E-cadherin expression; Also, DZNep
decreased the protein expressions of EZH2, EED, SUZ12 and H3K27me3; Moreover,
DZNep could inhibit MGC-803 cell invasive and migrative abilities, as well as
MMP9 expression. These results suggest DZNep raises miR-200c expression to delay 
the invasion and migration of gastric carcinoma cells, and the underlying
mechanisms involve the regulations of EMT-related proteins and polycomb
repressive complex 2.

PMID: 25672630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Tumour Biol. 2015 Jul;36(7):5341-51. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3195-7. Epub 2015
Feb 12.

SUZ12 promotes gastric cancer cell proliferation and metastasis by regulating
KLF2 and E-cadherin.

Xia R(1), Jin FY, Lu K, Wan L, Xie M, Xu TP, De W, Wang ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

SUZ12 is a core component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which
could silence gene transcription by generating trimethylation on lysine 27
residue of histone H3 (H3K27Me3). Meanwhile, SUZ12 has been found to be
overexpressed in multiple cancers; however, the clinical significance and
molecular mechanisms of SUZ12 controlling gastric cancer cell proliferation and
metastasis are unclear. In this study, we found that SUZ12 expression was
significantly increased in 64 gastric tumor tissues compared with normal tissues.
Additionally, SUZ12 expression was associated with pathological stage, metastasis
distance, and shorter overall survival of gastric cancer patients. Knockdown of
SUZ12 expression impaired cell proliferation and invasion in vitro, leading to
the inhibition of metastasis in vivo. Upregulation of SUZ12 was found to play a
key role in gastric cancer cell proliferation and metastasis through the
regulation of EMT and KLF2 expression.

PMID: 25672609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Mar;36(3):355-67. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv006. Epub 2015 Feb 
4.

Curcumin mediates chemosensitization to 5-fluorouracil through miRNA-induced
suppression of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in chemoresistant colorectal 
cancer.

Toden S(1), Okugawa Y(1), Jascur T(1), Wodarz D(2), Komarova NL(2), Buhrmann
C(3), Shakibaei M(3), Boland CR(1), Goel A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gastrointestinal Research, and Center for Epigenetics, Cancer
Prevention and Cancer Genomics, Baylor Research Institute and Sammons Cancer
Center, Baylor University Medical Center, 3500 Gaston Avenue, Suite H-250,
Dallas, TX 75246, USA, Department of Ecology and Evolution and Department of
Mathematics, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA and Institute of Anatomy, 
Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich, Germany. (2)Department of Ecology and
Evolution and Department of Mathematics, University of California, Irvine, CA,
USA and. (3)Institute of Anatomy, Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich, Germany. 
(4)Center for Gastrointestinal Research, and Center for Epigenetics, Cancer
Prevention and Cancer Genomics, Baylor Research Institute and Sammons Cancer
Center, Baylor University Medical Center, 3500 Gaston Avenue, Suite H-250,
Dallas, TX 75246, USA, Department of Ecology and Evolution and Department of
Mathematics, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA and Institute of Anatomy, 
Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich, Germany ajay.goel@baylorhealth.edu.

Resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy is a major cause of mortality in colorectal 
cancer (CRC) patients. Chemoresistance has been linked primarily to a subset of
cancer cells undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Curcumin, a
botanical with antitumorigenic properties, has been shown to enhance sensitivity 
of cancer cells to chemotherapeutic drugs, but the molecular mechanisms
underlying this phenomenon remain unclear. Effects of curcumin and 5-fluorouracil
(5FU) individually, and in combination, were examined in parental and 5FU
resistant (5FUR) cell lines. We performed a series of growth proliferation and
apoptosis assays in 2D and 3D cell cultures. Furthermore, we identified and
analyzed the expression pattern of a subset of putative EMT-suppressive microRNAs
(miRNAs) and their downstream target genes regulated by curcumin.
Chemosensitizing effects of curcumin were validated in a xenograft mouse model.
Combined treatment with curcumin and 5FU enhanced cellular apoptosis and
inhibited proliferation in both parental and 5FUR cells, whereas 5FU alone was
ineffective in 5FUR cells. A group of EMT-suppressive miRNAs were upregulated by 
curcumin treatment in 5FUR cells. Curcumin suppressed EMT in 5FUR cells by
downregulating BMI1, SUZ12 and EZH2 transcripts, key mediators of cancer
stemness-related polycomb repressive complex subunits. Using a xenograft and
mathematical models, we further demonstrated that curcumin sensitized 5FU to
suppress tumor growth. We provide novel mechanistic evidence for
curcumin-mediated sensitization to 5FU-related chemoresistance through
suppression of EMT in 5FUR cells via upregulation of EMT-suppressive miRNAs. This
study highlights the potential therapeutic usefulness of curcumin as an adjunct
in patients with chemoresistant advanced CRC.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4400529
PMID: 25653233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Int J Oncol. 2015 Apr;46(4):1788-800. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2876. Epub 2015 Feb
5.

Generation of an anti-EpCAM antibody and epigenetic regulation of EpCAM in
colorectal cancer.

Liao MY(1), Kuo MY(1), Lu TY(2), Wang YP(1), Wu HC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Dentistry, School of Dentistry, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C. (2)Institute of Cellular and Organismic
Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan, R.O.C.

We have generated a novel monoclonal antibody (mAb), OCAb9-1, which specifically 
binds to various types of cancer cell lines, but not to normal cells. According
to the results of immunoaffinity chromatography, LC-MS/MS analysis,
co-immunoprecipitation, and RNA interference studies, the target protein of
OCAb9-1 is the epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM). EpCAM is a type I
transmembrane glycoprotein which is highly expressed in epithelial-transformed
neoplasia and tumor-initiating cells (TICs). However, regulation of EpCAM gene
expression in tumors and its role in tumorigenesis are not fully understood. In
the present study, we show that EpCAM expression is elevated in several cancer
cell lines and tumor tissues. Loss-of-function experiments were performed to
demonstrate that EpCAM negatively regulates expression of p53 and p21, and
promotes tumor cell growth, colony formation, migration and invasion. The median 
overall survival of tumor-bearing mice treated with OCAb9-1 was significantly
higher than that of PBS-treated mice. Moreover, we report that the interplay
between SUZ12 and JMJD3 results in dynamic regulation of lysine 27 trimethylation
of histone 3 (H3K27me3). Taken together, our findings suggest that the anti-EpCAM
mAb may be suitable for use in cancer diagnosis, prognosis, imaging and therapy. 
Furthermore, EpCAM overexpression in cancer cells is strongly associated with
tumor progression, and may be regulated by epigenetic mechanisms.

PMID: 25652097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Blood. 2015 Mar 19;125(12):1890-900. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-10-603969. Epub 2015
Feb 2.

Jarid2 regulates hematopoietic stem cell function by acting with polycomb
repressive complex 2.

Kinkel SA(1), Galeev R(2), Flensburg C(3), Keniry A(1), Breslin K(4), Gilan O(5),
Lee S(1), Liu J(4), Chen K(1), Gearing LJ(1), Moore DL(1), Alexander WS(1),
Dawson M(5), Majewski IJ(1), Oshlack A(6), Larsson J(2), Blewitt ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC, Australia; (2)Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Lund Stem Cell Center,
Lund University, Lund, Sweden; (3)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia; Bioinformatics, Murdoch
Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, VIC,
Australia; and. (4)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, VIC, Australia; (5)Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, VIC,
Australia. (6)Bioinformatics, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal
Children's Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia; and.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) plays a key role in hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cell (HSPC) function. Analyses of mouse mutants harboring deletions of
core components have implicated PRC2 in fine-tuning multiple pathways that
instruct HSPC behavior, yet how PRC2 is targeted to specific genomic loci within 
HSPCs remains unknown. Here we use short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown to survey
the function of PRC2 accessory factors that were defined in embryonic stem cells 
(ESCs) by testing the competitive reconstitution capacity of transduced murine
HSPCs. We find that, similar to the phenotype observed upon depletion of core
subunit Suz12, depleting Jarid2 enhances the competitive transplantation capacity
of both fetal and adult mouse HSPCs. Furthermore, we demonstrate that depletion
of JARID2 enhances the in vitro expansion and in vivo reconstitution capacity of 
human HSPCs. Gene expression profiling revealed common Suz12 and Jarid2 target
genes that are enriched for the H3K27me3 mark established by PRC2. These data
implicate Jarid2 as an important component of PRC2 that has a central role in
coordinating HSPC function.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4424268
PMID: 25645357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Development. 2015 Feb 15;142(4):722-31. doi: 10.1242/dev.111997. Epub 2015 Jan
23.

Snail2/Slug cooperates with Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) to regulate
neural crest development.

Tien CL(1), Jones A(2), Wang H(2), Gerigk M(1), Nozell S(1), Chang C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, 1720 2nd Avenue S., Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, 1720 2nd Avenue S., Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. (3)Department of Cell,
Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1720 
2nd Avenue S., Birmingham, AL 35294, USA cchang@uab.edu.

Neural crest cells arise from the border of the neural plate and epidermal
ectoderm, migrate extensively and differentiate into diverse cell types during
vertebrate embryogenesis. Although much has been learnt about growth factor
signals and gene regulatory networks that regulate neural crest development,
limited information is available on how epigenetic mechanisms control this
process. In this study, we show that Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2)
cooperates with the transcription factor Snail2/Slug to modulate neural crest
development in Xenopus. The PRC2 core components Eed, Ezh2 and Suz12 are
expressed in the neural crest cells and are required for neural crest marker
expression. Knockdown of Ezh2, the catalytic subunit of PRC2 for histone H3K27
methylation, results in defects in neural crest specification, migration and
craniofacial cartilage formation. EZH2 interacts directly with Snail2, and Snail2
fails to expand the neural crest domains in the absence of Ezh2. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis shows that Snail2 regulates EZH2 occupancy and
histone H3K27 trimethylation levels at the promoter region of the Snail2 target
E-cadherin. Our results indicate that Snail2 cooperates with EZH2 and PRC2 to
control expression of the genes important for neural crest specification and
migration during neural crest development.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4325378
PMID: 25617436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell. 2015 Jan 22;57(2):304-16. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.12.009. Epub 2015 
Jan 8.

Developmental control of polycomb subunit composition by GATA factors mediates a 
switch to non-canonical functions.

Xu J(1), Shao Z(2), Li D(3), Xie H(4), Kim W(4), Huang J(5), Taylor JE(6),
Pinello L(7), Glass K(7), Jaffe JD(6), Yuan GC(7), Orkin SH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Children's Research Institute,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital and Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Key
Laboratory of Computational Biology, CAS-MPG Partner Institute for Computational 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (3)Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138,
USA. (4)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (5)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (6)The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (7)Department of Biostatistics and Computational
Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
MA 02115, USA. (8)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
stuart_orkin@dfci.harvard.edu.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) plays crucial roles in transcriptional
regulation and stem cell development. However, the context-specific functions
associated with alternative subunits remain largely unexplored. Here we show that
the related enzymatic subunits EZH1 and EZH2 undergo an expression switch during 
blood cell development. An erythroid-specific enhancer mediates transcriptional
activation of EZH1, and a switch from GATA2 to GATA1 controls the developmental
EZH1/2 switch by differential association with EZH1 enhancers. We further examine
the in vivo stoichiometry of the PRC2 complexes by quantitative proteomics and
reveal the existence of an EZH1-SUZ12 subcomplex lacking EED. EZH1 together with 
SUZ12 form a non-canonical PRC2 complex, occupy active chromatin, and positively 
regulate gene expression. Loss of EZH2 expression leads to repositioning of EZH1 
to EZH2 targets. Thus, the lineage- and developmental stage-specific regulation
of PRC2 subunit composition leads to a switch from canonical silencing to
non-canonical functions during blood stem cell specification.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4305004
PMID: 25578878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cell Biol Int. 2015 May;39(5):600-10. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10431. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

Lineage specific expression of Polycomb Group Proteins in human embryonic stem
cells in vitro.

Pethe P(1), Pursani V, Bhartiya D.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Department, National Institute for Research in Reproductive 
Health (NIRRH), Jehangir Merwanji Street, Parel, Mumbai, 400012, India.

Human embryonic (hES) stem cells are an excellent model to study lineage
specification and differentiation into various cell types. Differentiation
necessitates repression of specific genes not required for a particular lineage. 
Polycomb Group (PcG) proteins are key histone modifiers, whose primary function
is gene repression. PcG proteins form complexes called Polycomb Repressive
Complexes (PRCs), which catalyze histone modifications such as H2AK119ub1,
H3K27me3, and H3K9me3. PcG proteins play a crucial role during differentiation of
stem cells. The expression of PcG transcripts during differentiation of hES cells
into endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm lineage is yet to be shown. In-house
derived hES cell line KIND1 was differentiated into endoderm, mesoderm, and
ectoderm lineages; followed by characterization using RT-PCR for HNF4A, CDX2,
MEF2C, TBX5, SOX1, and MAP2. qRT-PCR and western blotting was performed to
compare expression of PcG transcripts and proteins across all the three lineages.
We observed that cells differentiated into endoderm showed upregulation of
RING1B, BMI1, EZH2, and EED transcripts. Mesoderm differentiation was
characterized by significant downregulation of all PcG transcripts during later
stages. BMI1 and RING1B were upregulated while EZH2, SUZ12, and EED remained low 
during ectoderm differentiation. Western blotting also showed distinct expression
of BMI1 and EZH2 during differentiation into three germ layers. Our study shows
that hES cells differentiating into endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm lineages
show distinct PcG expression profile at transcript and protein level.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 25572667  [PubMed - in process]


68. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 13;290(7):4356-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.613968. Epub 2014 
Dec 28.

An alternative retinoic acid-responsive Stra6 promoter regulated in response to
retinol deficiency.

Laursen KB(1), Kashyap V(1), Scandura J(2), Gudas LJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Pharmacology Department and. (2)the Department of Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10065. (3)From 
the Pharmacology Department and the Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10065 ljgudas@med.cornell.edu.

Cellular uptake of vitamin A (retinol) is essential for many biological
functions. The Stra6 protein binds the serum retinol-binding protein, RBP4, and
acts in conjunction with the enzyme lecithin:retinol acyltransferase to
facilitate retinol uptake in some cell types. We show that in embryonic stem (ES)
cells and in some tissues, the Stra6 gene encodes two distinct mRNAs transcribed 
from two different promoters. Whereas both are all-trans-retinoic acid
(RA)-responsive in ES cells, the downstream promoter contains a half-site RA
response element (RARE) and drives an ~ 13-fold, RA-associated increase in
luciferase reporter activity. We employed CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing to show that
the endogenous RARE is required for RA-induced transcription of both Stra6
isoforms. We further demonstrate that in ES cells, 1) both RAR<U+03B3> and RXRa are
present at the Stra6 RARE; 2) RA increases co-activator p300 (KAT3B) binding and 
histone H3 Lys-27 acetylation at both promoters; 3) RA decreases Suz12 levels and
histone H3 Lys-27 trimethylation epigenetic marks at both promoters; and 4) these
epigenetic changes are diminished in the absence of RAR<U+03B3>. In the brains of WT
mice, both the longer and the shorter Stra6 transcript (Stra6L and Stra6S,
respectively) are highly expressed, whereas these transcripts are found only at
low levels in RAR<U+03B3>(-/-) mice. In the brains of vitamin A-deficient mice, both
Stra6L and Stra6S levels are decreased. In contrast, in the vitamin A-deficient
kidneys, the Stra6L levels are greatly increased, whereas Stra6S levels are
decreased. Our data show that kidneys respond to retinol deficiency by
differential Stra6 promoter usage, which may play a role in the retention of
retinol when vitamin A is low.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4326842
PMID: 25544292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Development. 2015 Jan 1;142(1):70-81. doi: 10.1242/dev.109454.

Geminin deletion increases the number of fetal hematopoietic stem cells by
affecting the expression of key transcription factors.

Karamitros D(1), Patmanidi AL(1), Kotantaki P(1), Potocnik AJ(2), Bähr-Ivacevic
T(3), Benes V(3), Lygerou Z(4), Kioussis D(5), Taraviras S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical School, University of Patras, Rio, Patras
26504, Greece. (2)Division of Molecular Immunology, MRC/National Institute for
Medical Research, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK. (3)European Molecular Biology
Laboratory (EMBL), Core Facilities and Services, Meyerhofstraße 1, Heidelberg
69117, Germany. (4)Department of Biology, Medical School, University of Patras,
Rio, Patras 26504, Greece. (5)Division of Molecular Immunology, MRC/National
Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK
dkiouss@nimr.mrc.ac.uk taraviras@med.upatras.gr. (6)Department of Physiology,
Medical School, University of Patras, Rio, Patras 26504, Greece
dkiouss@nimr.mrc.ac.uk taraviras@med.upatras.gr.

Balancing stem cell self-renewal and initiation of lineage specification programs
is essential for the development and homeostasis of the hematopoietic system. We 
have specifically ablated geminin in the developing murine hematopoietic system
and observed profound defects in the generation of mature blood cells, leading to
embryonic lethality. Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) accumulated in the fetal
liver following geminin ablation, while committed progenitors were reduced.
Genome-wide transcriptome analysis identified key HSC transcription factors as
being upregulated upon geminin deletion, revealing a gene network linked with
geminin that controls fetal hematopoiesis. In order to obtain mechanistic insight
into the ability of geminin to regulate transcription, we examined Hoxa9 as an
example of a key gene in definitive hematopoiesis. We demonstrate that in human
K562 cells geminin is associated with HOXA9 regulatory elements and its absence
increases HOXA9 transcription similarly to that observed in vivo. Moreover,
silencing geminin reduced recruitment of the PRC2 component SUZ12 to the HOXA9
locus and resulted in an increase in RNA polymerase II recruitment and H3K4
trimethylation (H3K4me3), whereas the repressive marks H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 were 
reduced. The chromatin landscape was also modified at the regulatory regions of
HOXA10 and GATA1. K562 cells showed a reduced ability to differentiate to
erythrocytes and megakaryocytes upon geminin silencing. Our data suggest that
geminin is indispensable for fetal hematopoiesis and regulates the generation of 
a physiological pool of stem and progenitor cells in the fetal hematopoietic
system.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25516969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Nov 11;3(5):892-904. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.09.003.
Epub 2014 Oct 11.

DAZL limits pluripotency, differentiation, and apoptosis in developing primordial
germ cells.

Chen HH(1), Welling M(2), Bloch DB(3), Muñoz J(4), Mientjes E(5), Chen X(6),
Tramp C(1), Wu J(7), Yabuuchi A(8), Chou YF(1), Buecker C(2), Krainer A(7),
Willemsen R(5), Heck AJ(4), Geijsen N(9).

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
(2)Hubrecht Institute and University Medical Center, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT
Utrecht, the Netherlands. (3)Department of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, 
Department of Rheumatology, Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases,
Boston, MA 02114, USA. (4)Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet 
Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical
Sciences and Netherlands Proteomics Center, Utrecht University, 3584 CH Utrecht, 
the Netherlands. (5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, 3000
CA Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (6)Key Laboratory for Major Obstetric Diseases of 
Guangdong Province, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical College,
Guangzhou 510150, PR China. (7)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor,
NY 11724, USA. (8)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital 
Boston and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (9)Hubrecht
Institute and University Medical Center, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, the
Netherlands; Department of Companion Animals, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Utrecht University, Yalelaan 104, 3584 CM Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic
address: n.geijsen@hubrecht.eu.

The scarcity of primordial germ cells (PGCs) in the developing mammalian embryo
hampers robust biochemical analysis of the processes that underlie early germ
cell formation. Here, we demonstrate that DAZL, a germ cell-specific RNA binding 
protein, is a robust PGC marker during in vitro germ cell development. Using
Dazl-GFP reporter ESCs, we demonstrate that DAZL plays a central role in a large 
mRNA/protein interactive network that blocks the translation of core pluripotency
factors, including Sox2 and Sall4, as well as of Suz12, a polycomb family member 
required for differentiation of pluripotent cells. Thus, DAZL limits both
pluripotency and somatic differentiation in nascent PGCs. In addition, we
observed that DAZL associates with mRNAs of key Caspases and similarly inhibits
their translation. This elegant fail-safe mechanism ensures that, whereas loss of
DAZL results in prolonged expression of pluripotency factors, teratoma formation 
is avoided due to the concomitant activation of the apoptotic cascade.

PMCID: PMC4235140
PMID: 25418731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Cancer Discov. 2014 Nov;4(11):OF14. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-RW2014-206. Epub
2014 Oct 2.

Loss of PRC2 function promotes MPNST pathogenesis.

[No authors listed]

Genetic inactivation of PRC2 components, NF1, and CDKN2A are frequently detected 
in MPNSTs.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25367955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Histopathology. 2015 Jul;67(1):1-19. doi: 10.1111/his.12594. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Endometrial stromal sarcoma--the new genetic paradigm.

Lee CH(1), Nucci MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Royal Alexandra Hospital,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. (2)Department of Pathology, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Endometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS) is a gynaecological sarcoma that is composed of
cells that resemble those of proliferative-phase endometrial stroma. The 2014
World Health Organization tumour classification system separates ESS into
low-grade and high-grade types, which are histologically, genetically and
clinically distinct from undifferentiated uterine sarcoma (UUS). Low-grade ESSs
frequently contain chromosomal rearrangements that result in JAZF1-SUZ12 fusion
or equivalent genetic fusions. Although most low-grade ESSs show classic
histological features that closely resemble those of proliferative-phase
endometrial stroma, there are several histological variants that are associated
with the same genetic fusions as seen in the classic type. High-grade ESS is
defined by the presence of YWHAE-NUTM2A/B (YWHAE-FAM22A/B) fusions. High-grade
ESSs are clinically more aggressive than low-grade ESSs, but are associated with 
a lower mortality rate than UUSs. The histological and immunophenotypic features 
of these different types of ESS, and their diagnostic considerations, are the
subjects of this review.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25355621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nat Genet. 2014 Nov;46(11):1154-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.3124.

PRC2 loss amplifies Ras signaling in cancer.

Baude A(1), Lindroth AM(2), Plass C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk Factors at the German Cancer Research 
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Graduate School of Cancer Science and
Policy, National Cancer Center, Goyang-si, Republic of Korea.

The histone-modifying PRC2 complex has an ambiguous role in cancer, bearing both 
oncogenic and tumor-suppressive features depending on cell type. Studies of
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) have now identified
loss-of-function mutations altering PRC2 subunits, leading to the amplification
of Ras-driven transcription and conferring vulnerability to BRD4 inhibitors.

PMID: 25352098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 21;9(10):e110498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110498.
eCollection 2014.

Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 regulates lineage fidelity during embryonic stem
cell differentiation.

Thornton SR(1), Butty VL(2), Levine SS(2), Boyer LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)BioMicro Center, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) catalyzes histone H3 lysine 27
tri-methylation (H3K27me3), an epigenetic modification associated with gene
repression. H3K27me3 is enriched at the promoters of a large cohort of
developmental genes in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Loss of H3K27me3 leads to a
failure of ESCs to properly differentiate, making it difficult to determine the
precise roles of PRC2 during lineage commitment. Moreover, while studies suggest 
that PRC2 prevents DNA methylation, how these two epigenetic regulators
coordinate to regulate lineage programs is poorly understood. Using several PRC2 
mutant ESC lines that maintain varying levels of H3K27me3, we found that partial 
maintenance of H3K27me3 allowed for proper temporal activation of lineage genes
during directed differentiation of ESCs to spinal motor neurons (SMNs). In
contrast, genes that function to specify other lineages failed to be repressed in
these cells, suggesting that PRC2 is also necessary for lineage fidelity. We also
found that loss of H3K27me3 leads to a modest gain in DNA methylation at PRC2
target regions in both ESCs and in SMNs. Our study demonstrates a critical role
for PRC2 in safeguarding lineage decisions and in protecting genes against
inappropriate DNA methylation.

PMCID: PMC4204901
PMID: 25333635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2015 Apr;141(4):661-9. doi: 10.1007/s00432-014-1854-5.
Epub 2014 Oct 19.

Expression and clinicopathological significance of EED, SUZ12 and EZH2 mRNA in
colorectal cancer.

Liu YL(1), Gao X, Jiang Y, Zhang G, Sun ZC, Cui BB, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital, Harbin
Medical University, No. 150, Haping Rd, Nangang District, Harbin, 150081,
Heilongjiang, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2), embryonic ectoderm
development (EED), and suppressor of zeste 12 homolog (SUZ12), the key component 
of polycomb repressive complex 2, are of great importance in human cancer
pathogenesis. This study was designed to investigate the clinical and prognostic 
significances of EZH2, EED and SUZ12 in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients.
METHODS: The expression of EZH2, EED and SUZ12 mRNA was evaluated in 82 primary
CRC and paired non-cancerous mucosa samples by qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: We found that overall EZH2, EED and SUZ12 mRNA expression in the CRC
tissues was significantly increased than in the non-cancerous tissue (p < 0.05). 
Increased EZH2, EED and SUZ12 mRNA expression was directly correlated with
primary tumor size, regional lymph node metastases, distant metastasis and AJCC
stage. Furthermore, CRC patients with higher level of EED, SUZ12 or EZH2 showed a
worse disease-free survival (DFS) (p < 0.01). In multivariate analysis, the
increased EZH2 expression may be a risk factor for the patients' 3-year DFS (HR
2.517; 95% CI 1.104, 5.736; p = 0.028). Furthermore, the k-means cluster analysis
showed that high mRNA expression of EED, SUZ12 and EZH2 was significantly
correlated with the aggressive clinical behavior and poor prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: High expression of EED, SUZ12 and EZH2 might contribute to the CRC
development/progression.

PMID: 25326896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Nat Genet. 2014 Nov;46(11):1170-2. doi: 10.1038/ng.3116. Epub 2014 Oct 12.

Somatic mutations of SUZ12 in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.

Zhang M(1), Wang Y(1), Jones S(2), Sausen M(2), McMahon K(1), Sharma R(3), Wang
Q(1), Belzberg AJ(4), Chaichana K(4), Gallia GL(4), Gokaslan ZL(4), Riggins
GJ(4), Wolinksy JP(4), Wood LD(3), Montgomery EA(3), Hruban RH(3), Kinzler KW(1),
Papadopoulos N(1), Vogelstein B(1), Bettegowda C(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics, Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (2)Personalized Genome
Diagnostics, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA. (5)1] Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics, Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [3] Department of
Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA.

Neurofibromatosis 1 is a hereditary syndrome characterized by the development of 
numerous benign neurofibromas, a small subset of which progress to malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs). To better understand the genetic basis
for MPNSTs, we performed genome-wide or targeted sequencing on 50 cases. Sixteen 
MPNSTs but none of the neurofibromas tested were found to have somatic mutations 
in SUZ12, implicating it as having a central role in malignant transformation.

PMCID: PMC4383254
PMID: 25305755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Adv Anat Pathol. 2014 Nov;21(6):383-93. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0000000000000046.

Endometrial stromal tumors: the new WHO classification.

Conklin CM(1), Longacre TA.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Surrey Memorial Hospital, Surrey, BC, Canada
Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.

Endometrial stromal tumors are rare uterine mesenchymal neoplasms that have
intrigued pathologists for years, not only because they commonly pose diagnostic 
dilemmas, but also because the classification and pathogenesis of these tumors
has been widely debated. The current World Health Organization recognizes 4
categories of endometrial stromal tumor: endometrial stromal nodule (ESN),
low-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma (LG-ESS), high-grade endometrial stromal
sarcoma (HG-ESS), and undifferentiated uterine sarcoma (UUS). uterine sarcoma.
These categories are defined by the presence of distinct translocations as well
as tumor morphology and prognosis. Specifically, the JAZF1-SUZ12 (formerly
JAZF1-JJAZ1) fusion identifies a large proportion of ESN and LG-ESSs, whereas the
YWHAE-FAM22 translocation identifies HG-ESSs. The latter tumors appear to have a 
prognosis intermediate between LG-ESS and UUS, which exhibits no specific
translocation pattern. This review (1) presents the clinicopathologic features of
endometrial stromal tumors; (2) discusses their immunophenotype; and (3)
highlights the recent advances in molecular genetics which explain their
pathogenesis and lend support for a new classification system.

PMID: 25299308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Oncol Lett. 2014 Nov;8(5):1933-1936. Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Suppressor of Zeste 12 homolog RNA interference inhibits retinoblastoma cell
invasion.

Zhou M(1), Sun J(1), Liu Y(1), Ma J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Beihua University,
Jilin City, Jilin 132011, P.R. China.

Suppressor of Zeste 12 homolog (SUZ12) is known to regulate tumor phenotype
through altering gene expression, with an important regulatory role in tumor
genesis and development. SUZ12 has been widely investigated; however, no studies 
regarding the role of the SUZ12 gene in retinoblastoma (RB) have been conducted. 
In this study, SUZ12 small interfering (si)RNA was transfected into SO-RB50 human
RB cells. The influence of SUZ siRNA on RB cell invasion was detected using a
soft agar colony forming assay and a Transwell cabin model. The effect of the
SUZ12 siRNA on the expression levels of the associated proteins, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 and MMP-2, was
detected by western blotting. The number of cell clones was found to be reduced
by the siRNA in a dose-dependent manner, and the number of cells that had
permeated through the filter membrane was reduced following transfection with the
siRNA. SUZ12 inhibition resulted in a marked reduction in VEGF, MMP-2 and MMP-9
expression levels (0.26±0.04, 0.16±0.02 and 0.12±0.02, respectively) compared
with the levels in the non-transfected group (0.80±0.10, 0.94±0.16 and 1.15±0.18,
respectively) (P<0.01). In conclusion, SUZ12 siRNA inhibited cell invasion and
the expression of VEGF, MMP-2 and MMP-9 in SO-RB50 retinoblastoma cells.

PMCID: PMC4186612
PMID: 25295075  [PubMed]


79. Hum Pathol. 2014 Dec;45(12):2453-62. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.08.012. Epub
2014 Sep 4.

Molecular characterization of a population-based series of endometrial stromal
sarcomas in Kuwait.

Ali RH(1), Al-Safi R(2), Al-Waheeb S(3), John B(3), Al-Ali W(3), Al-Jassar W(4), 
Al-Mulla F(3), Melnyk N(5), Huntsman DG(5), Lee CH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Health Sciences Center, Kuwait
University, Safat 13110, Kuwait. Electronic address: rolapath@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, Maternity Hospital, Safat 13001, Kuwait.
(3)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Health Sciences Center, Kuwait
University, Safat 13110, Kuwait. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Faculty of Medicine, Health Sciences Center, Kuwait University, Safat 13110,
Kuwait. (5)Centre for Translational and Applied Genomics, British Columbia Cancer
Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4E6, Canada. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathology, University of Alberta and Royal Alexandra Hospital, Edmonton, AB T5H
3V9, Canada.

Endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESSs) frequently harbor genetic fusions, including 
JAZF1-SUZ12 and equivalent fusions in low-grade ESS (LGESS) and YWHAE-NUTM2 in
high-grade ESS (HGESS). This study aims to classify a population-based series of 
ESSs in Kuwait based on the 2014 World Health Organization classification system 
and to assess the diagnostic use of interferon-induced transmembrane protein 1
(IFITM1) immunomarker for ESSs. Twenty ESSs including 19 LGESSs and 1 HGESS
treated during the period between 2002 and 2013 were identified, and the cases
were reviewed and characterized using fluorescence in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemical studies. Thirteen (81.3%) of 16 LGESSs with interpretable
results showed JAZF1 and/or PHF1 genetic rearrangements by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, and the only HGESS in the series showed YWHAE genetic
rearrangement. All LGESSs with interpretable results showed positive
immunostaining for CD10 compared with 11 (61%) of 18 that showed positive
immunostaining for IFITM1; 4 of 7 IFITM1-negative LGESSs showed JAZF1 and/or PHF1
rearrangements. A series of uterine leiomyomas, leiomyosarcomas, adenosarcomas,
and carcinosarcomas were included for comparison, and positive IFITM1 staining
was found in 1 of 10 leiomyomas, 3 of 13 leiomyosarcomas, 3 of 4 adenosarcomas,
and 3 of 8 carcinosarcomas, compared to 0 of 10 leiomyomas, 9 of 13
leiomyosarcomas, 3 of 4 adenosarcomas, and 5 of 8 carcinosarcomas that were
positive for CD10. Our results demonstrated characteristic genetic rearrangements
in a high percentage of LGESSs in this Middle Eastern population, and IFITM1
antibody appears to be less sensitive than CD10 for LGESS.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25288234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Biosyst. 2014 Dec;10(12):3238-48. doi: 10.1039/c4mb00526k.

Investigating the functional implications of reinforcing feedback loops in
transcriptional regulatory networks.

Li Y(1), Liang C, Easterbrook S, Luo J, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S
3G4, Canada. yueli@cs.toronto.edu sme@cs.toronto.edu.

Transcription factors (TFs) and microRNAs (miRNAs) can jointly regulate
transcriptional networks in the form of recurrent circuits or motifs. A motif can
be divided into a feedforward loop (FFL) and a feedback loop (FBL). Incoherent
FFLs have been the recent focus due to their potential to dampen gene expression 
noise in maintaining physiological norms. However, a cell is not only able to
manage noise but also able to exploit it during development or tumorigenesis to
initiate radical transformation such as cell differentiation or metastasis. A
plausible mechanism may involve reinforcing FBLs (rFBLs), which amplify changes
to a sufficient level in order to complete the state transition. To study the
behaviour of rFBLs, we developed a novel theoretical framework based on
biochemical kinetics. The proposed rFBL follows a parsimonious design, involving 
two TFs and two miRNAs. A simulation study based on our model suggested that a
system with rFBLs is robust to only a certain level of fluctuation but prone to a
complete paradigm shift when the change exceeds a threshold level. To investigate
the natural occurrence of rFBLs, we performed a rigorous network motif analysis
using a recently available TF/miRNA regulatory network from the Encyclopedia of
DNA Elements (ENCODE). Our analysis suggested that the rFBL is significantly
depleted in the observed network. Nonetheless, we identified 9 rFBL instances.
Among them, we found a double-rFBL involving three TFs SUZ12/BCLAF1/ZBTB33 and
three miRNAs miR-9/19a/129-5p, which together serve as an intriguing toggle
switch between nerve development and telomere maintenance. Additionally, we
investigated the interactions implicated in the rFBLs using expression profiles
of cancer patients from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Together, we provided a
novel and comprehensive view of the profound impacts of rFBLs and highlighted
several TFs and miRNAs as the leverage points for potential therapeutic targets
in cancers due to their eminent roles in the identified rFBLs.

PMID: 25286350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 3;9(10):e109578. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109578.
eCollection 2014.

Histone deacetylase 1/Sp1/microRNA-200b signaling accounts for maintenance of
cancer stem-like cells in human lung adenocarcinoma.

Chen DQ(1), Huang JY(1), Feng B(1), Pan BZ(1), De W(2), Wang R(1), Chen LB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jinling Hospital, School of Medicine, Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, P. R. China. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, P. R. China.

The presence of cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) is one of the mechanisms
responsible for chemoresistance that has been a major hindrance towards lung
adenocarcinoma (LAD) treatment. Recently, we have identified microRNA (miR)-200b 
as a key regulator of chemoresistance in human docetaxel-resistant LAD cells.
However, whether miR-200b has effects on regulating CSCs remains largely unclear 
and needs to be further elucidated. Here, we showed that miR-200b was
significantly downregulated in CD133+/CD326+ cells that exhibited properties of
CSCs derived from docetaxel-resistant LAD cells. Also, restoration of miR-200b
could inhibit maintenance and reverse chemoresistance of CSCs. Furthermore,
suppressor of zeste-12 (Suz-12) was identified as a direct and functional target 
of miR-200b, and silencing of Suz-12 phenocopied the effects of miR-200b on CSCs.
Additionally, overexpression of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 was identified as a 
pivotal mechanism responsible for miR-200b repression in CSCs through a
specificity protein (Sp) 1-dependent mechanism, and restoration of miR-200b by
HDAC1 repression significantly suppressed CSCs formation and reversed
chemoresistance of CSCs by regulating Suz-12-E-cadherin signaling. Also,
downregulation of HDAC1 or upregulation of miR-200b reduced the in vivo
tumorigenicity of CSCs. Finally, Suz-12 was inversely correlated with miR-200b,
positively correlated with HDAC1 and up-regulated in docetaxel-resistant LAD
tissues compared with docetaxel-sensitive tissues. Taken together, the
HDAC1/miR-200b/Suz-12-E-cadherin signaling might account for maintenance of CSCs 
and formation of chemoresistant phenotype in docetaxel-resistant LAD cells.

PMCID: PMC4184862
PMID: 25279705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. FEBS J. 2015 May;282(9):1723-35. doi: 10.1111/febs.13083. Epub 2014 Oct 25.

Role of PRC2-associated factors in stem cells and disease.

Vizán P(1), Beringer M, Ballaré C, Di Croce L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain; Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
Barcelona, Spain.

The Polycomb group (PcG) of proteins form chromatin-binding complexes with
histone-modifying activity. The two main PcG repressive complexes studied (PRC1
and PRC2) are generally associated with chromatin in its repressed state. PRC2 is
responsible for methylation of histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3), an epigenetic 
mark that is linked with numerous biological processes, including development,
adult homeostasis and cancer. The core canonical complex PRC2, which contains the
EZH1/2, SUZ12 and EED proteins, may be extended and functionally manipulated
through interactions with several other proteins. In this review, we focus on
these PRC2-associated proteins. As PRC2 functions are diverse, the variability
conferred by these sub-stoichiometrically associated members may help to
understand specific changes in PRC2 activity, chromatin recruitment and
distribution required for gene repression.

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 25271128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Clin Invest. 2014 Oct;124(10):4529-38. doi: 10.1172/JCI74747. Epub 2014 Sep 17.

Deep sequencing reveals stepwise mutation acquisition in paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria.

Shen W, Clemente MJ, Hosono N, Yoshida K, Przychodzen B, Yoshizato T, Shiraishi
Y, Miyano S, Ogawa S, Maciejewski JP, Makishima H.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2014 Oct;124(10):4227-30.

Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a nonmalignant clonal disease of
hematopoietic stem cells that is associated with hemolysis, marrow failure, and
thrombophilia. PNH has been considered a monogenic disease that results from
somatic mutations in the gene encoding PIGA, which is required for biosynthesis
of glycosylphosphatidylinisotol-anchored (GPI-anchored) proteins. The loss of
certain GPI-anchored proteins is hypothesized to provide the mutant clone with an
extrinsic growth advantage, but some features of PNH argue that there are
intrinsic drivers of clonal expansion. Here, we performed whole-exome sequencing 
of paired PNH+ and PNH- fractions on samples taken from 12 patients as well as
targeted deep sequencing of an additional 36 PNH patients. We identified
additional somatic mutations that resulted in a complex hierarchical clonal
architecture, similar to that observed in myeloid neoplasms. In addition to
mutations in PIGA, mutations were found in genes known to be involved in myeloid 
neoplasm pathogenesis, including TET2, SUZ12, U2AF1, and JAK2. Clonal analysis
indicated that these additional mutations arose either as a subclone within the
PIGA-mutant population, or prior to PIGA mutation. Together, our data indicate
that in addition to PIGA mutations, accessory genetic events are frequent in PNH,
suggesting a stepwise clonal evolution derived from a singular stem cell clone.

PMCID: PMC4191017
PMID: 25244093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 22;9(9):e108265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108265.
eCollection 2014.

Prognostic value of polycomb proteins EZH2, BMI1 and SUZ12 and histone
modification H3K27me3 in colorectal cancer.

Benard A(1), Goossens-Beumer IJ(1), van Hoesel AQ(1), Horati H(1), Putter H(2),
Zeestraten EC(1), van de Velde CJ(1), Kuppen PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Medical Statistics, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Numerous changes in epigenetic mechanisms have been described in various types of
tumors. In search for new biomarkers, we investigated the expression of
Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins EZH2, BMI1 and SUZ12 and associated histone
modification H3K27me3 in colorectal cancer. Nuclear expression of PcG proteins
and histone modification H3K27me3 were immunohistochemically (IHC) stained on a
tissue microarray (TMA), including 247 tumor tissues and 47 normal tissues, and
scored using the semi-automated Ariol system. Tumor tissues showed higher
expression of EZH2 (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.05) and H3K27me3 (p<0.001) as compared to their normal 
counterparts. Combined marker trend analyses indicated that an increase in the
number of markers showing high expression was associated with better prognosis.
High expression of all four markers in the combined marker analyses was
correlated with the best patient survival and the longest recurrence-free
survival, with overall survival (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01, HR 0.42(0.21-0.84)), disease-free
survival (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.007, HR 0.23(0.08-0.67) and local recurrence-free survival
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.02, HR 0.30(0.11-0.84)). In conclusion, we found that expression of PcG
proteins and H3K27me3 showed prognostic value in our study cohort. Better
stratification of patients was obtained by combining the expression data of the
investigated biomarkers as compared to the individual markers, underlining the
importance of investigating multiple markers simultaneously.

PMCID: PMC4171510
PMID: 25243792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nat Genet. 2014 Nov;46(11):1227-32. doi: 10.1038/ng.3095. Epub 2014 Sep 21.

PRC2 is recurrently inactivated through EED or SUZ12 loss in malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors.

Lee W(1), Teckie S(2), Wiesner T(3), Ran L(3), Prieto Granada CN(4), Lin M(5),
Zhu S(3), Cao Z(3), Liang Y(3), Sboner A(6), Tap WD(7), Fletcher JA(8), Huberman 
KH(9), Qin LX(10), Viale A(9), Singer S(11), Zheng D(12), Berger MF(13), Chen
Y(14), Antonescu CR(4), Chi P(14).

Author information: 
(1)1] Computational Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, New York, USA. [2] Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. (2)1] Department of Radiation
Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. [2]
Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, New York, USA. (3)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. (4)Department of
Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
USA. (6)1] Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York, USA. [2] Institute for Computational Biomedicine,
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA. [3] Institute for
Precision Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA. (7)1]
Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York, USA. [2] Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York,
New York, USA. (8)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA. (9)Genomics Core Laboratory, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York, USA. (10)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(11)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York, USA. (12)1] Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York, USA. [2] Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA. [3] Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA. (13)1] Human Oncology and Pathogenesis
Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. [2]
Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York, USA. (14)1] Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. [2] Department of Medicine,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. [3] Department
of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA.

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) represent a group of highly
aggressive soft-tissue sarcomas that may occur sporadically, in association with 
neurofibromatosis type I (NF1 associated) or after radiotherapy. Using
comprehensive genomic approaches, we identified loss-of-function somatic
alterations of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) components (EED or SUZ12)
in 92% of sporadic, 70% of NF1-associated and 90% of radiotherapy-associated
MPNSTs. MPNSTs with PRC2 loss showed complete loss of trimethylation at lysine 27
of histone H3 (H3K27me3) and aberrant transcriptional activation of multiple
PRC2-repressed homeobox master regulators and their regulated developmental
pathways. Introduction of the lost PRC2 component in a PRC2-deficient MPNST cell 
line restored H3K27me3 levels and decreased cell growth. Additionally, we
identified frequent somatic alterations of CDKN2A (81% of all MPNSTs) and NF1
(72% of non-NF1-associated MPNSTs), both of which significantly co-occur with
PRC2 alterations. The highly recurrent and specific inactivation of PRC2
components, NF1 and CDKN2A highlights their critical and potentially cooperative 
roles in MPNST pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4249650
PMID: 25240281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Genes Dev. 2014 Sep 15;28(18):2056-69. doi: 10.1101/gad.246124.114.

Repression of the soma-specific transcriptome by Polycomb-repressive complex 2
promotes male germ cell development.

Mu W(1), Starmer J(1), Fedoriw AM(1), Yee D(1), Magnuson T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 27599, USA.

Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) catalyzes the methylation of histone H3
Lys27 (H3K27) and functions as a critical epigenetic regulator of both stem cell 
pluripotency and somatic differentiation, but its role in male germ cell
development is unknown. Using conditional mutagenesis to remove the core PRC2
subunits EED and SUZ12 during male germ cell development, we identified a
requirement for PRC2 in both mitotic and meiotic germ cells. We observed a
paucity of mutant spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs), which appears independent of 
repression of the known cell cycle inhibitors Ink4a/Ink4b/Arf. Moreover, mutant
spermatocytes exhibited ectopic expression of somatic lamins and an abnormal
distribution of SUN1 proteins on the nuclear envelope. These defects were
coincident with abnormal chromosome dynamics, affecting homologous chromosome
pairing and synapsis. We observed acquisition of H3K27me3 on stage-specific genes
during meiotic progression, indicating a requirement for PRC2 in regulating the
meiotic transcriptional program. Together, these data demonstrate that
transcriptional repression of soma-specific genes by PRC2 facilitates homeostasis
and differentiation during mammalian spermatogenesis.

© 2014 Mu et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4173155
PMID: 25228648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nature. 2014 Oct 9;514(7521):247-51. doi: 10.1038/nature13561. Epub 2014 Aug 13.

PRC2 loss amplifies Ras-driven transcription and confers sensitivity to
BRD4-based therapies.

De Raedt T(1), Beert E(2), Pasmant E(3), Luscan A(4), Brems H(5), Ortonne N(4),
Helin K(6), Hornick JL(7), Mautner V(8), Kehrer-Sawatzki H(9), Clapp W(10),
Bradner J(11), Vidaud M(4), Upadhyaya M(12), Legius E(13), Cichowski K(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Genetics Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [2] Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA [3] Ludwig Center at Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (2)1] Department of Human Genetics, Catholic
University Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium [2] [3] Laboratory of Aquatic Biology,
Interdisciplinary Research Facility Life Sciences, Katholieke Universiteit,
Leuven Afdeling Kortrijk, 8500 Kortrijk, Belgium. (3)1] INSERM UMR_S745 et
EA7331, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté des Sciences
Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, 75006 Paris, France [2] Service de Biochimie et
Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Cochin, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
75014 Paris, France [3]. (4)1] INSERM UMR_S745 et EA7331, Université Paris
Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et
Biologiques, 75006 Paris, France [2] Service de Biochimie et Génétique
Moléculaire, Hôpital Cochin, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 75014 Paris, 
France. (5)Department of Human Genetics, Catholic University Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium. (6)1] Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of
Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark [2] Center for Epigenetics, University of
Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark [3] The Danish Stem Cell Center (Danstem),
University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark. (7)Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (8)Department of 
Maxillofacial Surgery, University Medical Centre, Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246
Hamburg, Germany. (9)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, 89081 Ulm,
Germany. (10)Herman Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Department of
Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 46202 Indianapolis, Indiana,
USA. (11)1] Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [2]
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Massachusetts
02115, USA. (12)Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Heath Park,
Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK. (13)1] Department of Human Genetics, Catholic University
Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium [2] Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital
Leuven, 3000 Leuven Belgium.

The polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) exerts oncogenic effects in many tumour 
types. However, loss-of-function mutations in PRC2 components occur in a subset
of haematopoietic malignancies, suggesting that this complex plays a dichotomous 
and poorly understood role in cancer. Here we provide genomic, cellular, and
mouse modelling data demonstrating that the polycomb group gene SUZ12 functions
as tumour suppressor in PNS tumours, high-grade gliomas and melanomas by
cooperating with mutations in NF1. NF1 encodes a Ras GTPase-activating protein
(RasGAP) and its loss drives cancer by activating Ras. We show that SUZ12 loss
potentiates the effects of NF1 mutations by amplifying Ras-driven transcription
through effects on chromatin. Importantly, however, SUZ12 inactivation also
triggers an epigenetic switch that sensitizes these cancers to bromodomain
inhibitors. Collectively, these studies not only reveal an unexpected connection 
between the PRC2 complex, NF1 and Ras, but also identify a promising
epigenetic-based therapeutic strategy that may be exploited for a variety of
cancers.

PMID: 25119042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. BMC Bioinformatics. 2014;15 Suppl 7:S2. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-S7-S2. Epub
2014 May 28.

Analysis of interactions between the epigenome and structural mutability of the
genome using Genboree Workbench tools.

Coarfa C, Pichot C, Jackson A, Tandon A, Amin V, Raghuraman S, Paithankar S, Lee 
AV, McGuire SE, Milosavljevic A.

BACKGROUND: Interactions between the epigenome and structural genomic variation
are potentially bi-directional. In one direction, structural variants may cause
epigenomic changes in cis. In the other direction, specific local epigenomic
states such as DNA hypomethylation associate with local genomic instability.
METHODS: To study these interactions, we have developed several tools and exposed
them to the scientific community using the Software-as-a-Service model via the
Genboree Workbench. One key tool is Breakout, an algorithm for fast and accurate 
detection of structural variants from mate pair sequencing data.
RESULTS: By applying Breakout and other Genboree Workbench tools we map
breakpoints in breast and prostate cancer cell lines and tumors, discriminate
between polymorphic breakpoints of germline origin and those of somatic origin,
and analyze both types of breakpoints in the context of the Human Epigenome
Atlas, ENCODE databases, and other sources of epigenomic profiles. We confirm
previous findings that genomic instability in human germline associates with
hypomethylation of DNA, binding sites of Suz12, a key member of the PRC2 Polycomb
complex, and with PRC2-associated histone marks H3K27me3 and H3K9me3. Breakpoints
in germline and in breast cancer associate with distal regulatory of active gene 
transcription. Breast cancer cell lines and tumors show distinct patterns of
structural mutability depending on their ER, PR, or HER2 status.
CONCLUSIONS: The patterns of association that we detected suggest that cell-type 
specific epigenomes may determine cell-type specific patterns of selective
structural mutability of the genome.

PMCID: PMC4110728
PMID: 25080362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Proteomics. 2014 Oct;14(19):2200-11. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201400084. Epub 2014 Aug
28.

Middle-down hybrid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry workflow for
characterization of combinatorial post-translational modifications in histones.

Sidoli S(1), Schwämmle V, Ruminowicz C, Hansen TA, Wu X, Helin K, Jensen ON.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Centre for Epigenetics,
University of Southern Denmark, Odense M, Denmark.

We present an integrated middle-down proteomics platform for sensitive mapping
and quantification of coexisting PTMs in large polypeptides (5-7 kDa). We
combined an RP trap column with subsequent weak cation exchange-hydrophilic
interaction LC interfaced directly to high mass accuracy ESI MS/MS using electron
transfer dissociation. This enabled automated and efficient separation and
sequencing of hypermodified histone N-terminal tails for unambiguous localization
of combinatorial PTMs. We present Histone Coder and IsoScale software to extract,
filter, and analyze MS/MS data, including quantification of cofragmenting
isobaric polypeptide species. We characterized histone tails derived from murine 
embryonic stem cells knockout in suppressor of zeste12 (Suz12(-/-) ) and
quantified 256 combinatorial histone marks in histones H3, H4, and H2A.
Furthermore, a total of 713 different combinatorial histone marks were identified
in purified histone H3. We measured a seven-fold reduction of H3K27me2/me3 (where
me2 and me3 are dimethylation and trimethylation, respectively) in Suz12(-) (/)
(-) cells and detected significant changes of the relative abundance of 16 other 
single PTMs of histone H3 and other combinatorial marks. We conclude that the
inactivation of Suz12 is associated with changes in the abundance of not only
H3K27 methylation but also multiple other PTMs in histone H3 tails.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25073878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Oct 1;34(19):3662-74. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00205-14. Epub 2014
Jul 21.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 and H3K27me3 cooperate with H3K9 methylation to
maintain heterochromatin protein 1a at chromatin.

Boros J(1), Arnoult N(1), Stroobant V(2), Collet JF(3), Decottignies A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Genetic and Epigenetic Alterations of Genomes, de Duve Institute, Catholic
University of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (2)Ludwig Institute for Cancer
Research, Brussels Branch, and de Duve Institute, Catholic University of Louvain,
Brussels, Belgium. (3)WELBIO and de Duve Institute, Catholic University of
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (4)Genetic and Epigenetic Alterations of Genomes, de 
Duve Institute, Catholic University of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium
anabelle.decottignies@uclouvain.be.

Methylation of histone H3 on lysine 9 or 27 is crucial for heterochromatin
formation. Previously considered hallmarks of, respectively, constitutive and
facultative heterochromatin, recent evidence has accumulated in favor of
coexistence of these two marks and their cooperation in gene silencing
maintenance. H3K9me2/3 ensures anchorage at chromatin of heterochromatin protein 
1a (HP1a), a main component of heterochromatin. HP1a chromoshadow domain,
involved in dimerization and interaction with partners, has additional but still 
unclear roles in HP1a recruitment to chromatin. Because of previously suggested
links between polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which catalyzes H3K27
methylation, and HP1a, we tested whether PRC2 may regulate HP1a abundance at
chromatin. We found that the EZH2 and SUZ12 subunits of PRC2 are required for
HP1a stability, as knockdown of either protein led to HP1a degradation. Similar
results were obtained upon overexpression of H3K27me2/3 demethylases. We further 
showed that binding of HP1a/ß/<U+03B3> to H3K9me3 peptides is greatly increased in the
presence of H3K27me3, and this is dependent on PRC2. These data fit with recent
proteomic studies identifying PRC2 as an indirect H3K9me3 binder in mouse tissues
and suggest the existence of a cooperative mechanism of HP1a anchorage at
chromatin involving H3 methylation on both K9 and K27 residues.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4187721
PMID: 25047840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 22;289(34):23882-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.573469. Epub
2014 Jul 11.

Paradoxical role of DNA methylation in activation of FoxA2 gene expression during
endoderm development.

Bahar Halpern K(1), Vana T(1), Walker MD(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel. (2)From the Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann
Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel m.walker@weizmann.ac.il.

The transcription factor FoxA2 is a master regulator of endoderm development and 
pancreatic beta cell gene expression. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying the 
activation of the FoxA2 gene during differentiation, we have compared the
epigenetic status of undifferentiated human embryonic stem cells (hESCs),
hESC-derived early endoderm stage cells (CXCR4+ cells), and pancreatic islet
cells. Unexpectedly, a CpG island in the promoter region of the FoxA2 gene
displayed paradoxically high levels of DNA methylation in expressing tissues
(CXCR4+, islets) and low levels in nonexpressing tissues. This CpG island region 
was found to repress reporter gene expression and bind the Polycomb group protein
SUZ12 and the DNA methyltransferase (DNMT)3b preferentially in undifferentiated
hESCs as compared with CXCR4+ or islets cells. Consistent with this, activation
of FoxA2 gene expression, but not CXCR4 or SOX17, was strongly inhibited by
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and by knockdown of DNMT3b. We hypothesize that in
nonexpressing tissues, the lack of DNA methylation allows the binding of DNA
methyltransferases and repressing proteins, such as Polycomb group proteins; upon
differentiation, DNMT activation leads to CpG island methylation, causing loss of
repressor protein binding. These results suggest a novel and unexpected role for 
DNA methylation in the activation of FoxA2 gene expression during
differentiation.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4156079
PMID: 25016019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Bioinformation. 2014 Apr 23;10(4):187-90. doi: 10.6026/97320630010187.
eCollection 2014.

In silico finding of Putative Cis-Acting Elements for the Tethering of Polycomb
Repressive Complex2 in Human Genome.

Hajjari M(1), Behmanesh M(2), Jahani MM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Shahid Chamran University of Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran ;
Department of Genetics, School of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of Genetics, School of Biological
Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran. (3)Department of Genetics,
Shahid Chamran University of Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran.

Polycomb Repressive Complex2 maintains a predetermined state of transcription
which constitutes a cellular memory stable over many cell divisions. Since this
complex acts through the regulation of chromatin structure, it is important to
understand how it is recruited to chromatin. The specific target sequences of
this complex such as PRE (polycomb repressive element) have not been completely
recognized in human genome. In this study, we have compared the target sequences 
of this complex with non-target genes in tumor cell lines. Through in silico and 
statistical analyses, we have identified some motifs which are over-represented
in target genes against non-target genes. Analyzing these motifs shows some
transcription factors which are potential recruiters of Polycomb repressive
complex2.

PMCID: PMC4070047
PMID: 24966518  [PubMed]


93. Genome Biol. 2014 Jun 2;15(6):R80. doi: 10.1186/gb-2014-15-6-r80.

SVA retrotransposon insertion-associated deletion represents a novel mutational
mechanism underlying large genomic copy number changes with non-recurrent
breakpoints.

Vogt J, Bengesser K, Claes KB, Wimmer K, Mautner VF, van Minkelen R, Legius E,
Brems H, Upadhyaya M, Högel J, Lazaro C, Rosenbaum T, Bammert S, Messiaen L,
Cooper DN, Kehrer-Sawatzki H.

BACKGROUND: Genomic disorders are caused by copy number changes that may exhibit 
recurrent breakpoints processed by nonallelic homologous recombination. However, 
region-specific disease-associated copy number changes have also been observed
which exhibit non-recurrent breakpoints. The mechanisms underlying these
non-recurrent copy number changes have not yet been fully elucidated.
RESULTS: We analyze large NF1 deletions with non-recurrent breakpoints as a model
to investigate the full spectrum of causative mechanisms, and observe that they
are mediated by various DNA double strand break repair mechanisms, as well as
aberrant replication. Further, two of the 17 NF1 deletions with non-recurrent
breakpoints, identified in unrelated patients, occur in association with the
concomitant insertion of SINE/variable number of tandem repeats/Alu (SVA)
retrotransposons at the deletion breakpoints. The respective breakpoints are
refractory to analysis by standard breakpoint-spanning PCRs and are only
identified by means of optimized PCR protocols designed to amplify across GC-rich
sequences. The SVA elements are integrated within SUZ12P intron 8 in both
patients, and were mediated by target-primed reverse transcription of SVA mRNA
intermediates derived from retrotranspositionally active source elements. Both
SVA insertions occurred during early postzygotic development and are uniquely
associated with large deletions of 1 Mb and 867 kb, respectively, at the
insertion sites.
CONCLUSIONS: Since active SVA elements are abundant in the human genome and the
retrotranspositional activity of many SVA source elements is high, SVA
insertion-associated large genomic deletions encompassing many hundreds of
kilobases could constitute a novel and as yet under-appreciated mechanism
underlying large-scale copy number changes in the human genome.

PMCID: PMC4229983
PMID: 24958239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. BMC Cell Biol. 2014 May 24;15:18. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-15-18.

Polycomb group protein expression during differentiation of human embryonic stem 
cells into pancreatic lineage in vitro.

Pethe P, Nagvenkar P, Bhartiya D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Department, National Institute for Research in Reproductive 
Health, J,M, Street, Parel-12, Mumbai, India. deepa.bhartiya@yahoo.in.

BACKGROUND: Polycomb Group (PcG) proteins are chromatin modifiers involved in
early embryonic development as well as in proliferation of adult stem cells and
cancer cells. PcG proteins form large repressive complexes termed Polycomb
Repressive Complexes (PRCs) of which PRC1 and PRC2 are well studied.
Differentiation of human Embryonic Stem (hES) cells into insulin producing cells 
has been achieved to limited extent, but several aspects of differentiation
remain unexplored. The PcG protein dynamics in human embryonic stem (hES) cells
during differentiation into pancreatic lineage has not yet been reported. In the 
present study, the expression of RING1A, RING1B, BMI1, CBX2, SUZ12, EZH2, EED and
JARID2 during differentiation of hES cells towards pancreatic lineage was
examined.
RESULTS: In-house derived hES cell line KIND1 was used to study expression of PcG
protein upon spontaneous and directed differentiation towards pancreatic lineage.
qRT-PCR analysis showed expression of gene transcripts for various lineages in
spontaneously differentiated KIND1 cells, but no differentiation into pancreatic 
lineage was observed. Directed differentiation induced KIND1 cells grown under
feeder-free conditions to transition from definitive endoderm (Day 4), primitive 
gut tube stage (Day 8) and pancreatic progenitors (Day 12-Day 16) as evident from
expression of SOX17, PDX1 and SOX9 by qRT-PCR and Western blotting. In
spontaneously differentiating KIND1 cells, RING1A and SUZ12 were upregulated at
day 15, while other PcG transcripts were downregulated. qRT-PCR analysis showed
transcripts of RING1B, BMI1, SUZ12, EZH2 and EED were upregulated, while RING1A
and CBX2 expression remained low and JARID2 was downregulated during directed
differentiation of KIND1 cells. Upregulation of BMI1, EZH2 and SUZ12 during
differentiation into pancreatic lineage was also confirmed by Western blotting.
Histone modifications such as H3K27 trimethylation and monoubiquitinylation of
H2AK119 increased during differentiation into pancreatic lineage as seen by
Western blotting.
CONCLUSION: Our study shows expression of PcG proteins was distinct during
spontaneous and directed differentiation. Differentiation into pancreatic lineage
was achieved by directed differentiation approach and was associated with
increased expression of PcG proteins RING1B, BMI1, EZH2 and SUZ12 accompanied by 
increase in monoubiquitinylation of H2AK119 and trimethylation of H3K27.

PMCID: PMC4038052
PMID: 24885493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mol Cell. 2014 Jul 17;55(2):171-85. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.05.009. Epub 2014 
May 29.

Regulatory interactions between RNA and polycomb repressive complex 2.

Cifuentes-Rojas C(1), Hernandez AJ(2), Sarma K(1), Lee JT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of
Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA;
Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA
02114, USA; Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA. Electronic address: lee@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2014 Jul 17;55(2):157-8.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a histone methyltransferase that is
localized to thousands of mammalian genes. Though important to human disease and 
as a drug target, how PRC2 is recruited remains unclear. One model invokes
cis-regulatory RNA. Herein, we biochemically and functionally probe PRC2's
recognition of RNA using the X-inactivation model. We observe surprisingly high
discriminatory capabilities. While SUZ12 and JARID2 subunits can bind RNA, EZH2
has highest affinity and is somewhat promiscuous. EED regulates the affinity of
EZH2 for RNA, lending greater specificity to PRC2-RNA interactions. Intriguingly,
while RNA is crucial for targeting, RNA inhibits EZH2's catalytic activity.
JARID2 weakens PRC2's binding to RNA and relieves catalytic inhibition. We
propose that RNA guides PRC2 to its target but inhibits its enzymatic activity
until PRC2 associates with JARID2 on chromatin. Our study provides a molecular
view of regulatory interactions between RNA and PRC2 at the chromatin interface.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4107928
PMID: 24882207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. PLoS One. 2014 May 20;9(5):e97820. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097820. eCollection
2014.

The epigenetic bivalency of core pancreatic ß-cell transcription factor genes
within mouse pluripotent embryonic stem cells is not affected by knockdown of the
polycomb repressive complex 2, SUZ12.

Wong JC(1), Jack MM(2), Li Y(1), O'Neill C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Developmental and Regenerative Medicine, Kolling Institute of
Medical Research, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia. (2)Department of Endocrinology, Royal North Shore Hospital,
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

This study assesses changes in activator and repressor modifications to histones 
associated with the core transcription factor genes most highly upregulated or
downregulated in pancreatic ß-cells relative to expression in an embryonic stem
cell line. Epigenetic analysis of the Oct4, Utf1, Nanog and Sox2 (pluripotency)
and Pdx1, Nkx6.1, Nkx2.2 and MafA (pancreatic ß-cells) transcription factor genes
in embryonic stem cells and a ß-cell line (MIN6) showed the pluripotency genes
were enriched for active (histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 4 and histone 3
acetylated at lysine 9) and depleted of repressor modifications (histone 3
trimethylated at lysine 27 and histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 9) around the
transcription start site in mouse embryonic stem cells (D3), and this was
reversed in MIN6 cells. The ß-cell transcription factors were bivalently enriched
for activating (histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 4) and repressor (histone 3
trimethylated at lysine 27) modifications in embryonic stem cells but were
monovalent for the activator modification (histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 4)
in the ß-cells. The polycomb repressor complex 2 acts as a histone 3 lysine 27
methylase and an essential component of this complex, SUZ12, was enriched at the 
ß-cell transcription factors in embryonic stem cells and was reduced MIN6.
Knock-down of SUZ12 in embryonic stem cells, however, did not reduce the level of
histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 27 at ß-cell transcription factor loci or break
the transcriptional repression of these genes in embryonic stem cells. This study
shows the reduction in the total SUZ12 level was not a sufficient cause of the
resolution of the epigenetic bivalency of ß-cell transcription factors in
embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4028244
PMID: 24845830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 8;5:e1220. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.106.

The combination of the prodrugs perforin-CEBPD and perforin-granzyme B
efficiently enhances the activation of caspase signaling and kills prostate
cancer.

Chuang CH(1), Wang WJ(2), Li CF(3), Ko CY(4), Chou YH(5), Chuu CP(6), Cheng
TL(1), Wang JM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Environmental Biology, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Basic Medical Science, National
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (3)1] Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei
Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan [2] National Institute of Cancer Research,
National Health Research Institutes, Tainan, Taiwan [3] Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)1] PhD Program for 
Neural Regenerative Medicine, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan [2] Center for Neurotrauma and
Neuroregeneration, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of
Pharmacology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (6)Institute of
Cellular and System Medicine, National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli,
Taiwan. (7)1] Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, College of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan [2] 
Infectious Disease and Signaling Research Center, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan [3] Center of Molecular Inflammation, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan [4] Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of
Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan 

The survival of prostate cancer (PrCa) patients is associated with the transition
to hormone-independent tumor growth and metastasis. Clinically, the dysregulation
of androgen action has been associated with the formation of PrCa and the outcome
of androgen deprivation therapy in PrCa. CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta
(CEBPD) is a transcription factor that has been reported to act as an oncogene or
tumor suppressor, depending on the extra- and intracellular environments
following tumorigenesis. We found that androgen can activate CEBPD transcription 
by direct binding of the androgen receptor (AR) to the CEBPD promoter region.
Increases of suppressor of zeste 12 (SUZ12) and enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) attenuated the androgen-induced transcription of CEBPD. Importantly, the
increases in E2F1, SUZ12 and EZH2 as well as the inactivation of CEBPD were
associated with the clinicopathological variables and survival of PrCa patients. 
We revealed that caspase 8 (CASP8), an apoptotic initiator, is responsive to
CEBPD induction. Reporter and in vivo DNA-binding assays revealed that CEBPD
directly binds to and activates CASP8 reporter activity. A prodrug system was
developed for therapeutic application in AR-independent or androgen-insensitive
PrCa to avoid the epigenetic effects on the suppression of CEBPD expression. Our 
results showed that the combination of a perforin (PF)-CEBPD prodrug (which
increases the level of procaspase-8) and a PF-granzyme B prodrug (which activates
CASP8 and caspase 3 (CASP3)) showed an additive effect in triggering the
apoptotic pathway and enhancing apoptosis in PrCa cells.

PMCID: PMC4047860
PMID: 24810056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Anticancer Drugs. 2014 Sep;25(8):938-49. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000122.

Epigenetic and molecular mechanisms underlying the antileukemic activity of the
histone deacetylase inhibitor belinostat in human acute promyelocytic leukemia
cells.

Savickiene J(1), Treigyte G, Valiuliene G, Stirblyte I, Navakauskiene R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Vilnius
University, Vilnius, Lithuania.

Therapeutic strategies targeting histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition have
become promising in many human malignancies. Belinostat (PXD101) is a
hydroxamate-type HDAC inhibitor tested in phase I and II clinical trials in solid
tumors and hematological cancers. However, little is known about the use of
belinostat for differentiation therapy against acute myelogenous leukemia. Here, 
we characterize the antileukemia activity of belinostat as a single drug and in
combination with all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) in promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 and
NB4 cells. Belinostat exerted dose-dependent growth-inhibitory or proapoptotic
effects, promoting cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1 or the S transition. Apoptosis 
was accompanied by activation of caspase 3, degradation of PARP-1, and cell
cycle-dependent changes in the expression of survivin, cyclin E1, and cyclin A2. 
Belinostat induced a dose-dependent reduction in the expression of EZH2 and
SUZ12, HDAC-1, HDAC-2, and histone acetyltransferase PCAF (p300/CBP-associated
factor). Belinostat increased acetylation of histone H4, H3 at K9 and H3 at K16
residues in a dose-dependent manner, but did not reduce trimethylation of H3 at
K27 at proapoptotic doses. Combined treatment with belinostat and RA dose
dependently accelerated and reinforced granulocytic differentiation, accompanied 
by changes in the expression of CD11b, C/EBPa (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-a),
and C/EBPe. Our results concluded the usefulness of belinostat, as an epigenetic 
drug, for antileukemia and differentiation therapy.

PMID: 24800886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Stem Cell Rev. 2014 Aug;10(4):561-72. doi: 10.1007/s12015-014-9517-0.

New proteomic insights on the role of NPR-A in regulating self-renewal of
embryonic stem cells.

Magdeldin S(1), Yamamoto T, Tooyama I, Abdelalim EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Pathology Institute of Nephrology, Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata University, Tokyo, Japan.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) have the ability to self-renew indefinitely and they 
can give unlimited source of cells and tissues for cellular therapies. Recently, 
the natriuretic peptide receptor A (NPR-A) has been recognized as an important
regulator for the self-renewal of ESCs. To gain insights into possible novel
mechanisms involved in NPR-A pathway that presumably regulates self-renewal and
survival of ESCs, we utilized a comprehensive label-free proteomics technology in
our study. Targeting of NPR-A gene with small interfering RNA (siRNA) resulted in
the inhibition of ESCs self-renewal. Coherently, quantitative label-free shotgun 
proteomic analysis identified differentially expressed proteins involved in
several biological processes, including cell cycle regulation, cell
proliferation, cell fate specification, and apoptosis. Interestingly, in addition
to Oct4 Nanog, and Sox2, other proteins involved in ESCs self-renewal were
down-regulated after NPR-A knockdown, such as heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein A2/B1 (ROA2), non-POU domain-containing octamer-binding protein
(Nono), nucleoplasmin (Npm1), histone H2A type 1-B/E (histone H2A.2), SW1/SNF
complex (Brg1), polycomb protein Suz12 (Suz12), and cyclin-dependent kinase 4
(Cdk4). Furthermore, several protein candidates involved in early differentiation
and cell death were up-regulated or down-regulated as a result of NPR-A
knockdown, including importin subunit alpha-4 (Impa4), importin-5 (Ipo5), H3
histones, core histone macro-H2A.1 (H2A.y), apurine/apyrimidine endonuclease 1
(Apex1), 78-kDa glucose-regulated protein (Grp78), and programmed cell death 5
(Pdcd5). Overall, these findings depict a comprehensive view to our understanding
of the pathways involved in the role of NPR-A in maintaining ESC functions.

PMID: 24798243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Hepatogastroenterology. 2014 May;61(131):697-702.

SUZ12 RNA Interference Inhibits the Invasion of Gastric Carcinoma Cells.

Xu XT, Tao ZZ, Song QB, Yao Y, Ruan P.

In order to observe the regulation effects of SUZ12 gene to the invasion of
gastric carcinoma cells and the mechanisms, the expressions of SUZ12 protein in
86 patients with different infiltrating degree (Tis-T4), lymph node metastasis
(N0-N3) and far metastasis (M0-M1) were detected by immunohistochemical staining.
The siRNA to SUZ12 was designed and synthesized and transfected into MKN28 cells.
The effects of SUZ12 siRNA to cell invasion were detected by soft agar colony
forming test and Transwell cabin model. The related protein was detected by
Western-Blot. We found the expression of SUZ12 in gastric carcinoma tissues
(23.58 ± 9.89%) was obviously higher than that in para-cancer tissue (1.12% ±
0.12%) (p < 0.01). The expression of SUZ12 was related to the infiltrating
degree, and demonstrated an increasing tendency from Tis-T4, or from N0-N3. The
expression of SUZ12 in M0 was obviously lower than in M1, p < 0.01. The level of 
SUZ12 was descent obviously after transfected SUZ12 siRNA (p < 0.01). The number 
of cell clone was reduced in dose dependent of siRNA and the cells permeated
through filter membrane were decreased after transfected siRNA. Inhibition of
SUZ12 caused an obviously descent of VEGF, MMP-2 and MMP-9 (0.22 ± 0.06, 0.12 ±
0.03, 0.08 ± 0.02) compared to non transfected group (0.87 ± 0.08, 0.92 ± 0.16,
1.05 ± 0.18) respectively (p < 0.01). We draw the conclusion that the expression 
of SUZ12 is increasing along with the degree of infiltrating and metastasis of
gastric carcinoma. SUZ12 siRNA inhibits the invasion of gastric carcinoma cells
and the expression of VEGF, MMP-2 and MMP-9.

PMID: 26176059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Bone Marrow Res. 2013 May 23;1:122.

Genomic Analysis of Invasive Human Bone Marrow Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

Mathews LA(1), Hurt EM(2), Zhang X(3), Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Med Immune, LLC, Gaithersburg, MD 20878, USA. (3)Cancer Stem Cell Section,
Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, Center for Cancer Research, Frederick National
Laboratories, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) are capable 
of differentiation into multiple cell lineages and demonstrate a wide variety of 
use in various therapeutic applications. Only recently has research begun to
understand the gene expression profiles of hMSCs and their differentiated
counterparts in vivo and ex vivo.
PURPOSE: The research presented here aimed at gaining a better understanding of
gene expression patterns present during hMSC invasion through a basement
membrane.
METHODS: Changes in gene expression were evaluated between invasive and
non-invasive cells using Agilent's gene expression arrays and Matrigel invasion
chambers. The cells were specifically attracted to a defined stem cell media
called SCM.
RESULTS: A total 435 genes were up-regulated by 2- fold or more in the invasive
population of cells and classified into developmental programs and
immunological/inflammatory signaling pathways determined by Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (IPA). This list included a variety of regulators of growth and
differentiation including NANOG, STAT3 and STAT5A and members of the polycomb
repressive complex-2 (PCRC2) EZH2 and SUZ12. The known regulator of inflammation 
and hypoxia HIF-1a was also increased suggesting that regulation of the
microenvironment is important during this process. Finally, the invasion process 
could be reversed using the STAT3 inhibitor Static.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall these data will increase the understanding of the genetic
pathways functioning during hMSC invasion and aid in the development of their
therapeutic applications.

PMCID: PMC3999892
PMID: 24772452  [PubMed]


102. Pathol Int. 2014 Apr;64(4):178-82. doi: 10.1111/pin.12151.

Colonic low-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma and orthotopic endometrial stromal 
tumor with limited infiltration sharing the JAZF1-SUZ12 gene fusion.

Tokinaga A(1), Furuya M, Niino H, Udaka N, Asai-Sato M, Sekido H, Miyagi E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yokohama City University Graduate
School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

Endometrial stromal tumors (ESTs) are composed of cells resembling endometrial
stroma, and are divided into benign and malignant types based on morphology.
Endometrial stromal nodule (ESN) is a benign localized tumor, and endometrial
stromal sarcoma (ESS) is an infiltrative and potentially metastatic neoplasm. A
series of genetic aberrations contribute to pathological diagnosis of ESTs. At
present, subsets of ESN and ESS-low grade (ESS-LG) are characterized as
JAZF1-SUZ12/JJAZ1 gene fusion. The ESTs that show higher grade atypia but lack
nuclear pleomorphism include YWHAE-FAM22 ESS. Here we report an unusual case of
ESTs. Sudden colonic perforation occurred to the patient, and emergency surgery
was performed. Pathological findings suggested metastatic ESS. Thorough medical
examination of the genital organs detected a 1<U+2009>cm-sized well-demarcated uterine
tumor. Microscopically, the tumor lacked infiltrative features, conforming to the
definition of ESN. Both lesions demonstrated identical cytology and shared
JAZF1-SUZ12 gene fusion. Endometriosis was not found in any areas of the resected
organs, strongly suggesting that the uterine orthotopic tumor metastasized. The
current case uncovered the problems of differential diagnosis between ESN and
ESS-LG. We demonstrate detailed pathological features of the two lesions, and
discuss the possibility of orthotopic EST with limited infiltration to develop
into ESS-LG.

© 2014 The Authors. Pathology International © 2014 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24750188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Med Genet. 2014 Jul;51(7):436-43. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-102240. Epub 2014
Apr 7.

ADAP2 in heart development: a candidate gene for the occurrence of cardiovascular
malformations in NF1 microdeletion syndrome.

Venturin M(1), Carra S(2), Gaudenzi G(2), Brunelli S(3), Gallo GR(2), Moncini
S(1), Cotelli F(2), Riva P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, Università
degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università
degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute,
Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Monza (MB), Italy.

BACKGROUND: Cardiovascular malformations have a higher incidence in patients with
NF1 microdeletion syndrome compared to NF1 patients with intragenic mutation,
presumably owing to haploinsufficiency of one or more genes included in the
deletion interval and involved in heart development. In order to identify which
genes could be responsible for cardiovascular malformations in the deleted
patients, we carried out expression studies in mouse embryos and functional
studies in zebrafish.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The expression analysis of three candidate genes included in
the NF1 deletion interval, ADAP2, SUZ12 and UTP6, performed by in situ
hybridisation, showed the expression of ADAP2 murine ortholog in heart during
fundamental phases of cardiac morphogenesis. In order to investigate the role of 
ADAP2 in cardiac development, we performed loss-of-function experiments of
zebrafish ADAP2 ortholog, adap2, by injecting two different morpholino oligos
(adap2-MO and UTR-adap2-MO). adap2-MOs-injected embryos (morphants) displayed in 
vivo circulatory and heart shape defects. The molecular characterisation of
morphants with cardiac specific markers showed that the injection of adap2-MOs
causes defects in heart jogging and looping. Additionally, morphological and
molecular analysis of adap2 morphants demonstrated that the loss of adap2
function leads to defective valvulogenesis, suggesting a correlation between
ADAP2 haploinsufficiency and the occurrence of valve defects in NF1-microdeleted 
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our findings indicate that ADAP2 has a role in heart
development, and might be a reliable candidate gene for the occurrence of
cardiovascular malformations in patients with NF1 microdeletion and, more
generally, for the occurrence of a subset of congenital heart defects.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 24711647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Feb 15;7(3):1051-9. eCollection 2014.

Uterine tumors resembling ovarian sex cord tumors (UTROSCT) with metastasis:
clinicopathological study of two cases.

Umeda S(1), Tateno M(2), Miyagi E(3), Sakurai K(4), Tanaka R(5), Tateishi Y(1),
Tokinaga A(3), Ohashi K(1), Furuya M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City University Hospital Yokohama, Japan ;
Department of Pathology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine
Yokohama, Japan. (2)Department of Pathology, Kushiro Red Cross Hospital Kushiro, 
Japan. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yokohama City University
Graduate School of Medicine Yokohama, Japan. (4)Department of Pathology,
Asahikawa Kosei Hospital Asahikawa, Japan. (5)Medical Mycology Research Center,
Chiba University Chiba, Japan. (6)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City
University Hospital Yokohama, Japan ; Department of Molecular Pathology, Yokohama
City University Graduate School of Medicine Yokohama, Japan.

Uterine tumors with sex cord-like elements are divided in two groups; uterine
tumors resembling ovarian sex cord tumors (UTROSCT), and endometrial stromal
tumors with sex cord-like elements (ESTSCLE). UTROSCT is currently defined as the
neoplasm predominantly or exclusively composed of sex cord-like elements, and
generally behaves in a benign fashion. We studied two unusual cases of UTROSCT
with metastasis. One case was a 38-year-old multiparous woman presented with
hypermenorrhea. The tumor grew as an intramural mass, and metastasized to a
pelvic lymph node. Another case was a 57-year-old woman presented with genital
bleeding. The tumor grew as a submucosal exophytic mass, and metastasized to the 
epiploic appendix. Microscopic examination of the 2 cases revealed that they were
composed of sex cord-like cells, epithelioid cells and spindle cells. They
exhibited solid pattern in predominance. Both solid and sex cord-like elements
showed similar immunoreactivities for more than 3 sex cord markers, but
simultaneously showed different staining patterns for some other markers.
Characteristic features of endometrial stroma such as tongue-like infiltration
and spiral arteries-like arterioles were not observed. RT-PCR analysis confirmed 
the absence of JAZF1-SUZ12 gene fusion, supporting the histopathological
diagnosis of UTROSCT rather than ESTSCLE. The current cases warned the potential 
risk of UTROSCT whose biological behavior is still uncertain. We discuss
histopathological, immunohistochemical and molecular findings of UTROSCT with
metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3971308
PMID: 24696722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jun;35(6):6073-82. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1804-5. Epub 2014
Mar 15.

SUZ12 is involved in progression of non-small cell lung cancer by promoting cell 
proliferation and metastasis.

Liu C(1), Shi X, Wang L, Wu Y, Jin F, Bai C, Song Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University
School of Medicine, 305 East Zhongshan Road, Nanjing, 210002, Jiangsu Province,
China, 1986liuchunhua@163.com.

The suppressor of zeste-12 protein (SUZ12), a core component of Polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), is implicated in transcriptional silencing by
generating di- and tri-methylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27Me3).
Although SUZ12 is known to be of great importance in several human cancer
tumorigenesis, limited data are available on the expression profile and
functional role of SUZ12 in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Here, we
determined the expression level of SUZ12 in 40 paired clinical NSCLC tissues and 
adjacent normal tissues by quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR). The results showed that SUZ12 was anomalously expressed in
NSCLC tissues compared to adjacent noncancerous tissues (P<0.05) and was highly
correlated to tumor size, lymph node metastasis, and clinical stages (P<0.05).
Additionally, siRNA-mediated knockdown of SUZ12 could inhibit tumor cell growth, 
migration, and invasion, indicating that SUZ12 might function as an oncogene in
NSCLC initiation and progression. Furthermore, we found that SUZ12 silencing
significantly reduced the expression levels of transcription factor transcription
factor E2F1 (E2F1) as well as potential metastasis promoters Rho-associated,
coiled-coil-containing protein kinase 1 (ROCK1) and roundabout homolog 1 (ROBO1) 
through Western blot analysis. Altogether, we provide evidences suggesting that
SUZ12 is an oncogene in NSCLC and can regulate NSCLC cells proliferation and
metastasis partly via reducing E2F1, ROCK1, and ROBO1. Thus, SUZ12 may represent 
a new potential diagnostic marker for NSCLC and may be a novel therapeutic target
for NSCLC intervention.

PMID: 24633887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Sep;115(9):1528-38. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24807.

Coordinated regulation of retinoic acid signaling pathway by KDM5B and polycomb
repressive complex 2.

Zhang Y(1), Liang J, Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University Health
Science Center, Beijing, 100191, China.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a critical epigenetic regulator in many
biological processes, including maintenance of cell identity, stem cell
self-renewal, differentiation, and deregulation of PRC2 is often observed in
human cancers and diseases. Here we report that KDM5B (PLU-1/JARID1B), a histone 
lysine demethylase of Jumonji family, associates with PRC2 and colocalizes with
PRC2 in nuclear bodies, and their physical association is dependent on direct
interaction between KDM5B and the SUZ12 component of PRC2. Interestingly,
co-occupancy of KDM5B and PRC2 was evidenced at the conserved cis-regulatory DNA 
element on retinoic acid (RA) responsive genes. Transcription readout and in
vitro pull-down experiments suggest that KDM5B is an essential co-activator, but 
not a co-repressor, for the RA signaling, and the interface between KDM5B's JMJC 
domain and retinoic acid receptor a (RARa) is crucial for RA-mediated gene
expression. Detailed chromatin immunoprecipitation assays addressed the seemingly
paradox by revealing a biphasic effect of KDM5B on RA-induced gene activation
through decoupled H3K4me3 demethylation and PRC2-antagonizing activities. These
results demonstrate that KDM5B and PRC2 regulate RA signaling cascade in a
cooperative and orchestrated fashion.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24619877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 5;9(3):e90277. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090277. eCollection 
2014.

Polycomb binding precedes early-life stress responsive DNA methylation at the Avp
enhancer.

Murgatroyd C(1), Spengler D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Molecular Neuroendocrinology, Munich,
Germany; Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)Max-Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Molecular Neuroendocrinology, Munich,
Germany.

Early-life stress (ELS) in mice causes sustained hypomethylation at the
downstream Avp enhancer, subsequent overexpression of hypothalamic Avp and
increased stress responsivity. The sequence of events leading to Avp enhancer
methylation is presently unknown. Here, we used an embryonic stem cell-derived
model of hypothalamic-like differentiation together with in vivo experiments to
show that binding of polycomb complexes (PcG) preceded the emergence of
ELS-responsive DNA methylation and correlated with gene silencing. At the same
time, PcG occupancy associated with the presence of Tet proteins preventing DNA
methylation. Early hypothalamic-like differentiation triggered PcG eviction,
DNA-methyltransferase recruitment and enhancer methylation. Concurrently, binding
of the Methyl-CpG-binding and repressor protein MeCP2 increased at the enhancer
although Avp expression during later stages of differentiation and the perinatal 
period continued to increase. Overall, we provide evidence of a new role of PcG
proteins in priming ELS-responsive DNA methylation at the Avp enhancer prior to
epigenetic programming consistent with the idea that PcG proteins are part of a
flexible silencing system during neuronal development.

PMCID: PMC3943912
PMID: 24599304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Immunol. 2014 Apr 1;192(7):3057-67. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302063. Epub 2014
Feb 24.

Noncoding RNAs and LRRFIP1 regulate TNF expression.

Shi L(1), Song L, Fitzgerald M, Maurer K, Bagashev A, Sullivan KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy Immunology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104.

Noncoding RNAs have been implicated in the regulation of expression of numerous
genes; however, the mechanism is not fully understood. We identified
bidirectional, long noncoding RNAs upstream of the TNF gene using five different 
methods. They arose in a region where the repressors LRRFIP1, EZH2, and SUZ12
were demonstrated to bind, suggesting a role in repression. The noncoding RNAs
were polyadenylated, capped, and chromatin associated. Knockdown of the noncoding
RNAs was associated with derepression of TNF mRNA and diminished binding of
LRRFIP1 to both RNA targets and chromatin. Overexpression of the noncoding RNAs
led to diminished expression of TNF and recruitment of repressor proteins to the 
locus. One repressor protein, LRRFIP1, bound directly to the noncoding RNAs.
These data place the noncoding RNAs upstream of TNF gene as central to the
transcriptional regulation. They appear to serve as a platform for the assembly
of a repressive complex.

PMCID: PMC3965610
PMID: 24567534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 18;111(7):2488-93. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1400648111. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

Reciprocal interactions of human C10orf12 and C17orf96 with PRC2 revealed by
BioTAP-XL cross-linking and affinity purification.

Alekseyenko AA(1), Gorchakov AA, Kharchenko PV, Kuroda MI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

Understanding the composition of epigenetic regulators remains an important
challenge in chromatin biology. Traditional biochemical analysis of
chromatin-associated complexes requires their release from DNA under conditions
that can also disrupt key interactions. Here we develop a complementary approach 
(BioTAP-XL), in which cross-linking (XL) enhances the preservation of protein
interactions and also allows the analysis of DNA targets under the same tandem
affinity purification (BioTAP) regimen. We demonstrate the power of BioTAP-XL
through analysis of human EZH2, a core subunit of polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2). We identify and validate two strong interactors, C10orf12 and C17orf96,
which display enrichment with EZH2-BioTAP at levels similar to canonical PRC2
components (SUZ12, EED, MTF2, JARID2, PHF1, and AEBP2). ChIP-seq analysis of
BioTAP-tagged C10orf12 or C17orf96 revealed the similarity of each binding
pattern with the location of EZH2 and the H3K27me3-silencing mark, validating
their physical interaction with PRC2 components. Interestingly, analysis by mass 
spectrometry of C10orf12 and C17orf96 interactions revealed that these proteins
may be mutually exclusive PRC2 subunits that fail to interact with each other or 
with JARID2 and AEBP2. C10orf12, in addition, shows a strong and unexpected
association with components of the EHMT1/2 complex, thus potentially connecting
PRC2 to another histone methyltransferase. Similarly, results from CBX4-BioTAP
protein pulldowns are consistent with reports of a diversity of PRC1 complexes.
Our results highlight the importance of reciprocal analyses of multiple subunits 
and suggest that iterative use of BioTAP-XL has strong potential to reveal
networks of chromatin-based interactions in higher organisms.

PMCID: PMC3932854
PMID: 24550272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cancer Lett. 2014 May 28;347(1):75-8. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.01.030. Epub
2014 Feb 11.

MEAF6/PHF1 is a recurrent gene fusion in endometrial stromal sarcoma.

Micci F(1), Gorunova L(2), Gatius S(3), Matias-Guiu X(4), Davidson B(5), Heim
S(6), Panagopoulos I(7).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Cancer Genetics and
Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway; Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
Electronic address: francesca.micci@labmed.uio.no. (2)Section for Cancer
Cytogenetics, Institute for Cancer Genetics and Informatics, The Norwegian Radium
Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
ludmila.gorunova@rr-research.no. (3)Department of Pathology and Molecular
Genetics and Research Laboratory, Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova,
University of Lleida, IRBLLEIDA, Lleida, Spain. Electronic address:
sdesonia@hotmail.com. (4)Department of Pathology and Molecular Genetics and
Research Laboratory, Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova, University of
Lleida, IRBLLEIDA, Lleida, Spain. Electronic address:
fjmatiasguiu.lleida.ics@gencat.cat. (5)Department of Pathology, The Norwegian
Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
ben.davidson@medisin.uio.no. (6)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for
Cancer Genetics and Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, 
Norway; Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Electronic
address: sverre.heim@medisin.uio.no. (7)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics,
Institute for Cancer Genetics and Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital,
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, University
of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: ioannis.panagopoulos@rr-research.no.

The chimeric transcripts described in endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESS) are
JAZF1/SUZ12, YWHAE/FAM22, ZC3H7/BCOR, MBTD1/CXorf67, and recombinations of PHF1
with JAZF1, EPC1, and MEAF6. The MEAF6/PHF1 fusion had hitherto been identified
in only one tumor. We present two more ESS with MEAF6/PHF1 detected by
transcriptome sequencing (case 1) and RT-PCR (case 2), proving that this fusion
is recurrent in ESS. The transcript of both cases was an in-frame fusion between 
exon 5 of MEAF6 and exon 2 of PHF1. Both genes are involved in epigenetic
modification, and this may well be their main pathogenetic theme also in ESS
tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24530230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Oncotarget. 2014 Jan 30;5(2):351-62.

ERG induces a mesenchymal-like state associated with chemoresistance in leukemia 
cells.

Mochmann LH(1), Neumann M, von der Heide EK, Nowak V, Kühl AA, Ortiz-Tanchez J,
Bock J, Hofmann WK, Baldus CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Charité University Medicine Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.

Overexpression of the oncogene ERG (ETS-related gene) is an adverse prognostic
factor in acute myeloid and T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (AML and T-ALL). We
hypothesize that ERG overexpression is associated with primary drug resistance
thereby influencing the outcome in leukemia. We previously reported a cell-line
based model of ERG overexpression which induced a potentially chemo-resistant
spindle shape cell type. Herein, we report a specific transcriptional gene
signature for the observed spindle shaped morphology. Genes significantly
over-expressed after ERG induction strongly resembled adhesive mesenchymal-like
genes that included integrins (ITGA10, ITGB5, ITGB3, ITGA2B), CD44, and CD24.
Interestingly, the mesenchymal-like signature was accompanied by the repression
of DNA chromatin remodeling and DNA repair genes, such as CHEK1, EZH2, SUZ12, and
DNMT3a. The ERG-induced mesenchymal-like signature positively correlated with
TMPRSS2-ERG prostate tissues and invasive breast cancer mRNA expression datasets 
reflecting a general ERG-driven pattern of malignancy. Furthermore, inhibitors
modulating ERG druggable pathways WNT, PKC, and AKT, and chemotherapeutic agent
cytarabine revealed ERG-induced drug resistance. In particular, PKC412 treatment 
enhanced proliferative rates and promoted spindle shape formation in ERG-induced 
cells. Nilotinib and dasatinib were effective at abolishing ERG-induced cells.
Moreover, ERG overexpression also led to an increase in double strand breaks.
This report provides mechanistic clues into ERG-driven drug resistance in the
poor prognostic group of high ERG expressers, provides insight to improved drug
targeted therapies, and provides novel markers for a mesenchymal-like state in
acute leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3964212
PMID: 24504051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 11;111(6):2235-40. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1312951111. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Spatial separation of Xist RNA and polycomb proteins revealed by superresolution 
microscopy.

Cerase A(1), Smeets D, Tang YA, Gdula M, Kraus F, Spivakov M, Moindrot B, Leleu
M, Tattermusch A, Demmerle J, Nesterova TB, Green C, Otte AP, Schermelleh L,
Brockdorff N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QU, United
Kingdom.

In female mammals, one of the two X chromosomes is transcriptionally silenced to 
equalize X-linked gene dosage relative to XY males, a process termed X chromosome
inactivation. Mechanistically, this is thought to occur via directed recruitment 
of chromatin modifying factors by the master regulator, X-inactive specific
transcript (Xist) RNA, which localizes in cis along the entire length of the
chromosome. A well-studied example is the recruitment of polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2), for which there is evidence of a direct interaction involving
the PRC2 proteins Enhancer of zeste 2 (Ezh2) and Supressor of zeste 12 (Suz12)
and the A-repeat region located at the 5' end of Xist RNA. In this study, we have
analyzed Xist-mediated recruitment of PRC2 using two approaches, microarray-based
epigenomic mapping and superresolution 3D structured illumination microscopy.
Making use of an ES cell line carrying an inducible Xist transgene located on
mouse chromosome 17, we show that 24 h after synchronous induction of Xist
expression, acquired PRC2 binding sites map predominantly to gene-rich regions,
notably within gene bodies. Paradoxically, these new sites of PRC2 deposition do 
not correlate with Xist-mediated gene silencing. The 3D structured illumination
microscopy was performed to assess the relative localization of PRC2 proteins and
Xist RNA. Unexpectedly, we observed significant spatial separation and absence of
colocalization both in the inducible Xist transgene ES cell line and in normal XX
somatic cells. Our observations argue against direct interaction between Xist RNA
and PRC2 proteins and, as such, prompt a reappraisal of the mechanism for PRC2
recruitment in X chromosome inactivation.

PMCID: PMC3926064
PMID: 24469834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 15;20(6):1531-41. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1455.
Epub 2014 Jan 21.

TGF-ß-induced upregulation of malat1 promotes bladder cancer metastasis by
associating with suz12.

Fan Y(1), Shen B, Tan M, Mu X, Qin Y, Zhang F, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliation: Department of Renal Transplantation and Urology,
Shanghai First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: TGF-ß promotes tumor invasion and metastasis by inducing an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). However, the underlying mechanisms
causing this are not entirely clear. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNA) have been shown
to play important regulatory roles in cancer progression. The lncRNA malat1
(metastasis associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1) is a critical regulator 
of the metastasis phenotype of lung cancer cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We, therefore, investigated whether TGF-ß regulates malat1
expression to promote tumor metastasis of bladder cancer. The expression levels
of malat1 and EMT markers were assayed in specimens of bladder cancer. The role
of malat1 in regulating bladder cancer metastasis was evaluated in cell and
animal models.
RESULTS: TGF-ß induces malat1 expression and EMT in bladder cancer cells. malat1 
overexpression is significantly correlated with poor survival in patients with
bladder cancer. malat1 and E-cadherin expression is negatively correlated in
vitro and in vivo. malat1 knockdown inhibits TGF-ß-induced EMT. malat1 is
associated with suppressor of zeste 12 (suz12), and this association results in
decrease of E-cadherin expression and increase of N-cadherin and fibronectin
expression. Furthermore, targeted inhibition of malat1 or suz12 suppresses the
migratory and invasive properties induced by TGF-ß. Finally, we demonstrated that
malat1 or suz12 knockdown inhibits tumor metastasis in animal models.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that malat1 is an important mediator of
TGF-ß-induced EMT, and suggest that malat1 inhibition may represent a promising
therapeutic option for suppressing bladder cancer progression.

©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24449823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Epigenetics. 2014 Apr;9(4):523-32. doi: 10.4161/epi.27688. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Effect of estrogen receptor a binding on functional DNA methylation in breast
cancer.

Ung M(1), Ma X(2), Johnson KC(3), Christensen BC(3), Cheng C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics; Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH
USA. (2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology; Center for Systems Biology; The
University of Texas at Dallas; Dallas, TX USA. (3)Department of Community and
Family Medicine; Section of Biostatistics and Epidemiology; Geisel School of
Medicine at Dartmouth; Lebanon, NH USA; Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology; Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA.
(4)Department of Genetics; Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH
USA; Institute for Quantitative Biomedical Sciences; Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth; Lebanon, NH USA; Norris Cotton Cancer Center; Geisel School of
Medicine at Dartmouth; Lebanon, NH USA.

Epigenetic modifications introduce an additional layer of regulation that
drastically expands the instructional capability of the human genome. The
regulatory consequences of DNA methylation is context dependent; it can induce,
enhance, and suppress gene expression, or have no effect on gene regulation.
Therefore, it is essential to account for the genomic location of its occurrence 
and the protein factors it associates with to improve our understanding of its
function and effects. Here, we use ENCODE ChIP-seq and DNase I hypersensitivity
data, along with large-scale breast cancer genomic data from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) to computationally dissect the intricacies of DNA methylation in
regulation of cancer transcriptomes. In particular, we identified a relationship 
between estrogen receptor a (ERa) activity and DNA methylation patterning in
breast cancer. We found compelling evidence that methylation status of DNA
sequences at ERa binding sites is tightly coupled with ERa activity. Furthermore,
we predicted several transcription factors including FOXA1, GATA1, and SUZ12 to
be associated with breast cancer by examining the methylation status of their
binding sites in breast cancer. Lastly, we determine that methylated CpGs highly 
correlated with gene expression are enriched in regions 1kb or more downstream of
TSSs, suggesting more significant regulatory roles for CpGs distal to gene TSSs. 
Our study provides novel insights into the role of ERa in breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC4121363
PMID: 24434785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Hum Genet. 2014 Apr;133(4):383-401. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1410-4. Epub 2014 Jan
3.

Population-specific differences in gene conversion patterns between human SUZ12
and SUZ12P are indicative of the dynamic nature of interparalog gene conversion.

Mussotter T(1), Bengesser K, Högel J, Cooper DN, Kehrer-Sawatzki H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11,
89081, Ulm, Germany.

Nonallelic homologous gene conversion (NAHGC) resulting from interparalog
recombination without crossover represents an important influence on the
evolution of duplicated sequences in the human genome. In 17q11.2, different
paralogous sequences mediate large NF1 deletions by nonallelic homologous
recombination with crossover (NAHR). Among these paralogs are SUZ12 and its
pseudogene SUZ12P which harbour the breakpoints of type-2 (1.2-Mb) NF1 deletions.
Such deletions are caused predominantly by mitotic NAHR since somatic mosaicism
with normal cells is evident in most patients. Investigating whether SUZ12 and
SUZ12P have also been involved in NAHGC, we observed gene conversion tracts
between these paralogs in both Africans (AFR) and Europeans (EUR). Since germline
type-2 NF1 deletions resulting from meiotic NAHR are very rare, the vast majority
of the gene conversion tracts in SUZ12 and SUZ12P are likely to have resulted
from mitotic recombination during premeiotic cell divisions of germ cells. A
higher number of gene conversion tracts were noted within SUZ12 and SUZ12P in AFR
as compared to EUR. Further, the distinctive signature of NAHGC (a high number of
SNPs per paralog and a high number of shared SNPs between paralogs), a
characteristic of many actively recombining paralogs, was observed in both SUZ12 
and SUZ12P but only in AFR and not in EUR. A novel polymorphic 2.3-kb deletion in
SUZ12P was identified which exhibited a high allele frequency in EUR. We
postulate that this interparalog structural difference, together with low allelic
recombination rates, could have caused a reduction in NAHGC between SUZ12 and
SUZ12P during human evolution.

PMID: 24385046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 19;8(12):e84147. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084147.
eCollection 2013.

Structural context of disease-associated mutations and putative mechanism of
autoinhibition revealed by X-ray crystallographic analysis of the EZH2-SET
domain.

Antonysamy S(1), Condon B(1), Druzina Z(1), Bonanno JB(2), Gheyi T(1), Zhang
F(1), MacEwan I(3), Zhang A(1), Ashok S(1), Rodgers L(1), Russell M(1), Gately
Luz J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lilly Biotechnology Center San Diego, San Diego, California, United States of 
America. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
University, Jack and Pearl Resnik Campus, Bronx, New York, United States of
America. (3)Department of Radiology, Loma Linda University Medical Center, Loma
Linda, California, United States of America.

The enhancer-of-zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) gene product is an 87 kDa polycomb group
(PcG) protein containing a C-terminal methyltransferase SET domain. EZH2, along
with binding partners, i.e., EED and SUZ12, upon which it is dependent for
activity forms the core of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). PRC2
regulates gene silencing by catalyzing the methylation of histone H3 at lysine
27. Both overexpression and mutation of EZH2 are associated with the incidence
and aggressiveness of various cancers. The novel crystal structure of the SET
domain was determined in order to understand disease-associated EZH2 mutations
and derive an explanation for its inactivity independent of complex formation.
The 2.00 Å crystal structure reveals that, in its uncomplexed form, the EZH2
C-terminus folds back into the active site blocking engagement with substrate.
Furthermore, the S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) binding pocket observed in the
crystal structure of homologous SET domains is notably absent. This suggests that
a conformational change in the EZH2 SET domain, dependent upon complex formation,
must take place for cofactor and substrate binding activities to be
recapitulated. In addition, the data provide a structural context for clinically 
significant mutations found in the EZH2 SET domain.

PMCID: PMC3868555
PMID: 24367637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 19;8(12):e83737. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083737.
eCollection 2013.

Structure of the catalytic domain of EZH2 reveals conformational plasticity in
cofactor and substrate binding sites and explains oncogenic mutations.

Wu H(1), Zeng H(1), Dong A(1), Li F(1), He H(1), Senisterra G(1), Seitova A(1),
Duan S(2), Brown PJ(1), Vedadi M(3), Arrowsmith CH(4), Schapira M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (2)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre and Department of Medical Biophysics, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Structural Genomics
Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada ; Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada ; Princess Margaret Cancer Centre and Department of Medical Biophysics,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is an important regulator of cellular
differentiation and cell type identity. Overexpression or activating mutations of
EZH2, the catalytic component of the PRC2 complex, are linked to
hyper-trimethylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3) in many cancers.
Potent EZH2 inhibitors that reduce levels of H3K27me3 kill mutant lymphoma cells 
and are efficacious in a mouse xenograft model of malignant rhabdoid tumors.
Unlike most SET domain methyltransferases, EZH2 requires PRC2 components, SUZ12
and EED, for activity, but the mechanism by which catalysis is promoted in the
PRC2 complex is unknown. We solved the 2.0 Å crystal structure of the EZH2
methyltransferase domain revealing that most of the canonical structural features
of SET domain methyltransferase structures are conserved. The site of methyl
transfer is in a catalytically competent state, and the structure clarifies the
structural mechanism underlying oncogenic hyper-trimethylation of H3K27 in tumors
harboring mutations at Y641 or A677. On the other hand, the I-SET and post-SET
domains occupy atypical positions relative to the core SET domain resulting in
incomplete formation of the cofactor binding site and occlusion of the substrate 
binding groove. A novel CXC domain N-terminal to the SET domain may contribute to
the apparent inactive conformation. We propose that protein interactions within
the PRC2 complex modulate the trajectory of the post-SET and I-SET domains of
EZH2 in favor of a catalytically competent conformation.

PMCID: PMC3868588
PMID: 24367611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Jan;12(1):296-308. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.11.007. Epub 2013 
Nov 16.

Pluripotency factors and Polycomb Group proteins repress aryl hydrocarbon
receptor expression in murine embryonic stem cells.

Ko CI(1), Wang Q(1), Fan Y(1), Xia Y(1), Puga A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental Genetics,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3223 Eden Avenue, Cincinnati, OH
45267, USA. (2)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental
Genetics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3223 Eden Avenue,
Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. Electronic address: Alvaro.Puga@uc.edu.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a transcription factor and environmental
sensor that regulates expression of genes involved in drug-metabolism and cell
cycle regulation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses, Ahr ablation in mice
and studies with orthologous genes in invertebrates suggest that AHR may also
play a significant role in embryonic development. To address this hypothesis, we 
studied the regulation of Ahr expression in mouse embryonic stem cells and their 
differentiated progeny. In ES cells, interactions between OCT3/4, NANOG, SOX2 and
Polycomb Group proteins at the Ahr promoter repress AHR expression, which can
also be repressed by ectopic expression of reprogramming factors in hepatoma
cells. In ES cells, unproductive RNA polymerase II binds at the Ahr transcription
start site and drives the synthesis of short abortive transcripts. Activation of 
Ahr expression during differentiation follows from reversal of repressive marks
in Ahr promoter chromatin, release of pluripotency factors and PcG proteins,
binding of Sp factors, establishment of histone marks of open chromatin, and
engagement of active RNAPII to drive full-length RNA transcript elongation. Our
results suggest that reversible Ahr repression in ES cells holds the gene poised 
for expression and allows for a quick switch to activation during embryonic
development.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3896086
PMID: 24316986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Feb;42(3):1606-18. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1096. Epub 2013
Nov 11.

Cellular senescence mediated by p16INK4A-coupled miRNA pathways.

Overhoff MG(1), Garbe JC, Koh J, Stampfer MR, Beach DH, Bishop CL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute, Barts and the London School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark Street,
London, E1 2AT, UK, Life Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA and Division of Surgical Sciences, Department of Surgery,
Duke University Medical School, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

p16 is a key regulator of cellular senescence, yet the drivers of this stable
state of proliferative arrest are not well understood. Here, we identify 22
senescence-associated microRNAs (SA-miRNAs) in normal human mammary epithelial
cells. We show that SA-miRNAs-26b, 181a, 210 and 424 function in concert to
directly repress expression of Polycomb group (PcG) proteins CBX7, embryonic
ectoderm development (EED), enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) and suppressor
of zeste 12 homologue (Suz12), thereby activating p16. We demonstrate the
existence of a tight positive feedback loop in which SA-miRNAs activate and
re-enforce the expression of other SA-miRNA members. In contrast, PcG members
restrain senescence by epigenetically repressing the expression of these
SA-miRNAs. Importantly, loss of p16 leads to repression of SA-miRNA expression,
intimately coupling this effector of senescence to the SA-miRNA/PcG
self-regulatory loop. Taken together, our findings illuminate an important
regulatory axis that underpins the transition from proliferation to cellular
senescence.

PMCID: PMC3919591
PMID: 24217920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mod Pathol. 2014 May;27(5):751-7. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.199. Epub 2013 Nov 
1.

Frequent expression of KIT in endometrial stromal sarcoma with YWHAE genetic
rearrangement.

Lee CH(1), Hoang LN(2), Yip S(2), Reyes C(3), Marino-Enriquez A(4), Eilers G(4), 
Tao D(4), Chiang S(3), Fletcher JA(4), Soslow RA(3), Nucci MR(4), Oliva E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta and
Royal Alexandra Hospital, Edmonton, AB, Canada. (2)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA. (4)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Endometrial stromal sarcomas with the YWHAE-NUTM2A/B genetic fusion
characteristically contain high-grade round to epithelioid cell component that is
strongly and diffusely cyclin D1-positive and it may or may not show an
associated low-grade fibroblastic/myxoid cell component. They are clinically more
aggressive than endometrial stromal sarcomas with the JAZF1-SUZ12 genetic fusion 
and frequently demonstrate extrauterine extension at initial clinical
presentation. In this setting, the tumor may be misdiagnosed as gastrointestinal 
stromal tumor. This study examines the expression of KIT and ANO1 in 14
YWHAE-NUTM2A/B tumors by immunohistochemistry. Staining localization was
determined as membranous and/or cytoplasmic, and the staining intensity was
assessed (negative, weak, moderate and strong). Of the 14 tumors, 6 contained
only a high-grade round cell component, 2 only a low-grade fibroblastic component
and 6 had both components in the slides evaluated. The high-grade round cell
component displayed moderate to strong membranous/cytoplasmic KIT staining in all
tumors (12 of 12). The low-grade fibroblastic cell component showed only weak
cytoplasmic KIT staining in 3 of 8 tumors. In contrast, ANO1 was negative in all 
14 neoplasms, irrespective of the component evaluated. Sanger sequencing analysis
(exons 9, 11, 13 and 17) and Ampliseq Cancer Panel mutation screen (Ion Torrent) 
demonstrated no KIT mutations in three KIT-positive YWHAE-NUTM2A/B tumors. This
study shows that the high-grade round cell component of YWHAE-NUTM2A/B
endometrial stromal sarcoma consistently expresses KIT but lacks KIT hotspot
mutations. KIT expression may represent a potential diagnostic pitfall in the
evaluation of YWHAE-NUTM2A/B endometrial stromal sarcoma presenting with
pelvic/abdominal mass, particularly in situations where its uterine origin is not
definitive, and thus a panel of antibodies that includes ANO1 and cyclin D1 is
necessary.

PMID: 24186140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cancer Cell. 2013 Nov 11;24(5):660-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.10.006. Epub 2013 
Oct 31.

Reduced H3K27me3 and DNA hypomethylation are major drivers of gene expression in 
K27M mutant pediatric high-grade gliomas.

Bender S(1), Tang Y, Lindroth AM, Hovestadt V, Jones DT, Kool M, Zapatka M,
Northcott PA, Sturm D, Wang W, Radlwimmer B, Højfeldt JW, Truffaux N, Castel D,
Schubert S, Ryzhova M, Seker-Cin H, Gronych J, Johann PD, Stark S, Meyer J, Milde
T, Schuhmann M, Ebinger M, Monoranu CM, Ponnuswami A, Chen S, Jones C, Witt O,
Collins VP, von Deimling A, Jabado N, Puget S, Grill J, Helin K, Korshunov A,
Lichter P, Monje M, Plass C, Cho YJ, Pfister SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology, and
Immunology, Heidelberg University Hospital, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Two recurrent mutations, K27M and G34R/V, within histone variant H3.3 were
recently identified in ~50% of pHGGs. Both mutations define clinically and
biologically distinct subgroups of pHGGs. Here, we provide further insight about 
the dominant-negative effect of K27M mutant H3.3, leading to a global reduction
of the repressive histone mark H3K27me3. We demonstrate that this is caused by
aberrant recruitment of the PRC2 complex to K27M mutant H3.3 and enzymatic
inhibition of the H3K27me3-establishing methyltransferase EZH2. By performing
chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by next-generation sequencing and
whole-genome bisulfite sequencing in primary pHGGs, we show that reduced H3K27me3
levels and DNA hypomethylation act in concert to activate gene expression in K27M
mutant pHGGs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24183680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Br J Cancer. 2013 Dec 10;109(12):3092-104. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.655. Epub 2013
Oct 29.

Direct targeting of SUZ12/ROCK2 by miR-200b/c inhibits cholangiocarcinoma
tumourigenesis and metastasis.

Peng F(1), Jiang J, Yu Y, Tian R, Guo X, Li X, Shen M, Xu M, Zhu F, Shi C, Hu J, 
Wang M, Qin R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery, Affiliated Tongji Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang
Avenue, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, China.

BACKGROUND: The multidrug resistance and distant metastasis of cholangiocarcinoma
result in high postoperative recurrence and low long-term survival rates. It has 
been demonstrated that the ectopic expression of miR-200 suppresses the multidrug
resistance and metastasis of cancer. However, the expression and function of
miR-200 in cholangiocarcinoma has not yet been described.
METHODS: In this study, we identified dysregulated microRNAs (miRNAs, miR) in
cholangiocarcinoma tissue by microarray analysis, and subsequent real-time PCR
and northern blot analyses validated the expression of candidate miR. We
performed functional analyses and investigated the relationship between
miR-200b/c expression and the properties of cholangiocarcinoma cells. A dual
luciferase assay was applied to examine the effect of miRNAs on the 3'-UTR of
target genes, and we demonstrated the function of the target gene by siRNA
transfection identifying the downstream pathway via western blotting.
RESULTS: We found significantly downregulated expression of four miR-200 family
members (miR-200a/b/c/429) and then confirmed that ectopic miR-200b/200c inhibits
the migration and invasion of cholangiocarcinoma cells both in vitro and in vivo.
We found that miR-200b/c influenced the tumourigenesis of cholangiocarcinoma
cells including their tumour-initiating capacity, sphere formation, and drug
resistance. We further found that miR-200b/c regulated migration and invasion
capacities by directly targeting rho-kinase 2 and regulated tumorigenic
properties by directly targeting SUZ12 (a subunit of a polycomb repressor
complex).
CONCLUSION: Our study shows that miR-200b/c has a critical role in the regulation
of the tumorigenic and metastatic capacity of cholangiocarcinoma and reveals the 
probable underlying mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3859942
PMID: 24169343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Genome Res. 2014 Jan;24(1):25-36. doi: 10.1101/gr.159483.113. Epub 2013 Oct 16.

Integrative transcriptome sequencing identifies trans-splicing events with
important roles in human embryonic stem cell pluripotency.

Wu CS(1), Yu CY, Chuang CY, Hsiao M, Kao CF, Kuo HC, Chuang TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan;

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2013 Dec;14(12):822.

Trans-splicing is a post-transcriptional event that joins exons from separate
pre-mRNAs. Detection of trans-splicing is usually severely hampered by
experimental artifacts and genetic rearrangements. Here, we develop a new
computational pipeline, TSscan, which integrates different types of
high-throughput long-/short-read transcriptome sequencing of different human
embryonic stem cell (hESC) lines to effectively minimize false positives while
detecting trans-splicing. Combining TSscan screening with multiple experimental
validation steps revealed that most chimeric RNA products were platform-dependent
experimental artifacts of RNA sequencing. We successfully identified and
confirmed four trans-spliced RNAs, including the first reported trans-spliced
large intergenic noncoding RNA ("tsRMST"). We showed that these trans-spliced
RNAs were all highly expressed in human pluripotent stem cells and differentially
expressed during hESC differentiation. Our results further indicated that tsRMST 
can contribute to pluripotency maintenance of hESCs by suppressing
lineage-specific gene expression through the recruitment of NANOG and the PRC2
complex factor, SUZ12. Taken together, our findings provide important insights
into the role of trans-splicing in pluripotency maintenance of hESCs and help to 
facilitate future studies into trans-splicing, opening up this important but
understudied class of post-transcriptional events for comprehensive
characterization.

PMCID: PMC3875859
PMID: 24131564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Biotechniques. 2013 Oct;55(4):204-6. doi: 10.2144/000114089.

A rapid and efficient method to purify proteins at replication forks under native
conditions.

Leung KH(1), Abou El Hassan M, Bremner R.

Author information: 
(1)Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada;
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada.

Tools for studying replication fork dynamics are critical for dissecting the
mechanisms of DNA replication, DNA repair, histone deposition, and epigenetic
memory. Isolation of protein on nascent DNA (iPOND) is an elegant method for
purifying replication fork proteins. Here, we present accelerated native iPOND
(aniPOND), a simplification of the iPOND procedure with improved protein yield.
Cell membrane lysis and nuclei harvesting are combined in one step to reduce
washes and minimize sample loss. A mild nuclei lysis protocol is then used to
better preserve DNA-protein complexes. aniPOND is faster than iPOND, avoids
formaldehyde cross-linking, and improves protein yield 5- and 20-fold for the
CAF1-complex or PCNA respectively. Moreover, using aniPOND, but not iPOND, we
could detect the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) components SUZ12, EZH2, and
RBBP4 at replication forks. This faster, higher-yield method will facilitate MS
analysis of replication fork complexes.

PMID: 24107252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013 Dec;6(12):1348-55. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0104. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Aberrant DNA methylation at genes associated with a stem cell-like phenotype in
cholangiocarcinoma tumors.

Sriraksa R(1), Zeller C, Dai W, Siddiq A, Walley AJ, Limpaiboon T, Brown R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, IRDB Building,
Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom. Phone:
44-(0)-2075-941804; Fax: 44-(0)-2075-942129; b.brown@imperial.ac.uk; and Temduang
Limpaiboon, Centre for Research and Development of Medical Diagnostic
Laboratories, Faculty of Associated Medical Sciences, Khon Kaen University, Khon 
Kaen 40002, Thailand. temduang@kku.ac.th.

Genetic abnormalities of cholangiocarcinoma have been widely studied; however,
epigenomic changes related to cholangiocarcinogenesis have been less well
characterized. We have profiled the DNA methylomes of 28 primary
cholangiocarcinoma and six matched adjacent normal tissues using Infinium's
HumanMethylation27 BeadChips with the aim of identifying gene sets aberrantly and
epigenetically regulated in this tumor type. Using a linear model for microarray 
data, we identified 1610 differentially methylated autosomal CpG sites, with 809 
hypermethylated (representing 603 genes) and 801 hypomethylated (representing 712
genes) in cholangiocarcinoma versus adjacent normal tissues (false-discovery rate
= 0.05). Gene ontology and gene set enrichment analyses identified gene sets
significantly associated with hypermethylation at linked CpG sites in
cholangiocarcinoma including homeobox genes and target genes of PRC2, EED, SUZ12,
and histone H3 trimethylation at lysine 27. We confirmed frequent
hypermethylation at the homeobox genes HOXA9 and HOXD9 by bisulfite
pyrosequencing in a larger cohort of cholangiocarcinoma (n = 102). Our findings
indicate a key role for hypermethylation of multiple CpG sites at genes
associated with a stem cell-like phenotype as a common molecular aberration in
cholangiocarcinoma. These data have implications for cholangiocarcinogenesis, as 
well as possible novel treatment options using histone methyltransferase
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3855864
PMID: 24089088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Asian J Androl. 2013 Nov;15(6):703-4. doi: 10.1038/aja.2013.116. Epub 2013 Sep
30.

Scaffold attachment factor B1: an intrinsic inhibitor of androgen receptor
downregulated in prostate cancer.

Huang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA [2] Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic College
of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA [3] Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The androgen receptor (AR) is a pleiotrophic transcription factor that regulates 
expression of a large number of genes involved in many diverse cellular
processes. The AR activation pathways have been studied extensively. However, the
molecular mechanism and biological significance of AR inhibitory signals remain
poorly understood. Mukhopadhyay et al. have now identified the nuclear matrix
protein scaffold attachment factor B1 (SAFB1) as a novel AR corepressor. The
authors found that SAFB1 physically associates with AR protein and inhibits AR
transcriptional activity and androgen-sensitive gene expression. SAFB1 had no
effect on chromatin occupancy of AR, but silencing of SAFB1 abolished recruitment
MST1, a known AR repressor, at AR target loci. They also showed that SAFB1
interacts with EZH2, SUZ12 and EED, three core components of the Polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which catalyzes the gene repression histone
modification H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). The authors further showed
that forced expression of SAFB1 increases H3K27me3 at AR target loci and this
effect requires EZH2. Finally, the authors demonstrated that expression of SAFB1 
is downregulated in human prostate cancer (PCa) specimens and SAFB1 knockdown
results in an aggressive phenotype of PCa. These findings identify SAFB1 as an
important node for integration of multiple inhibitory signals of AR, which
represents a viable pathway for therapeutic intervention of PCa.

PMCID: PMC3854040
PMID: 24077602  [PubMed]


127. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Jan 1;320(1):128-43. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.09.011. Epub
2013 Sep 25.

Altered epigenetic regulation of homeobox genes in human oral squamous cell
carcinoma cells.

Marcinkiewicz KM(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of
Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical Sciences of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

To gain insight into oral squamous cell carcinogenesis, we performed deep
sequencing (RNAseq) of non-tumorigenic human OKF6-TERT1R and tumorigenic SCC-9
cells. Numerous homeobox genes are differentially expressed between OKF6-TERT1R
and SCC-9 cells. Data from Oncomine, a cancer microarray database, also show that
homeobox (HOX) genes are dysregulated in oral SCC patients. The activity of
Polycomb repressive complexes (PRC), which causes epigenetic modifications, and
retinoic acid (RA) signaling can control HOX gene transcription. HOXB7, HOXC10,
HOXC13, and HOXD8 transcripts are higher in SCC-9 than in OKF6-TERT1R cells;
using ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) we detected PRC2 protein SUZ12 and the
epigenetic H3K27me3 mark on histone H3 at these genes in OKF6-TERT1R, but not in 
SCC-9 cells. In contrast, IRX1, IRX4, SIX2 and TSHZ3 transcripts are lower in
SCC-9 than in OKF6-TERT1R cells. We detected SUZ12 and the H3K27me3 mark at these
genes in SCC-9, but not in OKF6-TERT1R cells. SUZ12 depletion increased HOXB7,
HOXC10, HOXC13, and HOXD8 transcript levels and decreased the proliferation of
OKF6-TERT1R cells. Transcriptional responses to RA are attenuated in SCC-9 versus
OKF6-TERT1R cells. SUZ12 and H3K27me3 levels were not altered by RA at these HOX 
genes in SCC-9 and OKF6-TERT1R cells. We conclude that altered activity of PRC2
is associated with dysregulation of homeobox gene expression in human SCC cells, 
and that this dysregulation potentially plays a role in the neoplastic
transformation of oral keratinocytes.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3880227
PMID: 24076275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Haematologica. 2014 Jan;99(1):37-45. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.091454. Epub 2013
Aug 30.

Array comparative genomic hybridization and sequencing of 23 genes in 80 patients
with myelofibrosis at chronic or acute phase.

Brecqueville M(1), Rey J, Devillier R, Guille A, Gillet R, Adélaide J,
Gelsi-Boyer V, Arnoulet C, Chaffanet M, Mozziconacci MJ, Vey N, Birnbaum D,
Murati A.

Author information: 
(1)muratia@ipc.unicancer.fr.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2014 Jan;99(1):2-3.

Myelofibrosis is a myeloproliferative neoplasm that occurs de novo (primary
myelofibrosis) or results from the progression of polycythemia vera or essential 
thrombocytemia (hereafter designated as secondary myelofibrosis or
post-polycythemia vera/ essential thrombocythemia myelofibrosis). To progress in 
the understanding of myelofibrosis and to find molecular prognostic markers we
studied 104 samples of primary and secondary myelofibrosis at chronic (n=68) and 
acute phases (n=12) from 80 patients, by using array-comparative genomic
hybridization and sequencing of 23 genes (ASXL1, BMI1, CBL, DNMT3A, EZH2, IDH1/2,
JAK2, K/NRAS, LNK, MPL, NF1, PPP1R16B, PTPN11, RCOR1, SF3B1, SOCS2, SRSF2, SUZ12,
TET2, TP53, TRPS1). We found copy number aberrations in 54% of samples, often
involving genes with a known or potential role in leukemogenesis. We show that
cases carrying a del(20q), del(17) or del(12p) evolve in acute myeloid leukemia
(P=0.03). We found that 88% of the cases were mutated, mainly in signaling
pathway (JAK2 69%, NF1 6%) and epigenetic genes (ASXL1 26%, TET2 14%, EZH2 8%).
Overall survival was poor in patients with more than one mutation (P=0.001) and
in patients with JAK2/ASXL1 mutations (P=0.02). Our study highlights the
heterogeneity of myelofibrosis, and points to several interesting copy number
aberrations and genes with diagnostic and prognostic impact.

PMCID: PMC4007931
PMID: 23996481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Genome Biol. 2013 Aug 29;14(8):R91. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-8-r91.

Genome-wide analysis identifies a functional association of Tet1 and Polycomb
repressive complex 2 in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Neri F, Incarnato D, Krepelova A, Rapelli S, Pagnani A, Zecchina R, Parlato C,
Oliviero S.

BACKGROUND: Ten-Eleven Translocation (TETs)proteins mediate the oxidation of
5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC). Tet1 is expressed at
high levels in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs), where it mediates the induction
of 5hmC decoration on gene-regulatory elements. While the function of Tet1 is
known, the mechanisms of its specificity remain unclear.
RESULTS: We perform a genome-wide comparative analysis of 5hmC in pluripotent
ESCs, as well as in differentiated embryonic and adult cells. We find that 5hmC
co-localization with Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is specific to ESCs and
is absent in differentiated cells. Tet1 in ESCs is distributed on bivalent genes 
in two independent pools: one with Sin3a centered at non-hydroxymethylated
transcription start sites and another centered downstream from these sites. This 
latter pool of Tet1 co-localizes with 5hmC and PRC2. Through
co-immunoprecipitation experiments, we show that Tet1 forms a complex with PRC2
specifically in ESCs. Genome-wide analysis of 5hmC profiles in ESCs following
knockdown of the PRC2 subunit Suz12 shows a reduction of 5hmC within promoter
sequences, specifically at H3K27me3-positive regions of bivalent promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: In ESCs, PRC2 recruits Tet1 to chromatin at H3K27me3 positive
regions of the genome, with 5hmC enriched in a broad peak centered 455 bp after
the transcription start site and dependent on the PRC2 component Suz12. These
results suggest that PRC2-dependent recruitment of Tet1 contributes to epigenetic
plasticity throughout cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4053938
PMID: 23987249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Blood. 2013 Oct 10;122(15):2654-63. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-02-484055. Epub 2013 
Aug 27.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) suppresses Eµ-myc lymphoma.

Lee SC(1), Phipson B, Hyland CD, Leong HS, Allan RS, Lun A, Hilton DJ, Nutt SL,
Blewitt ME, Smyth GK, Alexander WS, Majewski IJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia; and.

Deregulation of polycomb group complexes polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) and
2 (PRC2) is associated with human cancers. Although inactivating mutations in
PRC2-encoding genes EZH2, EED, and SUZ12 are present in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia and in myeloid malignancies, gain-of-function mutations in
EZH2 are frequently observed in B-cell lymphoma, implying disease-dependent
effects of individual mutations. We show that, in contrast to PRC1, PRC2 is a
tumor suppressor in Eµ-myc lymphomagenesis, because disease onset was accelerated
by heterozygosity for Suz12 or by short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown of Suz12
or Ezh2. Accelerated lymphomagenesis was associated with increased accumulation
of B-lymphoid cells in the absence of effects on apoptosis or cell cycling.
However, Suz12-deficient B-lymphoid progenitors exhibit enhanced serial
clonogenicity. Thus, PRC2 normally restricts the self-renewal of B-lymphoid
progenitors, the disruption of which contributes to lymphomagenesis. This finding
provides new insight regarding the functional contribution of mutations in PRC2
in a range of leukemias.

PMID: 23982173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jan 1;23(1):117-28. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt405. Epub 2013 Aug
19.

Promoter histone H3K27 methylation in the control of IGF2 imprinting in human
tumor cell lines.

Li T(1), Chen H, Li W, Cui J, Wang G, Hu X, Hoffman AR, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Beike Cell Engineering Research Institute, Shenzhen, China.

Aberrant imprinting of the insulin-like growth factor II (IGF2) gene is a
molecular hallmark of many tumors. Reactivation of the normally suppressed
maternal allele leads to upregulation of the growth factor that promotes tumor
growth. However, the mechanisms underlying the loss of imprinting (LOI) remain
poorly defined. We examined the epigenotypes at the gene promoters that control
IGF2 allelic expression. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, we found that in
cells characterized by maintenance of IGF2 imprinting, three IGF2 promoters were 
differentially modified, with the suppressed allele heavily methylated at histone
H3K27 while the active allele was unmethylated. In the LOI tumors, however, both 
alleles were unmethylated, and correspondingly there was no binding of SUZ12, the
docking factor of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), and of the zinc
finger-containing transcription factor (CTCF) that recruits the PRC2. Using
chromatin conformation capture, we found that the CTCF-orchestrated
intrachromosomal loop between the IGF2 promoters and the imprinting control
region was abrogated in cells with LOI. SUZ12, which docks the PRC2 to IGF2
promoters for H3K27 methylation, was downregulated in LOI cells. These data
reveal a new epigenetic control pathway related to the loss of IGF2 imprinting in
tumors.

PMCID: PMC3857949
PMID: 23962719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Int J Cancer. 2014 Mar 1;134(5):1112-22. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28440. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Identification of a novel, recurrent MBTD1-CXorf67 fusion in low-grade
endometrial stromal sarcoma.

Dewaele B(1), Przybyl J, Quattrone A, Finalet Ferreiro J, Vanspauwen V, Geerdens 
E, Gianfelici V, Kalender Z, Wozniak A, Moerman P, Sciot R, Croce S, Amant F,
Vandenberghe P, Cools J, Debiec-Rychter M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven and University Hospitals Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.

Endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESSs) are a genetically heterogeneous group of rare
uterine neoplasms that are commonly driven by recurrent gene rearrangements. In
conventional low-grade ESS, JAZF1-SUZ12, PHF1-JAZF1, EPC1-PHF1 and MEAF6-PHF1,
and recently described ZC3H7-BCOR chimeric fusions have been reported in > 50% of
cases. Conversely, oncogenic t(10;17)(q22;p13) translocation yields
YWHAE-FAM22A/B chimeric proteins that are associated with histologically
high-grade and clinically more aggressive ESS. Integrating whole-transcriptome
paired-end RNA sequencing with fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and
banding cytogenetics, we identified MBTD1 (malignant brain tumor
domain-containing 1) and CXorf67 (chromosome X open reading frame 67) as the
genes involved in the novel reciprocal t(X;17)(p11.2;q21.33) translocation in two
independent low-grade ESS of classical histology. The presence of the
MBTD1-CXorf67 fusion transcript was validated in both cases using
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction followed by Sanger sequencing. A 
specific FISH assay was developed to detect the novel t(X;17) translocation in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded material, and resulted in identification of an
additional low-grade ESS case positive for the MBTD1-CXorf67 fusion among 25
uterine stromal tumors [14 ESS and 11 undifferentiated endometrial sarcomas
(UESs)] that were negative for JAZF1 and YWHAE rearrangements. Gene expression
profiles of seven ESS (including three with YWHAE and two with JAZF1
rearrangements) and four UES without specific chromosomal aberrations indicated
clustering of tumors with MBTD1-CXorf67 fusion together with low-grade
JAZF1-associated ESS. The chimeric MBTD1-CXorf67 fusion identifies yet another
cytogenetically distinct subgroup of low-grade ESS and offers the opportunity to 
shed light on the functions of two poorly characterized genes.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 23959973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Sep 6;438(4):647-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.07.128. Epub 2013 Aug 8.

DZNep, inhibitor of S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase, down-regulates expression
of SETDB1 H3K9me3 HMTase in human lung cancer cells.

Lee JK(1), Kim KC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Bio-Material Research Center, Department of Biological Sciences,
College of Natural Sciences, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon 200-701,
Republic of Korea.

3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), an epigenetic anticancer drug, leads to the indirect
suppression of S-adenosyl methionine-dependent cellular methylations by
inhibiting S-adenosyl homocystein (AdoHcy) hydrolase. Although it is well known
that DZNep targets the degradation of EZH2 protein, H3K27me3 HMTase, there are
still uncertainties about the regulation of other types of HMTases during cell
death. In this study, we describe that SETDB1 gene expression was regulated by
DZNep treatment in human lung cancer cells. We confirm that DZNep induced growth 
inhibition and increased the dead cell population of lung cancer cells. DZNep
treatment affected histone methylations, including H3K27me3 and H3K9me3, but not 
H3K4me3. Reduced levels of H3K27me3 and H3K9me3 were related with the decreased
EZH2 and SETDB1 proteins. Real time PCR analysis showed that SETDB1 gene
expression was decreased by DZNep treatment, but no effect was observed for EZH2 
gene expression. We cloned the promoter region of SETDB1 and SUV39H1 genes, and
performed luciferase assays. The promoter activity of SETDB1 gene was down
regulated by DZNep treatment, whereas no effect on SUV39H1 promoter activity was 
observed. In conclusion, we suggest that DZNep regulates not only on H3K27me3
HMTase EZH2, but also H3K9 HMTase SETDB1 gene expression at the transcription
level, implicating that the mechanism of action of DZNep targets multiple HMTases
during the death of lung cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23933322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2013 Nov;57:130-43. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2013.07.012. Epub 2013 
Aug 8.

Ezh1 and Ezh2 differentially regulate PSD-95 gene transcription in developing
hippocampal neurons.

Henriquez B(1), Bustos FJ, Aguilar R, Becerra A, Simon F, Montecino M, van
Zundert B.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedical Research, Universidad Andres Bello, Avenida Republica
239, Santiago, Chile; Faculty of Biological Sciences and Faculty of Medicine,
Universidad Andres Bello, Avenida Republica 239, Santiago, Chile.

Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) mediates transcriptional silencing by
catalyzing histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3), but its role in the
maturation of postmitotic mammalian neurons remains largely unknown. We report
that the PRC2 paralogs Ezh1 and Ezh2 are differentially expressed during
hippocampal development. We show that depletion of Ezh2 leads to increased
expression of PSD-95, a critical plasticity gene, and that reduced PSD-95 gene
transcription is correlated with enrichment of Ezh2 at the PSD-95 gene promoter; 
however, the H3K27me3 epigenetic mark is not present at the PSD-95 gene promoter,
likely due to the antagonizing effects of the H3S28P and H3K27Ac marks and the
activity of the H3K27 demethylases JMJD3 and UTX. In contrast, increased PSD-95
gene transcription is accompanied by the presence of Ezh1 and elongation-engaged 
RNA Polymerase II complexes at the PSD-95 gene promoter, while knock-down of Ezh1
reduces PSD-95 transcription. These results indicate that Ezh1 and Ezh2 have
antagonistic roles in regulating PSD-95 transcription.

© 2013.

PMID: 23932971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(11):1896-903.

A family of pleiotropically acting microRNAs in cancer progression, miR-200:
potential cancer therapeutic targets.

Zhang HF, Xu LY, Li EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shantou University Medical
College, No.22, Xinling Road, Shantou 515041, Guangdong, China. nmli@stu.edu.cn.

Recently, a group of microRNAs (miRNAs), the miR-200 family (miR-200s) has been
found to be deregulated in multiple types of cancers, in which this family of
miRNAs was demonstrated to play a pivotal role in tumor initiation, maintenance, 
malignant metastasis and chemotherapy resistance. By targeting several central
inducers of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), e.g. ZEB1, ZEB2 and
SLUG, miR-200s are currently recognized as master regulators of EMT, thereby
suppressing cancer invasion and metastasis. The involvement of miR-200s in
angiogenesis has also been reported, and they were found to directly target
VEGF-A, FLT1/VEGFR1 and KDR/VEGFR2, three key components of the VEGF signaling
pathway. Importantly, miR-200s also modulate the self-renewal ability of cancer
stem cells by targeting BMI1 and SUZ12. Aberrant expression of miR-200s has been 
shown to confer chemoresistant properties to various kinds of cancers. Thus,
miR-200s, by playing critical and pleiotropic roles in malignancies, are
promising targets for cancer therapy. Notably, it has been shown that several
types of natural agents and herbal extracts could be employed to manipulate the
expression of miR-200s, making the targeting of miR-200s in cancer therapy more
clinically attractive. Nevertheless, a very recent study reported a
metastasis-promoting role of miR-200s in breast cancer; thus, careful assessment 
should be conducted before applying therapeutic interventions using miR-200s as
treatment targets. In this review, we will focus on our emerging understanding of
the roles of miR- 200s in cancer, specifically their therapeutic potential in
treating cancer.

PMID: 23888967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Med Oncol. 2013;30(3):670. doi: 10.1007/s12032-013-0670-0. Epub 2013 Jul 26.

Up-regulation of HOTAIR long non-coding RNA in human gastric adenocarcinoma
tissues.

Hajjari M(1), Behmanesh M, Sadeghizadeh M, Zeinoddini M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, P.O. Box 14115-154, Tehran, Iran.

HOTAIR is a known long non-coding RNA which has recently been associated with the
progression of some cancer types. It has been reported that HOTAIR expression is 
correlated with SUZ12 expression level and therefore may affect the epigenetic
state of cancer tissues. Here, we found aberrant up-regulation of HOTAIR in
gastric adenocarcinoma samples compared with normal adjacent gastric epithelium
tissues. Besides, we found that the aberrant expression of HOTAIR was associated 
with TNM staging and lymph node metastasis of gastric tumors. Here, a potential
cooperative expression between HOTAIR and SUZ12 genes in gastric adenocarcinoma
tissues is deduced. This result suggests a role for HOTAIR long non-coding RNA in
gastric cancer progression.

PMID: 23888369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. 2013 Jul 23;14:37. doi: 10.1186/2050-6511-14-37.

Polycomblike protein PHF1b: a transcriptional sensor for GABA receptor activity.

Saha S(1), Hu Y, Martin SC, Bandyopadhyay S, Russek SJ, Farb DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics, Laboratory of
Translational Epilepsy, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118,
USA.

BACKGROUND: The <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA) type A receptor (GABA(A)R) contains
the recognition sites for a variety of agents used in the treatment of brain
disorders, including anxiety and epilepsy. A better understanding of how receptor
expression is regulated in individual neurons may provide novel opportunities for
therapeutic intervention. Towards this goal we have studied transcription of a
GABA(A)R subunit gene (GABRB1) whose activity is autologously regulated by GABA
via a 10 base pair initiator-like element (ß(1)-INR).
METHODS: By screening a human cDNA brain library with a yeast one-hybrid assay,
the Polycomblike (PCL) gene product PHD finger protein transcript b (PHF1b) was
identified as a ß(1)-INR associated protein. Promoter/reporter assays in primary 
rat cortical cells demonstrate that PHF1b is an activator at GABRB1, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays reveal that presence of PHF1 at endogenous
Gabrb1 is regulated by GABA(A)R activation.
RESULTS: PCL is a member of the Polycomb group required for correct spatial
expression of homeotic genes in Drosophila. We now show that PHF1b recognition of
ß(1)-INR is dependent on a plant homeodomain, an adjacent helix-loop-helix, and
short glycine rich motif. In neurons, it co-immunoprecipitates with SUZ12, a key 
component of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) that regulates a number of 
important cellular processes, including gene silencing via histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation (H3K27me3).
CONCLUSIONS: The observation that chronic exposure to GABA reduces PHF1 binding
and H3K27 monomethylation, which is associated with transcriptional activation,
strongly suggests that PHF1b may be a molecular transducer of GABA(A)R function
and thus GABA-mediated neurotransmission in the central nervous system.

PMCID: PMC3734045
PMID: 23879974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Cell Death Differ. 2013 Sep;20(9):1268-78. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.88. Epub 2013
Jul 12.

Epigenetic silencing of Bim transcription by Spi-1/PU.1 promotes apoptosis
resistance in leukaemia.

Ridinger-Saison M(1), Evanno E, Gallais I, Rimmelé P, Selimoglu-Buet D,
Sapharikas E, Moreau-Gachelin F, Guillouf C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Paris, France.

Deregulation of transcriptional networks contributes to haematopoietic
malignancies. The transcription factor Spi-1/PU.1 is a master regulator of
haematopoiesis and its alteration leads to leukaemia. Spi-1 overexpression
inhibits differentiation and promotes resistance to apoptosis in
erythroleukaemia. Here, we show that Spi-1 inhibits mitochondrial apoptosis in
vitro and in vivo through the transcriptional repression of Bim, a proapoptotic
factor. BIM interacts with MCL-1 that behaves as a major player in the survival
of the preleukaemic cells. The repression of BIM expression reduces the amount of
BIM-MCL-1 complexes, thus increasing the fraction of potentially active
antiapoptotic MCL-1. We then demonstrate that Spi-1 represses Bim transcription
by binding to the Bim promoter and by promoting the trimethylation of histone 3
on lysine 27 (H3K27me3, a repressive histone mark) on the Bim promoter. The PRC2 
repressive complex of Polycomb is directly responsible for the deposit of
H3K27me3 mark at the Bim promoter. SUZ12 and the histone methyltransferase EZH2, 
two PRC2 subunits bind to the Bim promoter at the same location than H3K27me3,
distinct of the Spi-1 DNA binding site. As Spi-1 interacts with SUZ12 and EZH2,
these results indicate that Spi-1 modulates the activity of PRC2 without directly
recruiting the complex to the site of its activity on the chromatin. Our results 
identify a new mechanism whereby Spi-1 represses transcription and provide
mechanistic insights on the antiapoptotic function of a transcription factor
mediated by the epigenetic control of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3741512
PMID: 23852375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 23;110(30):12331-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1222684110. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

Loss of corepressor PER2 under hypoxia up-regulates OCT1-mediated EMT gene
expression and enhances tumor malignancy.

Hwang-Verslues WW(1), Chang PH, Jeng YM, Kuo WH, Chiang PH, Chang YC, Hsieh TH,
Su FY, Lin LC, Abbondante S, Yang CY, Hsu HM, Yu JC, Chang KJ, Shew JY, Lee EY,
Lee WH.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.

The circadian clock gene Period2 (PER2) has been suggested to be a tumor
suppressor. However, detailed mechanistic evidence has not been provided to
support this hypothesis. We found that loss of PER2 enhanced invasion and
activated expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) genes including
TWIST1, SLUG, and SNAIL. This finding was corroborated by clinical observation
that PER2 down-regulation was associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer
patients. We further demonstrated that PER2 served as a transcriptional
corepressor, which recruited polycomb proteins EZH2 and SUZ12 as well as HDAC2 to
octamer transcription factor 1 (OCT1) (POU2F1) binding sites of the TWIST1 and
SLUG promoters to repress expression of these EMT genes. Hypoxia, a condition
commonly observed in tumors, caused PER2 degradation and disrupted the PER2
repressor complex, leading to activation of EMT gene expression. This result was 
further supported by clinical data showing a significant negative correlation
between hypoxia and PER2. Thus, our findings clearly demonstrate the tumor
suppression function of PER2 and elucidate a pathway by which hypoxia promotes
EMT via degradation of PER2.

PMCID: PMC3725072
PMID: 23836662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 21;8(6):e67217. Print 2013.

Identification and Validation of a Putative Polycomb Responsive Element in the
Human Genome.

Bengani H(1), Mendiratta S, Maini J, Vasanthi D, Sultana H, Ghasemi M, Ahluwalia 
J, Ramachandran S, Mishra RK, Brahmachari V.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Delhi, Delhi,
India.

Epigenetic cellular memory mechanisms that involve polycomb and trithorax group
of proteins are well conserved across metazoans. The cis-acting elements
interacting with these proteins, however, are poorly understood in mammals. In a 
directed search we identified a potential polycomb responsive element with 25
repeats of YY1 binding motifthatwe designate PRE-PIK3C2B as it occurs in the
first intron of human PIK3C2B gene. It down regulates reporter gene expression in
HEK cells and the repression is dependent on polycomb group of proteins (PcG). We
demonstrate that PRE-PIK3C2B interacts directly with YY1 in vitro and recruits
PRC2 complex in vivo. The localization of PcG proteins including YY1 to
PRE-PIK3C2B in HEK cells is decreased on knock-down of either YY1 or SUZ12.
Endogenous PRE-PIK3C2B shows bivalent marking having H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 for
repressed and active state respectively. In transgenic Drosophila, PRE-PIK3C2B
down regulates mini-white expression, exhibits variegation and pairing sensitive 
silencing (PSS), which has not been previously demonstrated for mammalian PRE.
Taken together, our results strongly suggest that PRE-PIK3C2B functions as a site
of interaction for polycomb proteins.

PMCID: PMC3689693
PMID: 23805300  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


141. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;33(16):3274-85. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00275-13. Epub 2013 Jun 
17.

Variable requirements for DNA-binding proteins at polycomb-dependent repressive
regions in human HOX clusters.

Woo CJ(1), Kharchenko PV, Daheron L, Park PJ, Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG)-mediated repression is an evolutionarily conserved process
critical for cell fate determination and maintenance of gene expression during
embryonic development. However, the mechanisms underlying PcG recruitment in
mammals remain unclear since few regulatory sites have been identified. We report
two novel prospective PcG-dependent regulatory elements within the human HOXB and
HOXC clusters and compare their repressive activities to a previously identified 
element in the HOXD cluster. These regions recruited the PcG proteins BMI1 and
SUZ12 to a reporter construct in mesenchymal stem cells and conferred repression 
that was dependent upon PcG expression. Furthermore, we examined the potential of
two DNA-binding proteins, JARID2 and YY1, to regulate PcG activity at these three
elements. JARID2 has differential requirements, whereas YY1 appears to be
required for repressive activity at all 3 sites. We conclude that distinct
elements of the mammalian HOX clusters can recruit components of the PcG
complexes and confer repression, similar to what has been seen in Drosophila.
These elements, however, have diverse requirements for binding factors, which,
combined with previous data on other loci, speaks to the complexity of PcG
targeting in mammals.

PMCID: PMC3753906
PMID: 23775117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Aug;41(15):7231-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt528. Epub 2013 Jun
12.

Visualization of multivalent histone modification in a single cell reveals highly
concerted epigenetic changes on differentiation of embryonic stem cells.

Hattori N(1), Niwa T, Kimura K, Helin K, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1
Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan, Biotech Research and Innovation Centre
(BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark and
Centre for Epigenetics, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Combinations of histone modifications have significant biological roles, such as 
maintenance of pluripotency and cancer development, but cannot be analyzed at the
single cell level. Here, we visualized a combination of histone modifications by 
applying the in situ proximity ligation assay, which detects two proteins in
close vicinity (~30 nm). The specificity of the method [designated as imaging of 
a combination of histone modifications (iChmo)] was confirmed by positive signals
from H3K4me3/acetylated H3K9, H3K4me3/RNA polymerase II and H3K9me3/H4K20me3, and
negative signals from H3K4me3/H3K9me3. Bivalent modification was clearly
visualized by iChmo in wild-type embryonic stem cells (ESCs) known to have it,
whereas rarely in Suz12 knockout ESCs and mouse embryonic fibroblasts known to
have little of it. iChmo was applied to analysis of epigenetic and phenotypic
changes of heterogeneous cell population, namely, ESCs at an early stage of
differentiation, and this revealed that the bivalent modification disappeared in 
a highly concerted manner, whereas phenotypic differentiation proceeded with
large variations among cells. Also, using this method, we were able to visualize 
a combination of repressive histone marks in tissue samples. The application of
iChmo to samples with heterogeneous cell population and tissue samples is
expected to clarify unknown biological and pathological significance of various
combinations of epigenetic modifications.

PMCID: PMC3753646
PMID: 23761442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Development. 2013 Jul;140(14):2867-78. doi: 10.1242/dev.088096. Epub 2013 Jun 5.

Polycomb repressive complex PRC2 regulates Xenopus retina development downstream 
of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Aldiri I(1), Moore KB, Hutcheson DA, Zhang J, Vetter ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

The histone methyltransferase complex PRC2 controls key steps in developmental
transitions and cell fate choices; however, its roles in vertebrate eye
development remain unknown. Here, we report that in Xenopus, PRC2 regulates the
progression of retinal progenitors from proliferation to differentiation. We show
that the PRC2 core components are enriched in retinal progenitors and
downregulated in differentiated cells. Knockdown of the PRC2 core component Ezh2 
leads to reduced retinal progenitor proliferation, in part due to upregulation of
the Cdk inhibitor p15(Ink4b). In addition, although PRC2 knockdown does not alter
eye patterning, retinal progenitor gene expression or expression of the neural
competence factor Sox2, it does cause suppression of proneural bHLH gene
expression, indicating that PRC2 is crucial for the initiation of neural
differentiation in the retina. Consistent with this, knocking down or blocking
PRC2 function constrains the generation of most retinal neural cell types and
promotes a Müller glial cell fate decision. We also show that Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling acting through the receptor Frizzled 5, but independent of Sox2,
regulates expression of key PRC2 subunits in the developing retina. This is
consistent with a role for this pathway in coordinating proliferation and the
transition to neurogenesis in the Xenopus retina. Our data establish PRC2 as a
regulator of proliferation and differentiation during eye development.

PMCID: PMC3699278
PMID: 23739135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2013;31(6):778-84. doi: 10.1159/000350095. Epub 2013 May
31.

SUZ12 depletion suppresses the proliferation of gastric cancer cells.

Cui Y(1), Chen J, He Z, Xiao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: SUZ12 and EZH2 are two main components of polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) that is known to be of great importance in tumorigenesis. EZH2
has been reported to play a vital role in pathogenesis of human cancer. However, 
whether SUZ12 has equivalent roles in tumorigenesis has not been demonstrated.
Here, we investigated a possible role of SUZ12 for the proliferation of gastric
cancer cells.
METHODS: Western-blot analysis was used to detected the levels of SUZ12,
H3K27me3, EZH2 and p27 in ten gastric cell lines. SUZ12 was depleted by RNA
interference. Cell cycle was detected by flow cytometry. Luciferase assays was to
analyze whether miR-200b directly regulate SUZ12.
RESULTS: We found that SUZ12 depletion mediated by RNA interference (RNAi) led to
a reduction of gastric cell numbers and arrested the cell cycle at G1/S point. As
an important G1/S phase inhibitory gene, p27 is re-induced to some extent by
SUZ12 knockdown. Furthermore, we demonstrated that SUZ12 was directly
downregulated by miR-200b.
CONCLUSION: We provide evidence suggesting that SUZ12 may be a potential
therapeutic target for gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23735840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Neuro Oncol. 2013 Sep;15(9):1212-24. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/not055. Epub 2013 Jun 3.

MicroRNA-128 coordinately targets Polycomb Repressor Complexes in glioma stem
cells.

Peruzzi P(1), Bronisz A, Nowicki MO, Wang Y, Ogawa D, Price R, Nakano I, Kwon CH,
Hayes J, Lawler SE, Ostrowski MC, Chiocca EA, Godlewski J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Womens Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Polycomb Repressor Complex (PRC) is an epigenetic regulator of
transcription whose action is mediated by 2 protein complexes, PRC1 and PRC2. PRC
is oncogenic in glioblastoma, where it is involved in cancer stem cell
maintenance and radioresistance.
METHODS: We used a set of glioblastoma patient samples, glioma stem cells, and
neural stem cells from a mouse model of glioblastoma. We characterized
gene/protein expression and cellular phenotypes by quantitative PCR/Western
blotting and clonogenic, cell-cycle, and DNA damage assays. We performed
overexpression/knockdown studies by lentiviral infection and microRNA/small
interfering RNA oligonucleotide transfection.
RESULTS: We show that microRNA-128 (miR-128) directly targets mRNA of SUZ12, a
key component of PRC2, in addition to BMI1, a component of PRC1 that we
previously showed as a target as well. This blocks the partially redundant
functions of PRC1/PRC2, thereby significantly reducing PRC activity and its
associated histone modifications. MiR-128 and SUZ12/BMI1 show opposite expression
in human glioblastomas versus normal brain and in glioma stemlike versus neural
stem cells. Furthermore, miR-128 renders glioma stemlike cells less
radioresistant by preventing the radiation-induced expression of both PRC
components. Finally, miR-128 expression is significantly reduced in neural stem
cells from the brain of young, presymptomatic mice in our mouse model of
glioblastoma. This suggests that loss of miR-128 expression in brain is an early 
event in gliomagenesis. Moreover, knockdown of miR-128 expression in nonmalignant
mouse and human neural stem cells led to elevated expression of PRC components
and increased clonogenicity.
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-128 is an important suppressor of PRC activity, and its absence 
is an early event in gliomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC3748913
PMID: 23733246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Nov;31(7):487-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.05.005.
Epub 2013 May 30.

The dynamics of polycomb group proteins in early embryonic nervous system in
mouse and human.

Qi L(1), Cao JL, Hu Y, Yang JG, Ji Y, Huang J, Zhang Y, Sun DG, Xia HF, Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Birth Defects and Reproductive Health, Chongqing, 
China; Graduate Schools, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China;
Reproductive and Genetic Center of National Research Institute for Family
Planning, Beijing, China.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are transcription regulatory proteins that control 
the expression of a variety of genes and the antero-posterior neural patterning
from early embryogenesis. Although expression of PcG genes in the nervous system 
has been noticed, but the expression pattern of PcG proteins in early embryonic
nervous system is still unclear. In this study, we analyzed the expression
pattern of PRC1 complex members (BMI-1 and RING1B) and PRC2 complex members (EED,
SUZ12 and EZH2) in early embryonic nervous system in mouse and human by Western
blot and Immunohistochemistry. The results of Western blot showed that EED
protein was significantly up-regulated with the increase of the day of pregnancy 
during the early embryogenesis in mouse. BMI-1 protein level was significantly
increased from the day 10 of pregnancy, when compared with the day 9 of
pregnancy. But the SUZ12, EZH2 and RING1B protein level did not change
significantly. From the results of Immunohistochemistry, we found that the four
PcG proteins were all expressed in the fetal brain and fetal spinal cord in
mouse. In human, the expression of EED, SUZ12, and EZH2 was not significantly
different in cerebral cortex and sacral spinal cord, but BMI-1 and RING1B
expression was enhanced with the development of embryos in early pregnancy.
Collectively, our findings showed that PRC1 and PRC2 were spatiotemporally
expressed in brain and spinal cord of early embryos.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23727134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1832(10):1528-37. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.05.010. Epub 2013 May 18.

linc-UBC1 physically associates with polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and
acts as a negative prognostic factor for lymph node metastasis and survival in
bladder cancer.

He W(1), Cai Q, Sun F, Zhong G, Wang P, Liu H, Luo J, Yu H, Huang J, Lin T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Guangzhou, People's
Republic of China. hewang525344@126.com

OBJECTIVES: The human genome encodes many long intergenic noncoding RNAs
(lincRNAs). However, their biological functions, molecular mechanisms and
prognostic values associated with bladder cancer remain to be elucidated. Here we
investigated a lincRNA termed linc-UBC1 (Up-regulated in bladder cancer 1) and
evaluated its prognostic value in bladder cancer patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of linc-UBC1 was evaluated by quantitative
reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) in 102 bladder cancer tissue samples and
normal adjacent tissues. The functions of linc-UBC1 on cell proliferation,
migration, invasion, colony formation, tumorigenicity and metastatic potential
were evaluated by knockdown strategy in vitro and in vivo. RNA
immunoprecipitation (RIP) was performed to confirm that linc-UBC1 physically
associates with EZH2 and SUZ12, core components of polycomb repressive complex 2 
(PRC2). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was conducted to examine histone
modification status.
RESULTS: qRT-PCR confirmed that linc-UBC1 expression is up-regulated in 60 cases 
(58.8%) in bladder cancer tissues compared with normal adjacent tissues, and its 
overexpression correlates with lymph node metastasis and poor survival. Further
functional analysis demonstrated that knockdown of linc-UBC1 attenuates bladder
cancer cell proliferation, motility, invasion, colony formation ability,
tumorigenicity and metastatic potential. Importantly, the inhibitory effect of
linc-UBC1 on cell proliferation was also observed in primary bladder cancer cells
obtained from patients. RIP and ChIP assay confirmed that linc-UBC1 physically
associates with PRC2 complex and regulates histone modification status of target 
genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Frequently overexpressed linc-UBC1 physically associates with PRC2
complex, and acts as a negative prognostic factor for lymph node metastasis and
survival in bladder cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23688781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jul;41(13):6430-43. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt367. Epub 2013
May 10.

Polycomb recruitment attenuates retinoic acid-induced transcription of the
bivalent NR2F1 gene.

Laursen KB(1), Mongan NP, Zhuang Y, Ng MM, Benoit YD, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Polycomb proteins play key roles in mediating epigenetic modifications that occur
during cell differentiation. The Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) mediates
the tri-methylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3). In this study, we
identify a distinguishing feature of two classes of PRC2 target genes,
represented by the Nr2F1 (Coup-TF1) and the Hoxa5 gene, respectively. Both genes 
are transcriptionally activated by all-trans retinoic acid (RA) and display
increased levels of the permissive H3K9/K14ac and tri-methylated histone H3
lysine 4 epigenetic marks in response to RA. However, while in response to RA the
PRC2 and H3K27me3 marks are greatly decreased at the Hoxa5 promoter, these marks 
are initially increased at the Nr2F1 promoter. Functional depletion of the
essential PRC2 protein Suz12 by short hairpin RNA (shRNA) technology enhanced the
RA-associated transcription of Nr2F1, Nr2F2, Meis1, Sox9 and BMP2, but had no
effect on the Hoxa5, Hoxa1, Cyp26a1, Cyp26b1 and RARß2 transcript levels in
wild-type embryonic stem cells. We propose that PRC2 recruitment attenuates the
RA-associated transcriptional activation of a subset of genes. Such a mechanism
would permit the fine-tuning of transcriptional networks during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3905905
PMID: 23666625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Acta Neuropathol. 2013 Aug;126(2):291-301. doi: 10.1007/s00401-013-1124-7. Epub
2013 May 10.

Differential expression and methylation of brain developmental genes define
location-specific subsets of pilocytic astrocytoma.

Lambert SR(1), Witt H, Hovestadt V, Zucknick M, Kool M, Pearson DM, Korshunov A, 
Ryzhova M, Ichimura K, Jabado N, Fontebasso AM, Lichter P, Pfister SM, Collins
VP, Jones DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Histopathology, Department of Pathology, University of
Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK. sl575@cam.ac.uk

Pilocytic astrocytomas (PAs) are the most common brain tumors in pediatric
patients and can cause significant morbidity, including chronic neurological
deficiencies. They are characterized by activating alterations in the
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, but little else is known about their
development. To map the global DNA methylation profiles of these tumors, we
analyzed 62 PAs and 7 normal cerebellum samples using Illumina 450K microarrays. 
These data revealed two subgroups of PA that separate according to tumor location
(infratentorial versus supratentorial), and identified key neural developmental
genes that are differentially methylated between the two groups, including NR2E1 
and EN2. Integration with transcriptome microarray data highlighted significant
expression differences, which were unexpectedly associated with a strong positive
correlation between methylation and expression. Differentially methylated probes 
were often identified within the gene body and/or regions up- or downstream of
the gene, rather than at the transcription start site. We also identified a large
number of differentially methylated genes between cerebellar PAs and normal
cerebellum, which were again enriched for developmental genes. In addition, we
found a significant association between differentially methylated genes and SUZ12
binding sites, indicating potential disruption of the polycomb repressor complex 
2 (PRC2). Taken together, these data suggest that PA from different locations in 
the brain may arise from region-specific cells of origin, and highlight the
potential disruption of key developmental regulators during tumorigenesis. These 
findings have implications for future basic research and clinical trials, as
therapeutic targets and drug sensitivity may differ according to tumor location.

PMID: 23660940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Epigenetics. 2013 May;8(5):464-76. doi: 10.4161/epi.24532. Epub 2013 Apr 17.

Multifaceted role of EZH2 in breast and prostate tumorigenesis: epigenetics and
beyond.

Deb G(1), Thakur VS, Gupta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Overexpression of EZH2 and other PRC2 subunits, such as SUZ12, is associated with
tumor progression and poor prognosis in several human malignancies. Nevertheless,
the underlying mechanisms driving aberrant EZH2 expression are poorly understood.
This review provides molecular insights into the essential role of EZH2 in breast
and prostate tumorigenesis. We addressed the current understanding on the
oncogenic role of EZH2, with an emphasis on: (1) the less known PRC2-independent 
role of EZH2 in gene activation, in addition to its canonical role in
transcriptional silencing as a histone methyltransferase catalyzing the
trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 27; (2) causes and consequences of its
deregulation in tumor cells and; (3) collaboration of EZH2 with other epigenetic 
and hormone receptor-mediated oncogenic signaling pathways. We also summarize how
EZH2 has emerged as a promising therapeutic target in hormone-refractory cancers 
and the prospects for integrating EZH2 blockade with available pharmacological
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3741216
PMID: 23644490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Jun 10;319(10):1463-70. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.04.006. Epub
2013 Apr 12.

Pharmacological inhibition of polycomb repressive complex-2 activity induces
apoptosis in human colon cancer stem cells.

Benoit YD(1), Witherspoon MS, Laursen KB, Guezguez A, Beauséjour M, Beaulieu JF, 
Lipkin SM, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Department, Weill Cornell Medical College, NY 10065, USA.
yannick.benoit@usherbrooke.ca

Colorectal cancer is among the leading causes of cancer death in the USA. The
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), including core components SUZ12 and EZH2,
represents a key epigenetic regulator of digestive epithelial cell physiology and
was previously shown to promote deleterious effects in a number of human cancers,
including colon. Using colon cancer stem cells (CCSC) isolated from human primary
colorectal tumors, we demonstrate that SUZ12 knockdown and treatment with DZNep, 
one of the most potent EZH2 inhibitors, increase apoptosis levels, marked by
decreased Akt phosphorylation, in CCSCs, while embryonic stem (ES) cell survival 
is not affected. Moreover, DZNep treatments lead to increased PTEN expression in 
these highly tumorigenic cells. Taken together, our findings suggest that
pharmacological inhibition of PRC2 histone methyltransferase activity may
constitute a new, epigenetic therapeutic strategy to target highly tumorigenic
and metastatic colon cancer stem cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3880229
PMID: 23588203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 May 1;41(10):5290-302. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt240. Epub 2013
Apr 12.

Induced DNA demethylation can reshape chromatin topology at the IGF2-H19 locus.

Ito Y(1), Nativio R, Murrell A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, CRUK Cambridge Institute,
Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.

Choriocarcinomas are embryonal tumours with loss of imprinting and
hypermethylation at the insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2)-H19 locus. The DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-Aza-2'deoxycytidine (5-AzaCdR) is an approved
epigenetic cancer therapy. However, it is not known to what extent 5-AzaCdR
influences other epigenetic marks. In this study, we set out to determine whether
5-AzaCdR treatment can reprogram the epigenomic organization of the IGF2-H19
locus in a choriocarcinoma cancer cell line (JEG3). We found that localized DNA
demethylation at the H19 imprinting control region (ICR) induced by 5-AzaCdR,
reduced IGF2, increased H19 expression, increased CTCF and cohesin recruitment
and changed histone modifications. Furthermore chromatin accessibility was
increased locus-wide and chromatin looping topography was altered such that a
CTCF site downstream of the H19 enhancers switched its association with the CTCF 
site upstream of the IGF2 promoters to associate with the ICR. We identified a
stable chromatin looping domain, which forms independently of DNA methylation.
This domain contains the IGF2 gene and is marked by a histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation block between CTCF site upstream of the IGF2 promoters and the
Centrally Conserved Domain upstream of the ICR. Together, these data provide new 
insights into the responsiveness of chromatin topography to DNA methylation
changes.

PMCID: PMC3664821
PMID: 23585276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Jul;52(7):610-8. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22057. Epub 2013
Apr 12.

Fusion of the ZC3H7B and BCOR genes in endometrial stromal sarcomas carrying an
X;22-translocation.

Panagopoulos I(1), Thorsen J, Gorunova L, Haugom L, Bjerkehagen B, Davidson B,
Heim S, Micci F.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Medical Informatics, The
Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
ioannis.panagopoulos@rr-research.no

Endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESS) are genetically heterogeneous uterine tumors
in which a JAZF1-SUZ12 chimeric gene resulting from the chromosomal translocation
t(7;17)(p15;q21) as well as PHF1 rearrangements (in chromosomal band 6p21) with
formation of JAZF1-PHF1, EPC1-PHF1, and MEAF6-PHF1 chimeras have been described. 
Here, we investigated two ESS characterized cytogenetically by the presence of a 
der(22)t(X;22)(p11;q13). Whole transcriptome sequencing one of the tumors
identified a ZC3H7-BCOR chimeric transcript. Reverse transciptase-PCR with the
ZC3H7B forward and BCOR reverse primer combinations confirmed the presence of a
ZC3H7-BCOR chimeric transcript in both ESS carrying a der(22)t(X;22) but not in a
control ESS with t(1;6) and the MEAF6-PHF1 fusion. Sequencing of the amplified
cDNA fragments showed that in both cases ESS exon 10 of ZC3H7B (from 22q13;
accession number NM_017590 version 4) was fused to exon 8 of BCOR (from Xp11;
accession number NM_001123385 version 1). Reciprocal multiple BCOR-ZC3H7B cDNA
fragments were amplified in only one case suggesting that ZC3H7B-BCOR, on the
der(22)t(X;22), is the pathogenetically important fusion gene. The putative
ZC3H7B-BCOR protein would contain the tetratricopeptide repeats and LD motif from
ZC3H7B and the AF9 binding site (1093-1233aa), the 3 ankyrin repeats (1410-1509
aa), and the NSPC1 binding site of BCOR. Although the presence of these motifs
suggests various functions of the chimeric protein, it is possible that its most 
important role may be in epigenetic regulation. Whether or not the (patho)genetic
subsets JAZF1-SUZ12, PHF1 rearrangements, and ZC3H7B-BCOR correspond to any
phenotypic, let alone clinically important, differences in ESS remain unknown.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23580382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 1;19(13):3450-61. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3139.
Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Altered DNA methylation landscapes of polycomb-repressed loci are associated with
prostate cancer progression and ERG oncogene expression in prostate cancer.

Kron K(1), Trudel D, Pethe V, Briollais L, Fleshner N, van der Kwast T, Bapat B.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

PURPOSE: To assess differentially methylated "landscapes" according to prostate
cancer Gleason score (GS) and ERG oncogene expression status, and to determine
the extent of polycomb group (PcG) target gene involvement, we sought to assess
the genome-wide DNA methylation profile of prostate cancer according to Gleason
score and ERG expression.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Genomic DNA from 39 prostate cancer specimens was hybridized
to CpG island microarrays through differential methylation hybridization. We
compared methylation profiles between Gleason score and ERG expression status as 
well as Gleason score stratified by ERG expression status. In addition, we
compared results from our dataset to publicly available datasets of histone
modifications in benign prostate cells.
RESULTS: We discovered hundreds of distinct differentially methylated regions
(DMR) associated with increasing Gleason score and ERG. Furthermore, the number
of DMRs associated with Gleason score was greatly expanded by stratifying samples
into ERG-positive versus ERG-negative, with ERG-positive/GS-associated DMRs being
primarily hypermethylated as opposed to hypomethylated. Finally, we found that
there was a significant overlap between either Gleason score-related or
ERG-hypermethylated DMRs and distinct regions in benign epithelial cells that
have PcG signatures (H3K27me3, SUZ12) and lack active gene expression signatures 
(H3K4me3, RNA pol II).
CONCLUSIONS: This work defines methylation landscapes of prostate cancer
according to Gleason score, and suggests that initiating genetic events may
influence the prostate cancer epigenome, which is further perturbed as prostate
cancer progresses. Moreover, CpG islands with silent chromatin signatures in
benign cells are particularly susceptible to prostate cancer-related
hypermethylation.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23549870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Apr 26;434(1):15-21. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.074. Epub 2013 Mar 30.

Poly(ADP-ribosylation) regulates chromatin organization through histone H3
modification and DNA methylation of the first cell cycle of mouse embryos.

Osada T(1), Rydén AM, Masutani M.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Medical Science Research Department, Mitsubishi Chemical Medience
Corporation, 14-1 Sunayama, Kamisu-shi, Ibaragi 314-0255, Japan.
osada.tomoharu@mg.medience.co.jp

We examined the roles of poly(ADP-ribosylation) in chromatin remodeling during
the first cell cycle of mouse embryos. Drug-based inhibition of
poly(ADP-ribosylation) by a PARP inhibitor, PJ-34, revealed up-regulation of
dimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 4 in male pronuclei and down-regulation of 
dimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9) and lysine 27 (H3K27). Association
of poly(ADP-ribosylation) with histone modification was suggested to be supported
by the interaction of Suz12, a histone methyltransferase in the polycomb complex,
with Parp1. PARP activity was suggested to be required for a proper localization 
and maintenance of Suz12 on chromosomes. Notably, DNA methylation level of female
pronuclei in one-cell embryos was robustly decreased by PJ-34. Electron
microscopic analysis showed a frequent appearance of unusual electron-dense areas
within the female pronuclei, implying the disorganized and hypercondensed
chromatin ultrastructure. These results show that poly(ADP-ribosylation) is
important for the integrity of non-equivalent epigenetic dynamics of pronuclei
during the first cell cycle of mouse embryos.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23548571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Apr;138(3):741-52. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2498-x. 
Epub 2013 Mar 29.

EZH2 inhibition decreases p38 signaling and suppresses breast cancer motility and
metastasis.

Moore HM(1), Gonzalez ME, Toy KA, Cimino-Mathews A, Argani P, Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

EZH2 is a Polycomb group protein that exerts oncogenic functions in breast
cancer, where its overexpression is associated with metastatic disease. While it 
reportedly acts a transcriptional repressor through trimethylation of histone H3 
at lysine 27, EZH2 may exhibit context-dependent activating functions. Despite
associations with worse outcome and metastasis in breast cancer, a functional
role of EZH2 in breast cancer metastasis in vivo has not been demonstrated.
Furthermore, whether EZH2 regulates cancer cell phenotype and motility are
unknown. In this study, we discovered that knockdown of EZH2 induces a phenotypic
reprogramming from mesenchymal to epithelial, reduces motility, and blocks
invasion in breast cancer cell lines. In vivo, EZH2 downregulation in MDA-MB-231 
cells decreases spontaneous metastasis to the lungs. We uncover an unexpected
role of EZH2 in inducing the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling
pathway, an important regulator of breast cancer invasion and metastasis. In
breast cancer cells, EZH2 binds to phosphorylated p38 (p-p38) in association with
other core members of the Polycomb repressive complex 2, EED, and SUZ12, and EZH2
overexpression leads to increased levels of p-p38 and of activated, downstream
pathway proteins. The effect on p-p38 was confirmed in vivo, where it correlated 
with decreased spontaneous metastasis. In clinical specimens of matched primary
and invasive breast carcinomas, we found that EZH2 expression was upregulated in 
100 % of the metastases, and that EZH2 and p-p38 were coexpressed in 63 % of
cases, consistent with the functional results. Together our findings reveal a new
mechanism by which EZH2 functions in breast cancer, and provide direct evidence
that EZH2 inhibition reduces breast cancer metastasis in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3690767
PMID: 23539298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Viruses. 2013 Mar 18;5(3):858-72. doi: 10.3390/v5030858.

Deregulation of epigenetic mechanisms by the hepatitis B virus X protein in
hepatocarcinogenesis.

Andrisani OM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Science and Center for Cancer Research, Purdue
University West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. andrisao@purdue.edu

This review focuses on the significance of deregulation of epigenetic mechanisms 
by the hepatitis B virus (HBV) X protein in hepatocarcinogenesis and HBV
replication. Epigenetic mechanisms, DNA methylation, and specific histone
modifications, e.g., trimethylation of H3 on lysine-27 or lysine-4, maintain
'cellular memory' by silencing expression of lineage-inducing factors in stem
cells and conversely, of pluripotency factors in differentiated cells. The X
protein has been reported to induce expression of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs),
likely promoting epigenetic changes during hepatocarcinogenesis. Furthermore, in 
cellular and animal models of X-mediated oncogenic transformation, protein levels
of chromatin modifying proteins Suz12 and Znf198 are down-regulated. Suz12 is
essential for the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) mediating the repressive
trimethylation of H3 on lysine-27 (H3K27me3). Znf198, stabilizes the
LSD1-CoREST-HDAC complex that removes, via lysine demethylase1 (LSD1), the
activating trimethylation of H3 on lysine-4 (H3K4me3). Down-regulation of Suz12
also occurs in liver tumors of woodchucks chronically infected by woodchuck
hepatitis virus, an animal model recapitulating HBV-mediated hepatocarcinogenesis
in humans. Significantly, subgroups of HBV-induced liver cancer re-express
hepatoblast and fetal markers, and imprinted genes, suggesting hepatocyte
reprogramming during oncogenic transformation. Lastly, down-regulation of Suz12
and Znf198 enhances HBV replication. Collectively, these observations suggest
deregulation of epigenetic mechanisms by HBV X protein influences both the viral 
cycle and the host cell.

PMCID: PMC3705300
PMID: 23507839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Leukemia. 2013 Jun;27(6):1301-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.80. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Multiple mechanisms deregulate EZH2 and histone H3 lysine 27 epigenetic changes
in myeloid malignancies.

Khan SN(1), Jankowska AM, Mahfouz R, Dunbar AJ, Sugimoto Y, Hosono N, Hu Z,
Cheriyath V, Vatolin S, Przychodzen B, Reu FJ, Saunthararajah Y, O'Keefe C,
Sekeres MA, List AF, Moliterno AR, McDevitt MA, Maciejewski JP, Makishima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Comment in
    Epigenomics. 2013;5(5):481.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is involved in trimethylation of histone H3 
lysine 27 (H3K27), chromatin condensation and transcriptional repression. The
silencing function of PRC2 complex is mostly attributed to its intrinsic activity
for methylating H3K27. Unlike in B-cell lymphomas, enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) mutations in myeloid malignancies are inactivating/hypomorphic. When we
assessed the mutational status in myeloid malignancies (N=469 cases examined), we
found EZH2 and EED/SUZ12 mutations in 8% and 3.3% of cases, respectively. In
addition to mutant cases, reduced EZH2 expression was also found in 78% cases
with hemizygous deletion (-7/del7q cases involving EZH2 locus) and 41% of cases
with diploid chromosome 7, most interestingly cases with spliceosomal mutations
(U2AF1/SRSF2 mutations; 63% of cases). EZH2 mutations were characterized by
decreased H3K27 trimethylation and increased chromatin relaxation at specific
gene loci accompanied by higher transcriptional activity. One of the major
downstream target is HOX gene family, involved in the regulation of stem cell
self-renewal. HOXA9 was found to be overexpressed in cases with decreased EZH2
expression either by EZH2/spliceosomal mutations or because of -7/del7q. In
summary, our results suggest that loss of gene repression through a variety of
mutations resulting in reduced H3K27 trimethylation may contribute to
leukemogenesis.

PMID: 23486531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Oct;31(6):424-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.02.006.
Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Epigenetic regulation of neural stem cell fate during corticogenesis.

MuhChyi C(1), Juliandi B, Matsuda T, Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Biological Sciences, 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Takayama 8916-5, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, 
Japan.

The cerebral cortex comprises over three quarters of the brain, and serves as
structural basis for the sophisticated perceptual and cognitive functions. It
develops from common multipotent neural stem cells (NSCs) that line the neural
tube. Development of the NSCs encompasses sequential phases of progenitor
expansion, neurogenesis, and gliogenesis along with the progression of
developmental stages. Interestingly, NSCs steadfastly march through all of these 
phases and give rise to specific neural cell types in a temporally defined and
highly predictable manner. Herein, we delineate the intrinsic and extrinsic
factors that dictate the progression and tempo of NSC differentiation during
cerebral cortex development, and how epigenetic modifications contribute to the
dynamic properties of NSCs.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23466416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56592. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056592. Epub 2013 Feb 22.

Identification of novel AR-targeted microRNAs mediating androgen signalling
through critical pathways to regulate cell viability in prostate cancer.

Mo W(1), Zhang J, Li X, Meng D, Gao Y, Yang S, Wan X, Zhou C, Guo F, Huang Y,
Amente S, Avvedimento EV, Xie Y, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been recognized as significantly involved in prostate
cancer (PCa). Since androgen receptor (AR) plays a central role in PCa
carcinogenesis and progression, it is imperative to systematically elucidate the 
causal association between AR and miRNAs, focusing on the molecular mechanisms by
which miRNAs mediate AR signalling. In this study, we performed a series of
time-course microarrays to observe the dynamic genome-wide expressions of mRNAs
and miRNAs in parallel in hormone-sensitive prostate cancer LNCaP cells
stimulated by androgen. Accordingly, we introduced Response Score to identify AR 
target miRNAs, as well as Modulation Score to identify miRNA target mRNAs. Based 
on theoretical identification and experimental validation, novel mechanisms
addressing cell viability in PCa were unravelled for 3 miRNAs newly recognized as
AR targets. (1) miR-19a is directly up-regulated by AR, and represses SUZ12,
RAB13, SC4MOL, PSAP and ABCA1, respectively. (2) miR-27a is directly up-regulated
by AR, and represses ABCA1 and PDS5B. (3) miR-133b is directly up-regulated by
AR, and represses CDC2L5, PTPRK, RB1CC1, and CPNE3, respectively. Moreover, we
found miR-133b is essential to PCa cell survival. Our study gives certain clues
on miRNAs mediated AR signalling to cell viability by influencing critical
pathways, especially by breaking through androgen's growth restriction effect on 
normal prostate tissue.

PMCID: PMC3579835
PMID: 23451058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Clin Invest. 2013 Mar;123(3):1241-61. doi: 10.1172/JCI61271. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Cigarette smoke mediates epigenetic repression of miR-487b during pulmonary
carcinogenesis.

Xi S(1), Xu H, Shan J, Tao Y, Hong JA, Inchauste S, Zhang M, Kunst TF, Mercedes
L, Schrump DS.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Section, Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

MicroRNAs are critical mediators of stem cell pluripotency, differentiation, and 
malignancy. Limited information exists regarding microRNA alterations that
facilitate initiation and progression of human lung cancers. In this study, array
techniques were used to evaluate microRNA expression in normal human respiratory 
epithelia and lung cancer cells cultured in the presence or absence of cigarette 
smoke condensate (CSC). Under relevant exposure conditions, CSC significantly
repressed miR-487b. Subsequent experiments demonstrated that miR-487b directly
targeted SUZ12, BMI1, WNT5A, MYC, and KRAS. Repression of miR-487b correlated
with overexpression of these targets in primary lung cancers and coincided with
DNA methylation, de novo nucleosome occupancy, and decreased H2AZ and TCF1 levels
within the miR-487b genomic locus. Deoxy-azacytidine derepressed miR-487b and
attenuated CSC-mediated silencing of miR-487b. Constitutive expression of
miR-487b abrogated Wnt signaling, inhibited in vitro proliferation and invasion
of lung cancer cells mediated by CSC or overexpression of miR-487b targets, and
decreased growth and metastatic potential of lung cancer cells in vivo.
Collectively, these findings indicate that miR-487b is a tumor suppressor
microRNA silenced by epigenetic mechanisms during tobacco-induced pulmonary
carcinogenesis and suggest that DNA demethylating agents may be useful for
activating miR-487b for lung cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3582115
PMID: 23426183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Hematology. 2013 Jul;18(4):217-23. doi: 10.1179/1607845412Y.0000000056. Epub 2013
Jan 25.

The roles of epigenetic modifications of proapoptotic BID and BIM genes in
imatinib-resistant chronic myeloid leukemia cells.

Bozkurt S(1), Özkan T, Özmen F, Baran Y, Sunguroglu A, Kansu E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Oncology, Insitute of Oncology, Hacettepe University,
Ankara, Turkey. subozkurt@yahoo.com

In chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), epigenetic modifications such as promoter
hypermethylation and inactive histone modification are known mechanisms of drug
resistance. In our study, we investigated the roles of promoter hypermethylation 
of BIM and BID genes and H3K27me3 histone modification on imatinib resistance. We
detected higher expression levels of BIM and BID genes and lower expression
levels of EZH2, EED2, SIRT1, and SUZ12 genes in imatinib-resistant K562/IMA-3
cells compared to imatinib-non-resistant K562 cells. While we determined the EZH2
and DNMT enzymes as bounded to the promoter of the BIM gene, we did not detect
hypermethylation of this promoter. We also found the H3K27me3 histone
modification promoter of BIM and BID genes in both cell lines. In conclusion, our
results support the notion that DNA promoter methylation may be formed
independently from EZH2-H3K27me3 and pro-apoptotic BIM and BID genes are not
methyllated in the imatinib resistance of CML cells.

PMID: 23394612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cell. 2013 Jan 31;152(3):570-83. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.01.003. Epub 2013 Jan
24.

Braveheart, a long noncoding RNA required for cardiovascular lineage commitment.

Klattenhoff CA(1), Scheuermann JC, Surface LE, Bradley RK, Fields PA, Steinhauser
ML, Ding H, Butty VL, Torrey L, Haas S, Abo R, Tabebordbar M, Lee RT, Burge CB,
Boyer LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2013 Jun 7;112(12):1532-4.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are often expressed in a development-specific
manner, yet little is known about their roles in lineage commitment. Here, we
identified Braveheart (Bvht), a heart-associated lncRNA in mouse. Using multiple 
embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation strategies, we show that Bvht is
required for progression of nascent mesoderm toward a cardiac fate. We find that 
Bvht is necessary for activation of a core cardiovascular gene network and
functions upstream of mesoderm posterior 1 (MesP1), a master regulator of a
common multipotent cardiovascular progenitor. We also show that Bvht interacts
with SUZ12, a component of polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2), during
cardiomyocyte differentiation, suggesting that Bvht mediates epigenetic
regulation of cardiac commitment. Finally, we demonstrate a role for Bvht in
maintaining cardiac fate in neonatal cardiomyocytes. Together, our work provides 
evidence for a long noncoding RNA with critical roles in the establishment of the
cardiovascular lineage during mammalian development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3563769
PMID: 23352431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Haematologica. 2013 Jun;98(6):908-12. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.076729. Epub
2013 Jan 24.

Mutational analysis of therapy-related myelodysplastic syndromes and acute
myelogenous leukemia.

Shih AH(1), Chung SS, Dolezal EK, Zhang SJ, Abdel-Wahab OI, Park CY, Nimer SD,
Levine RL, Klimek VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Leukemia Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, USA.

Therapy-related myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myelogenous leukemia comprise
a poor-risk subset of myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myelogenous leukemia.
Large-scale mutation profiling efforts in de novo myelodysplastic syndromes have 
identified mutations that correlate with clinical features, but such mutations
have not been investigated in therapy-related myelodysplastic syndromes and acute
myelogenous leukemia. Genomic DNA from 38 patient samples were subjected to high 
throughput polymerase chain reaction and sequenced for TP53, TET2, DNMT3A, ASXL1,
IDH1, IDH2, EZH2, EED, SUZ12, RBBP4, SRSF2, U2AF35, and SF3B1. We identified
somatic mutations in 16 of 38 (42%) patients. TP53 mutations were the most common
lesion, detected in 8 of 38 (21%) patients, followed by TET2 in 4 of 38 (10.5%). 
Cases with a TP53 mutation or loss of the TP53 locus had a worse overall survival
compared to those with wild-type TP53 (8.8 vs. 37.4 months; P=0.0035).

PMCID: PMC3669447
PMID: 23349305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. MBio. 2013 Jan 15;4(1). pii: e00590-12. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00590-12.

Kinetics of facultative heterochromatin and polycomb group protein association
with the herpes simplex viral genome during establishment of latent infection.

Cliffe AR(1), Coen DM, Knipe DM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

The herpes simplex virus (HSV) genome is associated with heterochromatic histone 
modifications, including trimethylation of the lysine 27 residue of histone H3
(H3K27me3), during latent infection of neurons. Here we have examined the
kinetics of general chromatin and H3K27me3 association with the viral genome
during establishment of latent infection. Using both wild-type virus and a mutant
virus that is unable to undergo replication in neurons, we found that histone H3 
associates with viral gene promoters by 7 days postinfection (dpi). Levels of
H3K27me3 were low at 7 dpi but increased dramatically by 14 dpi. Hence, general
chromatin association and/or other factors may play a key role(s) in the initial 
silencing of lytic genes, and H3K27me3 may play a role in further suppression of 
the genome and/or the maintenance of latency. A component of Polycomb repressive 
complex 2 (PRC2), which mediates the addition of K27me3 to histone H3 (Suz12),
was also recruited by 14 dpi. We have shown previously that the levels of
H3K27me3 during latent infection are increased in the presence of the
latency-associated transcript (LAT). However, the initial targeting of PRC2 was
not found to be dependent on the LAT. We found that a component of the PRC1
complex (Bmi1), which binds to H3K27me3, was not enriched at promoters found
previously to be enriched for H3K27me3. Our results are consistent with (i)
chromatinization of viral DNA or other mechanisms causing the initial silencing
of HSV lytic genes and (ii) facultative heterochromatin maintaining that
silencing during latent infection of neurons.IMPORTANCE: The human pathogen
herpes simplex virus (HSV) hides for the lifetime of the host in peripheral
neurons. The mechanism by which HSV is able to shut off its gene expression and
persist in neurons is not known. Here we show that the HSV DNA first associates
with histone H3, with later recruitment of Polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2)
and trimethylation of the lysine 27 residue of histone H3 (H3K27me3), a
modification associated with heterochromatin. This work indicates that the
initial silencing of HSV gene expression is not correlated with enrichment of
H3K27me3 and that PRC2 may be recruited to already-silenced genes to further
silence gene expression and/or maintain gene silencing. We demonstrate that
recruitment of PRC2 is not dependent upon expression of the noncoding HSV
latency-associated transcripts, indicating the presence of unknown triggers for
PRC2 recruitment during the establishment of latent infection.

PMCID: PMC3551550
PMID: 23322639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Reprod Biol. 2012 Dec;12(4):362-7. doi: 10.1016/j.repbio.2012.10.010. Epub 2012
Nov 7.

Identification of optimal housekeeping genes for examination of gene expression
in bovine corpus luteum.

Rekawiecki R(1), Rutkowska J, Kotwica J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of Polish Academy of
Science, Olsztyn, Poland. r.rekawiecki@pan.olsztyn.pl

The selection of proper housekeeping genes for studies requiring genes expression
normalization is an important step in the appropriate interpretation of results. 
The expression of housekeeping genes is regulated by many factors including age, 
gender, type of tissue or disease. The aim of the study was to identify optimal
housekeeping genes in the corpus luteum obtained from cyclic or pregnant cows.
The mRNA expression of thirteen housekeeping genes: C2orf29, SUZ12, TBP, TUBB2B, 
ZNF131, HPRT1, 18s RNA, GAPDH, SF3A1, SDHA, MRPL12, B2M and ACTB was measured by 
Real-time PCR. Range of cycle threshold (C(t)) values of the tested genes varied 
between 12 and 30 cycles, and 18s RNA had the highest coefficient of variation,
whereas C2orf29 had the smallest coefficient. GeNorm software demonstrated
C2orf29 and TBP as the most stable and 18s RNA and B2M as the most unstable
housekeeping genes. Using the proposed cut-off value (0.15), no more than two of 
the best GeNorm housekeeping genes are proposed to be used in studies requiring
gene expression normalization. NormFinder software demonstrated C2orf29 and SUZ12
as the best and 18s RNA and B2M as the worst housekeeping genes. The study
indicates that selection of housekeeping genes may essentially affect the quality
of the gene expression results.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp. z o.o.

PMID: 23229008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 11;430(2):547-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.116. Epub 2012 Dec 7.

Tudor domains of the PRC2 components PHF1 and PHF19 selectively bind to histone
H3K36me3.

Qin S(1), Guo Y, Xu C, Bian C, Fu M, Gong S, Min J.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, 101 College St.,
Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada.

PRC2 is the major H3K27 methyltransferase and is responsible for maintaining
repressed gene expression patterns throughout development. It contains four core 
components: EZH2, EED, SUZ12 and RbAp46/48 and some cell-type specific
components. In this study, we focused on characterizing the histone binding
domains of PHF1 and PHF19, and found that the Tudor domains of PHF1 and PHF19
selectively bind to histone H3K36me3. Structural analysis of these Tudor domains 
also shed light on how these Tudor domains selectively bind to histone H3K36me3. 
The histone H3K36me3 binding by the Tudor domains of PHF1, PHF19 and likely MTF2 
provide another recruitment and regulatory mechanism for the PRC2 complex. In
addition, we found that the first PHD domains of PHF1 and PHF19 do not exhibit
histone H3K4 binding ability, nor do they affect the Tudor domain binding to
histones.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23228662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Apr;37(4):514-21. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318272c612.

Endometrial stromal sarcomas with sex cord differentiation are associated with
PHF1 rearrangement.

D'Angelo E(1), Ali RH, Espinosa I, Lee CH, Huntsman DG, Gilks B, Prat J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Institut of
Biomedical Research (IIB Sant Pau), Autonomous University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.

Endometrial stromal tumors may pose diagnostic challenges particularly when they 
exhibit variant histologic appearances, involve extrauterine sites, or present as
metastatic disease. In such cases, use of immunohistochemical markers and
identification of specific nonrandom chromosomal rearrangements may be helpful.
Over the last decade, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) has been
progressively incorporated as a diagnostic tool for the evaluation of endometrial
stromal tumors. The purpose of this study was to review a series of these tumors 
and compare the results of FISH analysis with the clinicopathologic
characteristics. Three endometrial stromal nodules (ESNs), 13 endometrial stromal
sarcomas (ESSs), and 7 undifferentiated endometrial sarcomas (UESs) were
reviewed. Three metastases from 1 of the ESS cases were also analyzed. Nine of
these tumors (1 ESN, 8 ESSs, and 1 UES) exhibited unusual histologic features,
including smooth muscle (3), sex cord (7), epithelioid (1), fibromyxoid (1), and 
skeletal muscle (2) differentiation. A tissue microarray was prepared, and FISH
analysis was performed using break-apart and fusion probes for JAZF1, SUZ12,
EPC1, and PHF1 genes. FISH was successful in 22 cases, and rearrangements
involving JAZF1, SUZ12, EPC1, and PHF1 genes were detected in 10 of the 22 (45%) 
uterine tumors, including 2 of the 3 ESNs and 8 of 12 ESSs. Genetic
rearrangements were found neither in the 3 metastases of the ESS nor in any of
the UESs. It is noteworthy that a correlation between sex cord differentiation
and PHF1 rearrangement was encountered in ESSs (P=0.008). In our series, all ESSs
showing sex cords had PHF1 genetic rearrangement, suggesting that such
rearrangements may induce sex cord differentiation.

PMID: 23211293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Cell Biochem. 2013 May;114(5):1203-15. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24463.

The histone H3K27 methylation mark regulates intestinal epithelial cell
density-dependent proliferation and the inflammatory response.

Turgeon N(1), Blais M, Delabre JF, Asselin C.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé, Département d'anatomie et
biologie cellulaire, Pavillon de recherche appliquée sur le cancer, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada J1E 4K8.

Polycomb-group proteins form multimeric protein complexes involved in
transcriptional silencing. The Polycomb Repressive complex 2 (PRC2) contains the 
Suppressor of Zeste-12 protein (Suz12) and the histone methyltransferase Enhancer
of Zeste protein-2 (Ezh2). This complex, catalyzing the di- and tri-methylation
of histone H3 lysine 27, is essential for embryonic development and stem cell
renewal. However, the role of Polycomb-group protein complexes in the control of 
the intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) phenotype is not known. We show that Suz12
and Ezh2 were differentially expressed along the intestinal crypt-villus axis.
ShRNA-mediated Suz12 depletion in the IEC-6 rat crypt-derived cell line decreased
Ezh2 expression and H3K27 di-trimethylation. Suz12-depleted cells achieved higher
cell densities after confluence, with increased cyclin D2 and cyclin D3 protein
levels, and increased STAT3 activation in post-confluent cells. Suz12 depletion
specifically increased mostly developmental, cell adhesion and immune response
gene expression, including neuronal and inflammatory genes. Suz12 depletion
directly and indirectly de-regulated the IL-1ß-dependent inflammatory response,
as demonstrated by decreased MAPK p38 activation as opposed to JNK activation,
and altered basal and stimulated expression of inflammatory genes, including
transcription factors such as C/EBPß. Of note, this positive effect on cell
proliferation and inflammatory gene expression was revealed in the absence of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p16, a main target negatively regulated by
PRC2. These results demonstrate that the PRC2 complex, in addition to keeping in 
check non-IEC differentiation pathways, insures the proper IEC response to cell
density as well as to external growth and inflammatory signals, by controlling
specific signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3617464
PMID: 23192652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Acta Neuropathol. 2013 Mar;125(3):385-94. doi: 10.1007/s00401-012-1069-2. Epub
2012 Nov 18.

OTX2 sustains a bivalent-like state of OTX2-bound promoters in medulloblastoma by
maintaining their H3K27me3 levels.

Bunt J(1), Hasselt NA, Zwijnenburg DA, Koster J, Versteeg R, Kool M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogenomics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Recent studies showed frequent mutations in histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27)
demethylases in medulloblastomas of Group 3 and Group 4, suggesting a role for
H3K27 methylation in these tumors. Indeed, trimethylated H3K27 (H3K27me3) levels 
were shown to be higher in Group 3 and 4 tumors compared to WNT and SHH
medulloblastomas, also in tumors without detectable mutations in demethylases.
Here, we report that polycomb genes, required for H3K27 methylation, are
consistently upregulated in Group 3 and 4 tumors. These tumors show high
expression of the homeobox transcription factor OTX2. Silencing of OTX2 in D425
medulloblastoma cells resulted in downregulation of polycomb genes such as EZH2, 
EED, SUZ12 and RBBP4 and upregulation of H3K27 demethylases KDM6A, KDM6B, JARID2 
and KDM7A. This was accompanied by decreased H3K27me3 and increased H3K27me1
levels in promoter regions. Strikingly, the decrease of H3K27me3 was most
prominent in promoters that bind OTX2. OTX2-bound promoters showed high levels of
the H3K4me3 and H3K9ac activation marks and intermediate levels of the H3K27me3
inactivation mark, reminiscent of a bivalent modification. After silencing of
OTX2, H3K27me3 levels strongly dropped, but H3K4me3 and H3K9ac levels remained
high. OTX2-bound bivalent genes showed high expression levels in D425, but the
expression of most of these genes did not change after OTX2 silencing and loss of
the H3K27me3 mark. Maintaining promoters in a bivalent state by sustaining H3K27 
trimethylation therefore seems to be an important function of OTX2 in
medulloblastoma, while other transcription factors might regulate the actual
expression levels of these genes.

PMID: 23179372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Hum Pathol. 2013 May;44(5):837-43. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.08.007. Epub 2012 
Nov 15.

YWHAE-FAM22 endometrial stromal sarcoma: diagnosis by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
tumor.

Isphording A(1), Ali RH, Irving J, Goytain A, Nelnyk N, Hoang LN, Gilks CB,
Huntsman DG, Nielsen TO, Nucci MR, Lee CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, and Genetic Pathology
Evaluation Center, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada V5Z 4E3.

A subset of endometrial stromal sarcoma harbors t(10;17)(q23;p13), which results 
in the genetic fusion between YWHAE and 1 of 2 highly homologous FAM22 family
members-FAM22A or FAM22B. In contrast to classic low-grade endometrial stromal
sarcoma with JAZF1-SUZ12 fusions, YWHAE-FAM22 endometrial stromal sarcoma
displays high-grade histologic features and is associated with more aggressive
disease course. Ancillary fluorescence in situ hybridization assay demonstrating 
the presence of YWHAE rearrangement can be used to support the diagnosis, but the
detection of fusion transcript would be the most definitive test. We describe
here an optimized reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay for
detection of YWHAE-FAM22 fusion transcript in formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded tumor samples. We studied a series of 6 YWHAE-FAM22 endometrial
stromal sarcomas, 7 JAZF-SUZ12 endometrial stromal sarcomas, 3
JAZF1-PHF1/EPC1-PHF1 endometrial stromal sarcomas, 6 undifferentiated endometrial
sarcomas, 4 uterine leiomyosarcomas, and 4 uterine adenosarcomas. All 6
YWHAE-FAM22 endometrial stromal sarcomas were confirmed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization assay, whereas all non-YWHAE-FAM22 tumors were confirmed to lack
YWHAE rearrangement by fluorescence in situ hybridization assay. The reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay optimized for formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded samples detected YWHAE-FAM22 fusion transcripts in all 6
YWHAE-FAM22 endometrial stromal sarcomas and none of the 24 non-YWHAE-FAM22
uterine sarcomas. These findings show that this reverse transcription-polymerase 
chain reaction assay is sensitive and specific for detection of YWHAE-FAM22
fusion transcript and can serve as a useful adjunct diagnostic assay to confirm
the diagnosis of YWHAE-FAM22 endometrial stromal sarcoma in formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded tumor samples.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Blood. 2013 Jan 3;121(1):178-87. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-448860. Epub 2012 Nov
14.

DNA methylation changes are a late event in acute promyelocytic leukemia and
coincide with loss of transcription factor binding.

Schoofs T(1), Rohde C, Hebestreit K, Klein HU, Göllner S, Schulze I, Lerdrup M,
Dietrich N, Agrawal-Singh S, Witten A, Stoll M, Lengfelder E, Hofmann WK,
Schlenke P, Büchner T, Hansen K, Berdel WE, Rosenbauer F, Dugas M, Müller-Tidow
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine A, Hematology, Oncology and Pneumology, University of
Münster, Münster, Germany.

The origin of aberrant DNA methylation in cancer remains largely unknown. In the 
present study, we elucidated the DNA methylome in primary acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) and the role of promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor a
(PML-RARa) in establishing these patterns. Cells from APL patients showed
increased genome-wide DNA methylation with higher variability than healthy
CD34(+) cells, promyelocytes, and remission BM cells. A core set of
differentially methylated regions in APL was identified. Age at diagnosis, Sanz
score, and Flt3-mutation status characterized methylation subtypes. Transcription
factor-binding sites (eg, the c-myc-binding sites) were associated with low
methylation. However, SUZ12- and REST-binding sites identified in embryonic stem 
cells were preferentially DNA hypermethylated in APL cells. Unexpectedly,
PML-RARa-binding sites were also protected from aberrant DNA methylation in APL
cells. Consistent with this, myeloid cells from preleukemic PML-RARa knock-in
mice did not show altered DNA methylation and the expression of PML-RARa in
hematopoietic progenitor cells prevented differentiation without affecting DNA
methylation. Treatment of APL blasts with all-trans retinoic acid also did not
result in immediate DNA methylation changes. The results of the present study
suggest that aberrant DNA methylation is associated with leukemia phenotype but
is not required for PML-RARa-mediated initiation of leukemogenesis.

PMID: 23152544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. BMC Med Genet. 2012 Oct 26;13:98. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-13-98.

Non-coding RNA ANRIL and the number of plexiform neurofibromas in patients with
NF1 microdeletions.

Mußotter T(1), Kluwe L, Högel J, Nguyen R, Cooper DN, Mautner VF, Kehrer-Sawatzki
H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee, Ulm,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Neurofibromatosis type-1 (NF1) is caused by mutations of the NF1 gene
at 17q11.2. In 95% of non-founder NF1 patients, NF1 mutations are identifiable by
means of a comprehensive mutation analysis. 5-10% of these patients harbour
microdeletions encompassing the NF1 gene and its flanking regions. NF1 is
characterised by tumours of the peripheral nerve sheaths, the pathognomonic
neurofibromas. Considerable inter- and intra-familial variation in expressivity
of the disease has been observed which is influenced by genetic modifiers
unrelated to the constitutional NF1 mutation. The number of plexiform
neurofibromas (PNF) in NF1 patients is a highly heritable genetic trait.
Recently, SNP rs2151280 located within the non-coding RNA gene ANRIL at 9p21.3,
was identified as being strongly associated with PNF number in a family-based
association study. The T-allele of rs2151280, which correlates with reduced ANRIL
expression, appears to be associated with higher PNF number. ANRIL directly binds
to the SUZ12 protein, an essential component of polycomb repressive complex 2,
and is required for SUZ12 occupancy of the CDKN2A/CDKN2B tumour suppressor genes 
as well as for their epigenetic silencing.
METHODS: Here, we explored a potential association of PNF number and PNF volume
with SNP rs2151280 in 29 patients with constitutional NF1 microdeletions using
the exact Cochran-Armitage test for trends and the exact Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon
test. Both the PNF number and total tumour volume in these 29 NF1 patients were
assessed by whole-body MRI. The NF1 microdeletions observed in these 29 patients 
encompassed the NF1 gene as well as its flanking regions, including the SUZ12
gene.
RESULTS: In the 29 microdeletion patients investigated, neither the PNF number
nor PNF volume was found to be associated with the T-allele of rs2151280.
CONCLUSION: Our findings imply that, at least in patients with NF1
microdeletions, PNF susceptibility is not associated with rs2151280. Although
somatic inactivation of the NF1 wild-type allele is considered to be the
PNF-initiating event in NF1 patients with intragenic mutations and patients with 
NF1 microdeletions, both patient groups may differ with regard to tumour
progression because of the heterozygous constitutional deletion of SUZ12 present 
only in patients with NF1 microdeletions.

PMCID: PMC3500256
PMID: 23101500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jan 7;41(1):e31. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks968. Epub 2012 Oct
22.

X-inactivation: quantitative predictions of protein interactions in the Xist
network.

Agostini F(1), Cirillo D, Bolognesi B, Tartaglia GG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation, Dr Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

The transcriptional silencing of one of the female X-chromosomes is a finely
regulated process that requires accumulation in cis of the long non-coding RNA
X-inactive-specific transcript (Xist) followed by a series of epigenetic
modifications. Little is known about the molecular machinery regulating
initiation and maintenance of chromosomal silencing. Here, we introduce a new
version of our algorithm catRAPID to investigate Xist associations with a number 
of proteins involved in epigenetic regulation, nuclear scaffolding, transcription
and splicing processes. Our method correctly identifies binding regions and
affinities of protein interactions, providing a powerful theoretical framework
for the study of X-chromosome inactivation and other events mediated by
ribonucleoprotein associations.

PMCID: PMC3592426
PMID: 23093590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Prostate. 2013 Apr;73(5):455-66. doi: 10.1002/pros.22587. Epub 2012 Oct 4.

Developmental and androgenic regulation of chromatin regulators EZH2 and
ANCCA/ATAD2 in the prostate Via MLL histone methylase complex.

Duan Z(1), Zou JX, Yang P, Wang Y, Borowsky AD, Gao AC, Chen HW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center/Basic Sciences, University of California at Davis, Sacramento,
California 95817, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chromatin regulators ANCCA and EZH2 are overexpressed in prostate
cancer and play crucial roles in androgen-stimulated and castration-refractory
prostate tumor growth and survival. However, how their expression is regulated in
the tumors and whether they play a role in prostate development remains unclear.
METHODS: Prostate tissue from different developmental stages of mouse and human
were examined by IHC, qRT-PCR and Western for expression of ANCCA, EZH2, and
Ki-67. Animals were castrated and T-implanted for the expression response in
normal prostate and tumors. siRNA knockdown and ChIP were performed for the
mechanism of ANCCA regulation of EZH2.
RESULTS: In contrast to their very low level expression in adult prostate, ANCCA 
and EZH2 are strongly expressed in the epithelium and mesenchyme of mouse and
human UGS. Their expression becomes more restricted to epithelial cells during
later development and displays a second peak during puberty, which correlates
with the proliferative status of the epithelium. Importantly, their expression in
normal prostate and tumors is strongly suppressed by castration and markedly
induced by testosterone replacement. While androgen suppresses EZH2 in CRPC
cells, in LNCaP cells, physiological concentrations of androgen stimulate
expression of PRC2 genes (EZH2, SUZ12, and EED), which is mediated by
androgen-induced ANCCA and involves E2F and histone H3K4me3 methylase MLL1
complex.
CONCLUSION: EZH2 and ANCCA are androgen regulated and strongly expressed in early
prostate morphogenesis and during puberty, suggesting their important role in
prostate development. Regulation of EZH2 by ANCCA emphasizes bromodomain protein 
ANCCA as a potential therapeutic target against prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23038103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Apr;228(4):764-72. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24224.

Inhibition of PRC2 histone methyltransferase activity increases TRAIL-mediated
apoptosis sensitivity in human colon cancer cells.

Benoit YD(1), Laursen KB, Witherspoon MS, Lipkin SM, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 
10065, USA.

Colorectal cancer is ranked among the top leading causes of cancer death in
industrialized populations. Polycomb group proteins, including Suz12 and Ezh2,
are epigenetic regulatory proteins that act as transcriptional repressors of many
differentiation-associated genes and are overexpressed in a large subset of
colorectal cancers. Retinoic acid (RA) acts as a negative regulator of PcG
actions in stem cells, but has shown limited therapeutic potential in some solid 
tumors, including colorectal cancer, in part because of retinoic acid receptor ß 
silencing. Through treatment with RA, Suz12 shRNA knockdown, or Ezh2
pharmacological inhibition with 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), we increased
TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in human colorectal cancer cell lines. This increased
apoptosis in human colon cancer cells after RA or DZNep treatment was associated 
with a ~2.5-fold increase in TNFRSF10B (DR5) transcript levels and a 42%
reduction in the H3K27me3 epigenetic mark at the TNFRSF10B promoter after DZNep
addition. Taken together, our findings indicate that pharmacological inhibition
of Polycomb repressive complex 2 histone methyltransferase activity may
constitute a new epigenetic therapeutic strategy to overcome RA
non-responsiveness in a subset of colorectal tumors by increasing TRAIL-mediated 
apoptosis sensitivity.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3947628
PMID: 23001792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Oct;36(10):1562-70.

Cyclin D1 as a diagnostic immunomarker for endometrial stromal sarcoma with
YWHAE-FAM22 rearrangement.

Lee CH(1), Ali RH, Rouzbahman M, Marino-Enriquez A, Zhu M, Guo X, Brunner AL,
Chiang S, Leung S, Nelnyk N, Huntsman DG, Blake Gilks C, Nielsen TO, Dal Cin P,
van de Rijn M, Oliva E, Fletcher JA, Nucci MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Vancouver General Hospital,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 May;39(5):722-4.

Endometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS) characterized by YWHAE-FAM22 genetic fusion is 
histologically higher grade and clinically more aggressive than ESS with
JAZF1-SUZ12 or equivalent genetic rearrangements, hence it is clinically
important to recognize this subset of ESS. To identify diagnostic immunomarkers
for this biologically defined ESS subset, we compared gene expression profiles
between YWHAE-FAM22 ESS and JAZF1-rearranged ESS. These studies showed consistent
upregulation of cyclin D1 in YWHAE-FAM22 ESS compared with JAZF1-SUZ12 ESS.
Immunohistochemically, the high-grade round cell component of all 12 YWHAE-FAM22 
ESS demonstrated diffuse (=70%) moderate to strong nuclear cyclin D1 staining,
and this diffuse positivity was not seen in 34 ESSs with JAZF1 and equivalent
genetic rearrangements or in 21 low-grade ESS with no demonstrable genetic
rearrangements. In a series of 243 non-ESS pure uterine mesenchymal and mixed
epithelial-mesenchymal tumors, only 2 of 8 undifferentiated endometrial sarcomas 
with nuclear uniformity and 1 of 80 uterine leiomyosarcomas demonstrate diffuse
cyclin D1 immunoreactivity. Both cyclin D1-positive undifferentiated endometrial 
sarcomas showed diffuse strong CD10 staining, which is consistently absent in the
high-grade round cell component of YWHAE-FAM22 ESS. The low-grade spindle cell
component of YWHAE-FAM22 ESS showed a spatially heterogenous cyclin D1 staining
pattern that was weaker and less diffuse overall. Our findings indicate that
cyclin D1 is a sensitive and specific diagnostic immunomarker for YWHAE-FAM22
ESS. When evaluating high-grade uterine sarcomas, cyclin D1 can be included in
the immunohistochemical panel as an indicator of YWHAE-FAM22 ESS.

PMCID: PMC3444748
PMID: 22982899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Nov;10(11):1462-72. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0335. Epub
2012 Sep 10.

SUZ12 promotes human epithelial ovarian cancer by suppressing apoptosis via
silencing HRK.

Li H(1), Cai Q, Wu H, Vathipadiekal V, Dobbin ZC, Li T, Hua X, Landen CN, Birrer 
MJ, Sánchez-Beato M, Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression and Regulation Program, The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce
Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) ranks first as the cause of death for
gynecological cancers in the United States. SUZ12 is a component of the polycomb 
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and is essential for PRC2-mediated gene silencing by 
generating trimethylation on lysine 27 residue of histone H3 (H3K27Me3). The role
of SUZ12 in EOC has never been investigated. Here, we show that SUZ12 is
expressed at significantly higher levels in human EOC (n = 117) compared with
either normal human ovarian surface epithelium (n = 35, P < 0.001) or fallopian
tube epithelium (n = 15, P < 0.001). There is a positive correlation between
expression of SUZ12 and EZH2 in human EOC (P < 0.001). In addition, expression of
SUZ12 positively correlates with Ki67, a marker of cell proliferation (P <
0.001), and predicts shorter overall survival (P = 0.0078). Notably, knockdown of
SUZ12 suppresses the growth of human EOC cells in vitro and in vivo in both
orthotopic and subcutaneous xenograft EOC models. In addition, SUZ12 knockdown
decreases the levels of H3K27Me3 and triggers apoptosis of human EOC cells.
Mechanistically, we identified Harakiri (HRK), a proapoptotic gene, as a novel
SUZ12 target gene, and showed that HRK upregulation mediates apoptosis induced by
SUZ12 knockdown in human EOC cells. In summary, we show that SUZ12 promotes the
proliferation of human EOC cells by inhibiting apoptosis and HRK is a novel SUZ12
target gene whose upregulation contributes to apoptosis induced by SUZ12
knockdown.

PMCID: PMC3501543
PMID: 22964433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 15;18(22):6227-38. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0873. 
Epub 2012 Aug 29.

Superior efficacy of a combined epigenetic therapy against human mantle cell
lymphoma cells.

Fiskus W(1), Rao R, Balusu R, Ganguly S, Tao J, Sotomayor E, Mudunuru U, Smith
JE, Hembruff SL, Atadja P, Marquez VE, Bhalla K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

PURPOSE: A deregulated epigenome contributes to the transformed phenotype of
mantle cell lymphoma (MCL). This involves activity of the polycomb repressive
complex (PRC) 2, containing three core proteins, EZH2, SUZ12, and EED, in which
the SET domain of EZH2 mediates the histone methyltransferase activity. We
determined the effects of 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), an S-adenosylhomocysteine 
hydrolase inhibitor, and/or pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat (PS)
on cultured and primary MCL cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Following treatment with DZNep and/or PS, apoptosis and the 
levels and activity of EZH2 and PRC2 proteins in cultured and primary MCL cells
were determined.
RESULTS: Treatment with DZNep depleted EZH2, SUZ12, and 3MeK27H3 in the cultured 
human MCL cells. DZNep also increased expression of p21, p27, and FBXO32, whereas
it depleted Cyclin D1 and Cyclin E1 levels in MCL cells. In addition, DZNep
treatment induced cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in cultured and primary MCL
cells. Furthermore, as compared with treatment with each agent alone, cotreatment
with DZNep and PS caused greater depletion of EZH2, SUZ12, 3MeK27H3, and Cyclin
D1 levels, whereas it induced greater expression of FBXO32, p16, p21, and p27.
Combined treatment with DZNep and PS synergistically induced apoptosis of
cultured and primary MCL cells while relatively sparing normal CD34 + cells.
Cotreatment with DZNep and PS also caused significantly greater inhibition of
tumor growth of JeKo-1 xenografts in NOD/SCID mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These preclinical in vitro and in vivo findings show that
cotreatment with DZNep and PS is an active combined epigenetic therapy worthy of 
further in vivo testing against MCL.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4113119
PMID: 22932665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Lung Cancer. 2012 Nov;78(2):138-43. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.08.003. Epub 2012
Aug 25.

Epigenetic therapy with 3-deazaneplanocin A, an inhibitor of the histone
methyltransferase EZH2, inhibits growth of non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Kikuchi J(1), Takashina T, Kinoshita I, Kikuchi E, Shimizu Y, Sakakibara-Konishi 
J, Oizumi S, Marquez VE, Nishimura M, Dosaka-Akita H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2) is the catalytic subunit of PRC2 (polycomb
repressive complex 2), which mediates histone methyltransferase activity and
functions as transcriptional repressor involved in gene silencing. EZH2 is
involved in malignant transformation and biological aggressiveness of several
human malignancies. We previously demonstrated that non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLCs) also overexpress EZH2 and that high expression of EZH2 correlates with
poor prognosis. Growing evidence indicates that EZH2 may be an appropriate
therapeutic target in malignancies, including NSCLCs. Recently, an
S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine hydrolase inhibitor, 3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), has
been shown to deplete and inhibit EZH2. The aim of this study was to determine
the effect of DZNep in NSCLC cells. Knockdown of EZH2 by small-interfering RNA
(siRNA) resulted in decreased growth of four NSCLC cell lines. MTT assays
demonstrated that DZNep treatment resulted in dose-dependent inhibition of
proliferation in the NSCLC cell lines with a half maximal inhibitory
concentration (IC50) ranging from 0.08 to 0.24 µM. Immortalized but non-cancerous
bronchial epithelial and fibroblast cell lines were less sensitive to DZNep than 
the NSCLC cell lines. Soft agarose assays demonstrated that anchorage-independent
growth was also reduced in all three NSCLC cell lines that were evaluated using
this assay. Flow cytometry analysis demonstrated that DZNep induced apoptosis and
G1 cell cycle arrest in NSCLC cells, which was partially associated with cyclin A
decrease and p27(Kip1) accumulation. DZNep depleted cellular levels of EZH2 and
inhibited the associated histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation. These results
indicated that an epigenetic therapy that pharmacologically targets EZH2 via
DZNep may constitute a novel approach to treatment of NSCLCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3472089
PMID: 22925699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Science. 2012 Aug 24;337(6097):971-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1225237.

Dense chromatin activates Polycomb repressive complex 2 to regulate H3 lysine 27 
methylation.

Yuan W(1), Wu T, Fu H, Dai C, Wu H, Liu N, Li X, Xu M, Zhang Z, Niu T, Han Z,
Chai J, Zhou XJ, Gao S, Zhu B.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100094,
China.

Comment in
    Science. 2012 Aug 24;337(6097):919-20.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2)-mediated histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27)
methylation is vital for Polycomb gene silencing, a classic epigenetic phenomenon
that maintains transcriptional silencing throughout cell divisions. We report
that PRC2 activity is regulated by the density of its substrate nucleosome
arrays. Neighboring nucleosomes activate the PRC2 complex with a fragment of
their H3 histones (Ala(31) to Arg(42)). We also identified mutations on PRC2
subunit Su(z)12, which impair its binding and response to the activating peptide 
and its ability in establishing H3K27 trimethylation levels in vivo. In mouse
embryonic stem cells, local chromatin compaction occurs before the formation of
trimethylated H3K27 upon transcription cessation of the retinoic acid-regulated
gene CYP26a1. We propose that PRC2 can sense the chromatin environment to exert
its role in the maintenance of transcriptional states.

PMID: 22923582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 4;109(36):14470-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1212811109. Epub 2012 Aug 20.

An integrated transcriptional regulatory circuit that reinforces the breast
cancer stem cell state.

Polytarchou C(1), Iliopoulos D, Struhl K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) are a highly tumorigenic cell type present as a
minority population in developmentally diverse tumors and cell lines. Using a
genetic screen in an inducible model of CSC formation in a breast cell line, we
identify microRNAs (miRNAs) that inhibit CSC growth and are down-regulated in
CSCs. Aside from the previously identified miR-200 family, these include the
miR-15/16 (miR-16, miR-15b) and miR-103/107 (miR-103, miR-107) families as well
as miR-145, miR-335, and miR-128b. Interestingly, these miRNAs affect common
target genes that encode the Bmi1 and Suz12 components of the polycomb repressor 
complexes as well as the DNA-binding transcription factors Zeb1, Zeb2, and Klf4. 
Conversely, expression of the CSC-modulating miRNAs is inhibited by Zeb1 and
Zeb2. There is an inverse relationship between the levels of CSC-regulating
miRNAs and their respective targets in samples from triple-negative breast cancer
patients, providing evidence for the relevance of these interactions in human
cancer. In addition, combinatorial overexpression of these miRNAs progressively
attenuates the growth of CSCs derived from triple-negative breast cancers. These 
observations suggest that CSC formation and function are reinforced by an
integrated regulatory circuit of miRNAs, transcription factors, and
chromatin-modifying activities that can act as a bistable switch to drive cells
into either the CSC or the nonstem state within the population of cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3437881
PMID: 22908280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Anim Reprod Sci. 2012 Aug;133(3-4):198-204. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.07.006. Epub 2012 Jul 25.

The polycomb group protein EED varies in its ability to access the nucleus in
porcine oocytes and cleavage stage embryos.

Foust KB(1), Li Y, Park K, Wang X, Liu S, Cabot RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907,
United States.

Chromatin-modifying complexes serve essential functions during mammalian
embryonic development. Polycomb group proteins EED, SUZ12, and EZH2 have been
shown to mediate methylation of the lysine 27 residue of histone protein H3
(H3K27), an epigenetic mark that is linked with transcriptional repression. H3K27
trimethylation has been shown to be present on chromatin in mature porcine
oocytes, pronuclear and 2-cell stage embryos, with H3K27 trimethylation
decreasing at the 4-cell stage and not detectable in blastocyst stage embryos.
The goals of this study were to determine the intracellular localization of the
polycomb group protein EED in porcine oocytes and cleavage stage porcine embryos 
produced by in vitro fertilization and to determine the binding abilities of
karyopherin a subtypes toward EED. Our results revealed that EED had a strong
nuclear localization in 4-cell and blastocyst stage embryos and a strong
perinuclear staining in GV-stage oocytes; EED was not detectable in the nuclei of
pronuclear or 2-cell stage embryos. An in vitro binding assay was performed to
assess the ability of EED to interact with a series of karyopherin a subtypes;
results from this experiment revealed that EED can interact with several
karyopherin a subtypes, but with varying degrees of affinity. Together these data
indicate that EED displays a dynamic change in intracellular localization in
progression from immature oocyte to cleavage stage embryo and that EED possess
differing in vitro binding affinities toward individual karyopherin a subtypes,
which may in part regulate the nuclear access of EED during this window of
development.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22871331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 14;287(38):31920-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.360362. Epub 2012
Jul 28.

Polycomb (PcG) proteins, BMI1 and SUZ12, regulate arsenic-induced cell
transformation.

Kim HG(1), Kim DJ, Li S, Lee KY, Li X, Bode AM, Dong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota 55912, USA.

Inorganic arsenic is a well-documented human carcinogen associated with cancers
of the skin, lung, liver, and bladder. However, the underlying mechanisms
explaining the tumorigenic role of arsenic are not well understood. The present
study explored a potential mechanism of cell transformation induced by arsenic
exposure. Exposure to a low dose (0.5 µm) of arsenic trioxide (As(2)O(3)) caused 
transformation of BALB/c 3T3 cells. In addition, in a xenograft mouse model,
tumor growth of the arsenic-induced transformed cells was dramatically increased.
In arsenic-induced transformed cells, polycomb group (PcG) proteins, including
BMI1 and SUZ12, were activated resulting in enhanced histone H3K27
tri-methylation levels. On the other hand, tumor suppressor p16(INK4a) and
p19(ARF) mRNA and protein expression were dramatically suppressed. Introduction
of small hairpin (sh) RNA-BMI1 or -SUZ12 into BALB/c 3T3 cells resulted in
suppression of arsenic-induced transformation. Histone H3K27 tri-methylation
returned to normal in BMI1- or SUZ12-knockdown BALB/c 3T3 cells compared with
BMI1- or SUZ12-wildtype cells after arsenic exposure. As a consequence, the
expression of p16(INK4a) and p19(ARF) was recovered in arsenic-treated BMI1- or
SUZ12-knockdown cells. Thus, arsenic-induced cell transformation was blocked by
inhibition of PcG function. Taken together, these results strongly suggest that
the polycomb proteins, BMI1 and SUZ12 are required for cell transformation
induced by organic arsenic exposure.

PMCID: PMC3442524
PMID: 22843710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Hum Mutat. 2012 Nov;33(11):1599-609. doi: 10.1002/humu.22171. Epub 2012 Aug 20.

Identification of recurrent type-2 NF1 microdeletions reveals a mitotic
nonallelic homologous recombination hotspot underlying a human genomic disorder.

Vogt J(1), Mussotter T, Bengesser K, Claes K, Högel J, Chuzhanova N, Fu C, van
den Ende J, Mautner VF, Cooper DN, Messiaen L, Kehrer-Sawatzki H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR) is one of the major mechanisms
underlying copy number variation in the human genome. Although several
disease-associated meiotic NAHR breakpoints have been analyzed in great detail,
hotspots for mitotic NAHR are not well characterized. Type-2 NF1 microdeletions, 
which are predominantly of postzygotic origin, constitute a highly informative
model with which to investigate the features of mitotic NAHR. Here, a
custom-designed MLPA- and PCR-based approach was used to identify 23 novel
NAHR-mediated type-2 NF1 deletions. Breakpoint analysis of these 23 type-2
deletions, together with 17 NAHR-mediated type-2 deletions identified previously,
revealed that the breakpoints are nonuniformly distributed within the paralogous 
SUZ12 and SUZ12P sequences. Further, the analysis of this large group of type-2
deletions revealed breakpoint recurrence within short segments (ranging in size
from 57 to 253-bp) as well as the existence of a novel NAHR hotspot of 1.9-kb
(termed PRS4). This hotspot harbored 20% (8/40) of the type-2 deletion
breakpoints and contains the 253-bp recurrent breakpoint region BR6 in which four
independent type-2 deletion breakpoints were identified. Our findings indicate
that a combination of an open chromatin conformation and short non-B DNA-forming 
repeats may predispose to recurrent mitotic NAHR events between SUZ12 and its
pseudogene.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22837079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Blood Cancer J. 2011 Aug;1(8):e33. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2011.31. Epub 2011 Aug 26.

Mutations and deletions of the SUZ12 polycomb gene in myeloproliferative
neoplasms.

Brecqueville M, Cervera N, Adélaïde J, Rey J, Carbuccia N, Chaffanet M,
Mozziconacci MJ, Vey N, Birnbaum D, Gelsi-Boyer V, Murati A.

PMCID: PMC3255245
PMID: 22829192  [PubMed]


187. Blood Cancer J. 2011 Nov;1(11):e40. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2011.39. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

Analysis of genomic aberrations and gene expression profiling identifies novel
lesions and pathways in myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Rice KL, Lin X, Wolniak K, Ebert BL, Berkofsky-Fessler W, Buzzai M, Sun Y, Xi C, 
Elkin P, Levine R, Golub T, Gilliland DG, Crispino JD, Licht JD, Zhang W.

Polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia and primary myelofibrosis, are 
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) with distinct clinical features and are
associated with the JAK2V617F mutation. To identify genomic anomalies involved in
the pathogenesis of these disorders, we profiled 87 MPN patients using Affymetrix
250K single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays. Aberrations affecting chr9 were
the most frequently observed and included 9pLOH (n=16), trisomy 9 (n=6) and
amplifications of 9p13.3-23.3 (n=1), 9q33.1-34.13 (n=1) and 9q34.13 (n=6).
Patients with trisomy 9 were associated with elevated JAK2V617F mutant allele
burden, suggesting that gain of chr9 represents an alternative mechanism for
increasing JAK2V617F dosage. Gene expression profiling of patients with and
without chr9 abnormalities (+9, 9pLOH), identified genes potentially involved in 
disease pathogenesis including JAK2, STAT5B and MAPK14. We also observed
recurrent gains of 1p36.31-36.33 (n=6), 17q21.2-q21.31 (n=5) and 17q25.1-25.3
(n=5) and deletions affecting 18p11.31-11.32 (n=8). Combined SNP and gene
expression analysis identified aberrations affecting components of a
non-canonical PRC2 complex (EZH1, SUZ12 and JARID2) and genes comprising a 'HSC
signature' (MLLT3, SMARCA2 and PBX1). We show that NFIB, which is amplified in
7/87 MPN patients and upregulated in PV CD34+ cells, protects cells from
apoptosis induced by cytokine withdrawal.

PMCID: PMC3256752
PMID: 22829077  [PubMed]


188. BMC Cancer. 2012 Jul 23;12:304. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-304.

Myeloid malignancies: mutations, models and management.

Murati A(1), Brecqueville M, Devillier R, Mozziconacci MJ, Gelsi-Boyer V,
Birnbaum D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Laboratoire d'Oncologie
Moléculaire; UMR1068 Inserm, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, 27 Bd, Leï Roure, BP
30059, Marseille, 13273, France.

Myeloid malignant diseases comprise chronic (including myelodysplastic syndromes,
myeloproliferative neoplasms and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia) and acute
(acute myeloid leukemia) stages. They are clonal diseases arising in
hematopoietic stem or progenitor cells. Mutations responsible for these diseases 
occur in several genes whose encoded proteins belong principally to five classes:
signaling pathways proteins (e.g. CBL, FLT3, JAK2, RAS), transcription factors
(e.g. CEBPA, ETV6, RUNX1), epigenetic regulators (e.g. ASXL1, DNMT3A, EZH2, IDH1,
IDH2, SUZ12, TET2, UTX), tumor suppressors (e.g. TP53), and components of the
spliceosome (e.g. SF3B1, SRSF2). Large-scale sequencing efforts will soon lead to
the establishment of a comprehensive repertoire of these mutations, allowing for 
a better definition and classification of myeloid malignancies, the
identification of new prognostic markers and therapeutic targets, and the
development of novel therapies. Given the importance of epigenetic deregulation
in myeloid diseases, the use of drugs targeting epigenetic regulators appears as 
a most promising therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC3418560
PMID: 22823977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Epigenetics. 2012 Aug;7(8):914-29. doi: 10.4161/epi.21113. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Hepatic ontogeny and tissue distribution of mRNAs of epigenetic modifiers in mice
using RNA-sequencing.

Lu H(1), Cui JY, Gunewardena S, Yoo B, Zhong XB, Klaassen CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY,
USA. luh@upstate.edu

Developmental regulation of gene expression is controlled by distinct epigenetic 
signatures catalyzed by various epigenetic modifiers. Little is known about the
ontogeny and tissue distribution of these epigenetic modifiers. In the present
study, we used a novel approach of RNA-sequencing to elucidate hepatic ontogeny
and tissue distribution of mRNA expression of 142 epigenetic modifiers, including
enzymes involved in DNA methylation/demethylation, histone
acetylation/deacetylation, histone methylation/demethylation, histone
phosphorylation and chromosome remodeling factors in male C57BL/6 mice. Livers
from male C57BL/6 mice were collected at 12 ages from prenatal to adulthood. Many
of these epigenetic modifiers were expressed at much higher levels in perinatal
livers than adult livers, such as Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b, Apobec3, Kat1, Ncoa4,
Setd8, Ash2l, Dot1l, Cbx1, Cbx3, Cbx5, Cbx6, Ezh2, Suz12, Eed, Suv39h1, Suv420h2,
Dek, Hdac1, Hdac2, Hdac7, Kdm2b, Kdm5c, Kdm7, Prmt1-5, Prmt7, Smarca4, Smarcb1,
Chd4 and Ino80e. In contrast, hepatic mRNA expression of a few epigenetic
modifiers increased during postnatal liver development, such as Smarca2, Kdm1b,
Cbx7 and Chd3. In adult mice (60 d of age), most epigenetic modifiers were
expressed at moderately (1-3-fold) higher levels in kidney and/or small intestine
than liver. In conclusion, this study, for the first time, unveils developmental 
changes in mRNA abundance of all major known epigenetic modifiers in mouse liver.
These data suggest that ontogenic changes in mRNA expression of epigenetic
modifiers may play important roles in determining the addition and/or removal of 
corresponding epigenetic signatures during liver development.

PMCID: PMC3427287
PMID: 22772165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Immunol. 2012 Aug 1;189(3):1182-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102996. Epub 2012
Jul 2.

Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells induce the generation of novel IL-10-dependent
regulatory dendritic cells by SOCS3 activation.

Liu X(1), Qu X, Chen Y, Liao L, Cheng K, Shao C, Zenke M, Keating A, Zhao RC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine, Center of
Excellence in Tissue Engineering, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, People's Republic of China.

Suppression of immune response by mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) is well
documented. However, their regulatory effects on immune cells, especially
regulatory dendritic cells, are not fully understood. We have identified a novel 
Sca-1(+)Lin(-)CD117(-) MSC population isolated from mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEF) that suppressed lymphocyte proliferation in vitro. Moreover, the
Sca-1(+)Lin(-)CD117(-) MEF-MSCs induced hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells to
differentiate into novel regulatory dendritic cells (DCs) (Sca-1(+)Lin(-)CD117(-)
MEF-MSC-induced DCs) when cocultured in the absence of exogenous cytokines. Small
interfering RNA silencing showed that Sca-1(+)Lin(-)CD117(-) MEF-MSCs induced the
generation of Sca-1(+)Lin(-)CD117(-) MEF-MSC-induced DCs via IL-10-activated
SOCS3, whose expression was regulated by the JAK-STAT pathway. We observed a high
degree of H3K4me3 modification mediated by MLL1 and a relatively low degree of
H3K27me3 modification regulated by SUZ12 on the promoter of SOCS3 during SOCS3
activation. Importantly, infusion of Sca-1(+)CD117(-)Lin(-) MEF-MSCs suppressed
the inflammatory response by increasing DCs with a regulatory phenotype. Thus,
our results shed new light on the role of MSCs in modulating regulatory DC
production and support the clinical application of MSCs to reduce the
inflammatory response in numerous disease states.

PMID: 22753940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep 1;40(17):8199-209. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

Global identification of transcriptional regulators of pluripotency and
differentiation in embryonic stem cells.

Won KJ(1), Xu Z, Zhang X, Whitaker JW, Shoemaker R, Ren B, Xu Y, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Civic Center 
Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) hold great promise for regenerative medicine
because they can undergo unlimited self-renewal and retain the capability to
differentiate into all cell types in the body. Although numerous genes/proteins
such as Oct4 and Gata6 have been identified to play critical regulatory roles in 
self-renewal and differentiation of hESC, the majority of the regulators in these
cellular processes and more importantly how these regulators co-operate with each
other and/or with epigenetic modifications are still largely unknown. We propose 
here a systematic approach to integrate genomic and epigenomic data for
identification of direct regulatory interactions. This approach allows
reconstruction of cell-type-specific transcription networks in embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) and fibroblasts at an unprecedented scale. Many links in the
reconstructed networks coincide with known regulatory interactions or literature 
evidence. Systems-level analyses of these networks not only uncover novel
regulators for pluripotency and differentiation, but also reveal extensive
interplays between transcription factor binding and epigenetic modifications.
Especially, we observed poised enhancers characterized by both active (H3K4me1)
and repressive (H3K27me3) histone marks that contain enriched Oct4- and
Suz12-binding sites. The success of such a systems biology approach is further
supported by experimental validation of the predicted interactions.

PMCID: PMC3458541
PMID: 22730289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Biochem. 2012 Sep;152(3):241-9. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvs065. Epub 2012 Jun 4.

Mediator CDK subunits are platforms for interactions with various chromatin
regulatory complexes.

Fukasawa R(1), Tsutsui T, Hirose Y, Tanaka A, Ohkuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan.

The Mediator complex consists of more than 20 subunits. This is composed of four 
modules: head, middle, tail and CDK/Cyclin. Importantly, Mediator complex is
known to play pivotal roles in transcriptional regulation, but its molecular
mechanisms are still elusive. Many studies, including our own, have revealed that
CDK8, a kinase subunit of the CDK/Cyclin module, is one of the key subunits
involved in these roles. Additionally, we previously demonstrated that a novel
CDK component, CDK19, played similar roles. It is assumed that various factors
that directly affect transcriptional regulation target these two CDKs; thus, we
conducted yeast two-hybrid screenings to isolate the CDK19-interacting proteins. 
From a screening of 40 million colonies, we obtained 287 clones that provided
positive results encoded mRNAs, and it turned out that 59 clones of them encoded 
nuclear proteins. We checked the reading frames of the candidate clones and
obtained three positive clones, all of which encoded the transcriptional
cofactors, Brahma-related gene 1, B-cell CLL/lymphoma 6 and suppressor of zeste
12 homolog. Intriguingly, these three cofactors are also related to chromatin
regulation. Further studies demonstrated that those could bind not only to CDK19 
but also to CDK8. These results help elucidate the functional mechanism for the
mutual regulations between transcription and chromatin.

PMID: 22668559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36365. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036365. Epub 2012 May 3.

A novel human polycomb binding site acts as a functional polycomb response
element in Drosophila.

Cuddapah S(1), Roh TY, Cui K, Jose CC, Fuller MT, Zhao K, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 
New York, New York, USA. Suresh.Cuddapah@nyumc.org

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are key chromatin regulators implicated in multiple
processes including embryonic development, tissue homeostasis, genomic
imprinting, X-chromosome inactivation, and germ cell differentiation. The PcG
proteins recognize target genomic loci through cis DNA sequences known as
Polycomb Response Elements (PREs), which are well characterized in Drosophila.
However, mammalian PREs have been elusive until two groups reported putative
mammalian PREs recently. Consistent with the existence of mammalian PREs, here we
report the identification and characterization of a potential PRE from human T
cells. The putative human PRE has enriched binding of PcG proteins, and such
binding is dependent on a key PcG component SUZ12. We demonstrate that the
putative human PRE carries both genetic and molecular features of Drosophila PRE 
in transgenic flies, implying that not only the trans PcG proteins but also
certain features of the cis PREs are conserved between mammals and Drosophila.

PMCID: PMC3343078
PMID: 22570707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Cancer Res. 2012 Jun 15;72(12):3091-104. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3546. Epub
2012 Apr 13.

Polycomb protein EZH2 regulates tumor invasion via the transcriptional repression
of the metastasis suppressor RKIP in breast and prostate cancer.

Ren G(1), Baritaki S, Marathe H, Feng J, Park S, Beach S, Bazeley PS, Beshir AB, 
Fenteany G, Mehra R, Daignault S, Al-Mulla F, Keller E, Bonavida B, de la Serna
I, Yeung KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cancer Biology, College of Medicine, Health
Science Campus, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio, USA.

Epigenetic modifications such as histone methylation play an important role in
human cancer metastasis. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), which encodes the
histone methyltransferase component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), 
is overexpressed widely in breast and prostate cancers and epigenetically
silences tumor suppressor genes. Expression levels of the novel tumor and
metastasis suppressor Raf-1 kinase inhibitor protein (RKIP) have been shown to
correlate negatively with those of EZH2 in breast and prostate cell lines as well
as in clinical cancer tissues. Here, we show that the RKIP/EZH2 ratio
significantly decreases with the severity of disease and is negatively associated
with relapse-free survival in breast cancer. Using a combination of loss- and
gain-of-function approaches, we found that EZH2 negatively regulated RKIP
transcription through repression-associated histone modifications. Direct
recruitment of EZH2 and suppressor of zeste 12 (Suz12) to the proximal E-boxes of
the RKIP promoter was accompanied by H3-K27-me3 and H3-K9-me3 modifications. The 
repressing activity of EZH2 on RKIP expression was dependent on histone
deacetylase promoter recruitment and was negatively regulated upstream by
miR-101. Together, our findings indicate that EZH2 accelerates cancer cell
invasion, in part, via RKIP inhibition. These data also implicate EZH2 in the
regulation of RKIP transcription, suggesting a potential mechanism by which EZH2 
promotes tumor progression and metastasis.

PMID: 22505648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Hepatology. 2012 Oct;56(4):1240-51. doi: 10.1002/hep.25781.

Subset of Suz12/PRC2 target genes is activated during hepatitis B virus
replication and liver carcinogenesis associated with HBV X protein.

Studach LL(1), Menne S, Cairo S, Buendia MA, Hullinger RL, Lefrançois L, Merle P,
Andrisani OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences and Purdue University Center for Cancer
Research, West Lafayette, IN 47907-2026, USA.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major risk factor for developing
liver cancer, and the HBV X protein (pX) has been implicated as a cofactor in
hepatocyte transformation. We have shown that HBV replication as well as in vitro
transformation by pX are associated with induction of the mitotic polo-like
kinase 1 (Plk1) and down-regulation of the chromatin remodeling components Suz12 
and Znf198. Herein, we demonstrate the same inverse relationship between Plk1 and
Suz12/Znf198 in liver tumors from X/c-myc bitransgenic mice and woodchuck
hepatitis virus (WHV)-infected woodchucks. Employing these animal models and the 
HBV replicating HepAD38 cells we examined the effect of Suz12/Znf198
down-regulation on gene expression. Genes analyzed include hepatic cancer stem
cell markers BAMBI, DKK1,2, DLK1, EpCAM, MYC, and proliferation genes CCNA1,
CCND2, IGFII, MCM4-6, PLK1, RPA2, and TYMS. Suz12 occupancy at the promoters of
BAMBI, CCND2, DKK2, DLK1, EpCAM, and IGFII was demonstrated by chromatin
immunoprecipitation in untransformed hepatocytes, but was markedly reduced in
pX-transformed and Suz12 knockdown cells. Accordingly, we refer to these genes as
"Suz12 repressed" genes in untransformed hepatocytes. The Suz12 repressed genes
and proliferation genes were induced in HBV-replicating HepAD38 cells and,
interestingly, they exhibited distinct expression profiles during hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC) progression in X/c-myc bitransgenics. Specifically, CCND2, EpCAM,
and IGFII expression was elevated at the proliferative and preneoplastic stages
in X/c-myc bitransgenic livers, whereas BAMBI and PLK1 were overexpressed in
hepatic tumors from X/c-myc bitransgenics and WHV-infected woodchucks.
Importantly, most of these genes were selectively up-regulated in HBV-induced
HCCs.CONCLUSION: The distinct expression profile of the identified Suz12
repressed genes in combination with the proliferation genes hold promise as
biomarkers for progression of chronic HBV infection to HCC.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3417088
PMID: 22505317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34848. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034848. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

PRC1 and PRC2 are not required for targeting of H2A.Z to developmental genes in
embryonic stem cells.

Illingworth RS(1), Botting CH, Grimes GR, Bickmore WA, Eskeland R.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine at
the University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

The essential histone variant H2A.Z localises to both active and silent chromatin
sites. In embryonic stem cells (ESCs), H2A.Z is also reported to co-localise with
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) at developmentally silenced genes. The
mechanism of H2A.Z targeting is not clear, but a role for the PRC2 component
Suz12 has been suggested. Given this association, we wished to determine if
polycomb functionally directs H2A.Z incorporation in ESCs. We demonstrate that
the PRC1 component Ring1B interacts with multiple complexes in ESCs. Moreover, we
show that although the genomic distribution of H2A.Z co-localises with PRC2,
Ring1B and with the presence of CpG islands, H2A.Z still blankets polycomb target
loci in the absence of Suz12, Eed (PRC2) or Ring1B (PRC1). Therefore we conclude 
that H2A.Z accumulates at developmentally silenced genes in ESCs in a polycomb
independent manner.

PMCID: PMC3322156
PMID: 22496869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Aug;51(8):743-55. doi: 10.1002/gcc.21960. Epub
2012 Apr 9.

Mutation analysis of ASXL1, CBL, DNMT3A, IDH1, IDH2, JAK2, MPL, NF1, SF3B1,
SUZ12, and TET2 in myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Brecqueville M(1), Rey J, Bertucci F, Coppin E, Finetti P, Carbuccia N, Cervera
N, Gelsi-Boyer V, Arnoulet C, Gisserot O, Verrot D, Slama B, Vey N, Mozziconacci 
MJ, Birnbaum D, Murati A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Moléculaire, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de
Marseille, UMR1068 Inserm, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

Since the discovery of the JAK2V617F tyrosine kinase-activating mutation several 
genes have been found mutated in nonchronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), which mainly comprise three subtypes of
"classic" MPNs; polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia (ET), and
myelofibrosis (MF). We searched for mutations in ASXL1, CBL, DNMT3A, IDH1, IDH2, 
JAK2, MPL, NF1, SF3B1, SUZ12, and TET2 genes in 149 non-CML MPNs, including 127
"classic" MPNs cases. JAK2 was mutated in 100% PV, 66% ET and 68% MF. We found a 
high incidence of ASXL1 mutation in MF patients (20%) and a low incidence in PV
(7%) and ET (4%) patients. Mutations in the other genes were rare (CBL, DNMT3A,
IDH2, MPL, SF3B1, SUZ12, NF1) or absent (IDH1).

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22489043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Oncogene. 2013 Feb 14;32(7):930-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.110. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

The Polycomb complex PRC2 supports aberrant self-renewal in a mouse model of
MLL-AF9;Nras(G12D) acute myeloid leukemia.

Shi J(1), Wang E, Zuber J, Rappaport A, Taylor M, Johns C, Lowe SW, Vakoc CR.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.

The Trithorax and Polycomb groups of chromatin regulators are critical for
cell-lineage specification during normal development; functions that often become
deregulated during tumorigenesis. As an example, oncogenic fusions of the
Trithorax-related protein mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) can initiate aggressive
leukemias by altering the transcriptional circuitry governing hematopoietic cell 
differentiation, a process that requires multiple epigenetic pathways to
implement. Here we used shRNA screening to identify chromatin regulators uniquely
required in a mouse model of MLL-fusion acute myeloid leukemia, which revealed a 
role for the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) in maintenance of this disease.
shRNA-mediated suppression of PRC2 subunits Eed, Suz12 or Ezh1/Ezh2 led to
proliferation arrest and differentiation of leukemia cells, with a minimal impact
on growth of several non-transformed hematopoietic cell lines. The requirement
for PRC2 in leukemia is partly because of its role in direct transcriptional
repression of genes that limit the self-renewal potential of hematopoietic cells,
including Cdkn2a. In addition to implicating a role for PRC2 in the pathogenesis 
of MLL-fusion leukemia, our results suggest, more generally, that Trithorax and
Polycomb group proteins can cooperate with one another to maintain aberrant
lineage programs in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4102143
PMID: 22469984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Cell Sci. 2012 Jul 15;125(Pt 14):3454-63. doi: 10.1242/jcs.102061. Epub 2012
Mar 30.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 impedes intestinal cell terminal differentiation.

Benoit YD(1), Lepage MB, Khalfaoui T, Tremblay E, Basora N, Carrier JC, Gudas LJ,
Beaulieu JF.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Team on the Digestive Epithelium, Département d'Anatomie et Biologie
Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.

The crypt-villus axis constitutes the functional unit of the small intestine,
where mature absorptive cells are confined to the villi, and stem cells and
transit amplifying and differentiating cells are restricted to the crypts. The
polycomb group (PcG) proteins repress differentiation and promote self-renewal in
embryonic stem cells. PcGs prevent transcriptional activity by catalysing
epigenetic modifications, such as the covalent addition of methyl groups on
histone tails, through the action of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2).
Although a role for PcGs in the preservation of stemness characteristics is now
well established, recent evidence suggests that they may also be involved in the 
regulation of differentiation. Using intestinal epithelial cell models that
recapitulate the enterocytic differentiation programme, we generated a
RNAi-mediated stable knockdown of SUZ12, which constitutes a cornerstone for PRC2
assembly and functionality, in order to analyse intestinal cell proliferation and
differentiation. Expression of SUZ12 was also investigated in human intestinal
tissues, revealing the presence of SUZ12 in most proliferative epithelial cells
of the crypt and an increase in its expression in colorectal cancers. Moreover,
PRC2 disruption led to a significant precocious expression of a number of
terminal differentiation markers in intestinal cell models. Taken together, our
data identified a mechanism whereby PcG proteins participate in the repression of
the enterocytic differentiation program, and suggest that a similar mechanism
exists in situ to slow down terminal differentiation in the transit amplifying
cell population.

PMCID: PMC3516381
PMID: 22467857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(3):e1002576. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002576. Epub 2012 Mar 
15.

Polycomb-like 3 promotes polycomb repressive complex 2 binding to CpG islands and
embryonic stem cell self-renewal.

Hunkapiller J(1), Shen Y, Diaz A, Cagney G, McCleary D, Ramalho-Santos M, Krogan 
N, Ren B, Song JS, Reiter JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Cardiovascular Research Institute, 
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) trimethylates lysine 27 of histone H3
(H3K27me3) to regulate gene expression during diverse biological transitions in
development, embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation, and cancer. Here, we show
that Polycomb-like 3 (Pcl3) is a component of PRC2 that promotes ESC
self-renewal. Using mass spectrometry, we identified Pcl3 as a Suz12 binding
partner and confirmed Pcl3 interactions with core PRC2 components by
co-immunoprecipitation. Knockdown of Pcl3 in ESCs increases spontaneous
differentiation, yet does not affect early differentiation decisions as assessed 
in teratomas and embryoid bodies, indicating that Pcl3 has a specific role in
regulating ESC self-renewal. Consistent with Pcl3 promoting PRC2 function,
decreasing Pcl3 levels reduces H3K27me3 levels while overexpressing Pcl3
increases H3K27me3 levels. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation and
sequencing (ChIP-seq) reveal that Pcl3 co-localizes with PRC2 core component,
Suz12, and depletion of Pcl3 decreases Suz12 binding at over 60% of PRC2 targets.
Mutation of conserved residues within the Pcl3 Tudor domain, a domain implicated 
in recognizing methylated histones, compromises H3K27me3 formation, suggesting
that the Tudor domain of Pcl3 is essential for function. We also show that Pcl3
and its paralog, Pcl2, exist in different PRC2 complexes but bind many of the
same PRC2 targets, particularly CpG islands regulated by Pcl3. Thus, Pcl3 is a
component of PRC2 critical for ESC self-renewal, histone methylation, and
recruitment of PRC2 to a subset of its genomic sites.

PMCID: PMC3305387
PMID: 22438827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Blood. 2012 May 31;119(22):5071-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-406116. Epub 2012
Feb 27.

Sequential gain of mutations in severe congenital neutropenia progressing to
acute myeloid leukemia.

Beekman R(1), Valkhof MG, Sanders MA, van Strien PM, Haanstra JR, Broeders L,
Geertsma-Kleinekoort WM, Veerman AJ, Valk PJ, Verhaak RG, Löwenberg B, Touw IP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Blood. 2012 May 31;119(22):5063-4.

Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is a BM failure syndrome with a high risk of 
progression to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The underlying genetic changes
involved in SCN evolution to AML are largely unknown. We obtained serial
hematopoietic samples from an SCN patient who developed AML 17 years after the
initiation of G-CSF treatment. Next- generation sequencing was performed to
identify mutations during disease progression. In the AML phase, we found 12
acquired nonsynonymous mutations. Three of these, in CSF3R, LLGL2, and ZC3H18,
co-occurred in a subpopulation of progenitor cells already in the early SCN
phase. This population expanded over time, whereas clones harboring only CSF3R
mutations disappeared from the BM. The other 9 mutations were only apparent in
the AML cells and affected known AML-associated genes (RUNX1 and ASXL1) and
chromatin remodelers (SUZ12 and EP300). In addition, a novel CSF3R mutation that 
conferred autonomous proliferation to myeloid progenitors was found. We conclude 
that progression from SCN to AML is a multistep process, with distinct mutations 
arising early during the SCN phase and others later in AML development. The
sequential gain of 2 CSF3R mutations implicates abnormal G-CSF signaling as a
driver of leukemic transformation in this case of SCN.

PMID: 22371884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 23;287(13):10509-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.320234. Epub
2012 Feb 7.

Hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) recruits polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) 
to a subset of its target genes through interaction with human polycomb-like
(hPCL) proteins.

Boulay G(1), Dubuissez M, Van Rechem C, Forget A, Helin K, Ayrault O, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Université Lille Nord de France, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Lille 59021, France.

HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1) is a tumor suppressor gene epigenetically
silenced or deleted in many human cancers. HIC1 is involved in regulatory loops
modulating p53- and E2F1-dependent cell survival, growth control, and stress
responses. HIC1 is also essential for normal development because Hic1-deficient
mice die perinatally and exhibit gross developmental defects throughout the
second half of development. HIC1 encodes a transcriptional repressor with five
C(2)H(2) zinc fingers mediating sequence-specific DNA binding and two repression 
domains: an N-terminal BTB/POZ domain and a central region recruiting CtBP and
NuRD complexes. By yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified the Polycomb-like
protein hPCL3 as a novel co-repressor for HIC1. Using multiple biochemical
strategies, we demonstrated that HIC1 interacts with hPCL3 and its paralog PHF1
to form a stable complex with the PRC2 members EZH2, EED, and Suz12. Confirming
the implication of HIC1 in Polycomb recruitment, we showed that HIC1 shares some 
of its target genes with PRC2, including ATOH1. Depletion of HIC1 by siRNA
interference leads to a partial displacement of EZH2 from the ATOH1 promoter.
Furthermore, in vivo, ATOH1 repression by HIC1 is associated with Polycomb
activity during mouse cerebellar development. Thus, our results identify HIC1 as 
the first transcription factor in mammals able to recruit PRC2 to some target
promoters through its interaction with Polycomb-like proteins.

PMCID: PMC3323039
PMID: 22315224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1318-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-365213.

Genetic defects in PRC2 components other than EZH2 are not common in myeloid
malignancies.

Kroeze LI, Nikoloski G, da Silva-Coelho P, van Hoogen P, Stevens-Linders E,
Kuiper RP, Schnittger S, Haferlach T, Pahl HL, van der Reijden BA, Jansen JH.

Comment in
    Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1097-8.

PMID: 22308284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1097-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-391268.

Polycomb segment myeloid malignancies.

Saunthararajah Y(1), Maciejewski J.

Author information: 
(1)Cleveland Clinic.

Comment on
    Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1318-9.
    Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1208-13.

An unexpected revelation of cancer genome studies has been frequent abnormality
in genes for factors that modify chromatin, underscored in this issue of Blood by
reports from Score et al and Kroeze et al of inactivating mutations and
chromosome loss in SUZ12, EED and JARID2 in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and
myeloproliferative disease (MPD).

PMID: 22308277  [PubMed]


205. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29410. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029410. Epub 2012 Jan 18.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 targets murine cytomegalovirus chromatin for
modification and associates with viral replication centers.

Abraham CG(1), Kulesza CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, United States of America.

Regulation of viral transcription by chromatin structure has emerged as a
fundamental determinant in the establishment of lytic and latent herpesvirus
infections. The Polycomb group (PcG) of epigenetic repressors promotes
heterochromatin formation by trimethylating histone H3 on lysine-27 (H3K27me3)
and regulates development, stem cell renewal and differentiation and the cell
cycle. These cellular processes are tightly coupled to the molecular switch
between lytic and latent herpesvirus infections. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis, we observed enrichment of H3K27me3 at the major
immediate-early (MIE) locus of murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) very early following
infection of permissive fibroblasts. As lytic replication progressed, we observed
a loss of H3K27me3 enrichment concomitant with the appearance of H3K4me3.
However, late during infection, as viral replication centers are established, we 
observed a significant increase in PcG protein association with chromatin.
Additionally, in co-immunofluorescence assays using confocal microscopy, we
detected strong enrichments for PcG protein within the viral replication
compartment, suggesting an association between viral DNA synthesis machinery and 
PcG proteins. Together, our results suggest a novel, dynamic interaction between 
PcG epigenetic repressors and MCMV genomes.

PMCID: PMC3261147
PMID: 22279536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Nat Med. 2012 Feb 6;18(2):298-301. doi: 10.1038/nm.2651.

Genetic inactivation of the polycomb repressive complex 2 in T cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Ntziachristos P(1), Tsirigos A, Van Vlierberghe P, Nedjic J, Trimarchi T,
Flaherty MS, Ferres-Marco D, da Ros V, Tang Z, Siegle J, Asp P, Hadler M, Rigo I,
De Keersmaecker K, Patel J, Huynh T, Utro F, Poglio S, Samon JB, Paietta E,
Racevskis J, Rowe JM, Rabadan R, Levine RL, Brown S, Pflumio F, Dominguez M,
Ferrando A, Aifantis I.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Pathology, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is an immature hematopoietic
malignancy driven mainly by oncogenic activation of NOTCH1 signaling. In this
study we report the presence of loss-of-function mutations and deletions of the
EZH2 and SUZ12 genes, which encode crucial components of the Polycomb repressive 
complex 2 (PRC2), in 25% of T-ALLs. To further study the role of PRC2 in T-ALL,
we used NOTCH1-dependent mouse models of the disease, as well as human T-ALL
samples, and combined locus-specific and global analysis of NOTCH1-driven
epigenetic changes. These studies demonstrated that activation of NOTCH1
specifically induces loss of the repressive mark Lys27 trimethylation of histone 
3 (H3K27me3) by antagonizing the activity of PRC2. These studies suggest a tumor 
suppressor role for PRC2 in human leukemia and suggest a hitherto unrecognized
dynamic interplay between oncogenic NOTCH1 and PRC2 function for the regulation
of gene expression and cell transformation.

PMCID: PMC3274628
PMID: 22237151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Nature. 2012 Jan 11;481(7380):157-63. doi: 10.1038/nature10725.

The genetic basis of early T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Zhang J(1), Ding L, Holmfeldt L, Wu G, Heatley SL, Payne-Turner D, Easton J, Chen
X, Wang J, Rusch M, Lu C, Chen SC, Wei L, Collins-Underwood JR, Ma J, Roberts KG,
Pounds SB, Ulyanov A, Becksfort J, Gupta P, Huether R, Kriwacki RW, Parker M,
McGoldrick DJ, Zhao D, Alford D, Espy S, Bobba KC, Song G, Pei D, Cheng C,
Roberts S, Barbato MI, Campana D, Coustan-Smith E, Shurtleff SA, Raimondi SC,
Kleppe M, Cools J, Shimano KA, Hermiston ML, Doulatov S, Eppert K, Laurenti E,
Notta F, Dick JE, Basso G, Hunger SP, Loh ML, Devidas M, Wood B, Winter S,
Dunsmore KP, Fulton RS, Fulton LL, Hong X, Harris CC, Dooling DJ, Ochoa K,
Johnson KJ, Obenauer JC, Evans WE, Pui CH, Naeve CW, Ley TJ, Mardis ER, Wilson
RK, Downing JR, Mullighan CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, St Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

Early T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ETP ALL) is an aggressive
malignancy of unknown genetic basis. We performed whole-genome sequencing of 12
ETP ALL cases and assessed the frequency of the identified somatic mutations in
94 T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cases. ETP ALL was characterized by
activating mutations in genes regulating cytokine receptor and RAS signalling
(67% of cases; NRAS, KRAS, FLT3, IL7R, JAK3, JAK1, SH2B3 and BRAF), inactivating 
lesions disrupting haematopoietic development (58%; GATA3, ETV6, RUNX1, IKZF1 and
EP300) and histone-modifying genes (48%; EZH2, EED, SUZ12, SETD2 and EP300). We
also identified new targets of recurrent mutation including DNM2, ECT2L and RELN.
The mutational spectrum is similar to myeloid tumours, and moreover, the global
transcriptional profile of ETP ALL was similar to that of normal and myeloid
leukaemia haematopoietic stem cells. These findings suggest that addition of
myeloid-directed therapies might improve the poor outcome of ETP ALL.

PMCID: PMC3267575
PMID: 22237106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mol Cell. 2012 Jan 27;45(2):255-62. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.11.019. Epub 2011 
Dec 22.

Polycomb protein Ezh1 promotes RNA polymerase II elongation.

Mousavi K(1), Zare H, Wang AH, Sartorelli V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Muscle Stem Cells and Gene Regulation, National Institute of
Arthritis, Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20852, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2012 Jan 27;45(2):145-6.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins initiate the formation of repressed chromatin
domains and regulate developmental gene expression. A mammalian PcG protein,
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2), triggers transcriptional repression by
catalyzing the addition of methyl groups onto lysine 27 of histone H3
(H3K27me2/3). This action facilitates the binding of other PcG proteins to
chromatin for purposes of transcriptional silencing. Interestingly, there exists 
a paralog of Ezh2, termed Ezh1, whose primary function remains unclear. Here, we 
provide evidence for genome-wide association of Ezh1 complex with active
epigenetic mark (H3K4me3), RNA polymerase II (Pol II), and mRNA production. Ezh1 
depletion reduced global Pol II occupancy within gene bodies and resulted in
delayed transcriptional activation during differentiation of skeletal muscle
cells. Conversely, overexpression of wild-type Ezh1 led to premature gene
activation and rescued Pol II occupancy defects in Ezh1-depleted cells.
Collectively, these findings reveal a role for a PcG complex in promoting mRNA
transcription.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22196887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. EMBO J. 2012 Feb 1;31(3):522-33. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.459. Epub 2011 Dec 23.

Human long non-coding RNAs promote pluripotency and neuronal differentiation by
association with chromatin modifiers and transcription factors.

Ng SY(1), Johnson R, Stanton LW.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology Group, Genome Institute of Singapore,
Singapore.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2012 Apr 27;110(9):1162-5.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are a numerous class of newly discovered genes in 
the human genome, which have been proposed to be key regulators of biological
processes, including stem cell pluripotency and neurogenesis. However, at present
very little functional characterization of lncRNAs in human differentiation has
been carried out. In the present study, we address this using human embryonic
stem cells (hESCs) as a paradigm for pluripotency and neuronal differentiation.
With a newly developed method, hESCs were robustly and efficiently differentiated
into neurons, and we profiled the expression of thousands of lncRNAs using a
custom-designed microarray. Some hESC-specific lncRNAs involved in pluripotency
maintenance were identified, and shown to physically interact with SOX2, and PRC2
complex component, SUZ12. Using a similar approach, we identified lncRNAs
required for neurogenesis. Knockdown studies indicated that loss of any of these 
lncRNAs blocked neurogenesis, and immunoprecipitation studies revealed physical
association with REST and SUZ12. This study indicates that lncRNAs are important 
regulators of pluripotency and neurogenesis, and represents important evidence
for an indispensable role of lncRNAs in human brain development.

PMCID: PMC3273385
PMID: 22193719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Am J Hematol. 2012 Mar;87(3):245-50. doi: 10.1002/ajh.22257. Epub 2011 Dec 21.

Frequent deletions of JARID2 in leukemic transformation of chronic myeloid
malignancies.

Puda A(1), Milosevic JD, Berg T, Klampfl T, Harutyunyan AS, Gisslinger B, Rumi E,
Pietra D, Malcovati L, Elena C, Doubek M, Steurer M, Tosic N, Pavlovic S,
Guglielmelli P, Pieri L, Vannucchi AM, Gisslinger H, Cazzola M, Kralovics R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna,
Austria.

Chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) and myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS)
have an inherent tendency to progress to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Using
high-resolution SNP microarrays, we studied a total of 517 MPN and MDS patients
in different disease stages, including 77 AML cases with previous history of MPN 
(N = 46) or MDS (N = 31). Frequent chromosomal deletions of variable sizes were
detected, allowing the mapping of putative tumor suppressor genes involved in the
leukemic transformation process. We detected frequent deletions on the short arm 
of chromosome 6 (del6p). The common deleted region on 6p mapped to a 1.1-Mb
region and contained only the JARID2 gene--member of the polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2). When we compared the frequency of del6p between chronic and
leukemic phase, we observed a strong association of del6p with leukemic
transformation (P = 0.0033). Subsequently, analysis of deletion profiles of other
PRC2 members revealed frequent losses of genes such as EZH2, AEBP2, and SUZ12;
however, the deletions targeting these genes were large. We also identified two
patients with homozygous losses of JARID2 and AEBP2. We observed frequent
codeletion of AEBP2 and ETV6, and similarly, SUZ12 and NF1. Using next generation
exome sequencing of 40 patients, we identified only one somatic mutation in the
PRC2 complex member SUZ12. As the frequency of point mutations in PRC2 members
was found to be low, deletions were the main type of lesions targeting PRC2
complex members. Our study suggests an essential role of the PRC2 complex in the 
leukemic transformation of chronic myeloid disorders.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22190018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Feb;32(4):840-51. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06148-11. Epub 2011 Dec
19.

Myc regulates the transcription of the PRC2 gene to control the expression of
developmental genes in embryonic stem cells.

Neri F(1), Zippo A, Krepelova A, Cherubini A, Rocchigiani M, Oliviero S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Università di Siena, Siena, Italy.

Myc family members are critical to maintain embryonic stem cells (ESC) in the
undifferentiated state. However, the mechanism by which they perform this task
has not yet been elucidated. Here we show that Myc directly upregulates the
transcription of all core components of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) 
as well as the ESC-specific PRC2-associated factors. By expressing Myc protein
fused with the estrogen receptor (Myc-ER) in fibroblasts, we observed that Myc,
binding to the regulatory elements of Suz12, Ezh2, and Eed, induces the
acetylation of histones H3 and H4 and the recruitment of elongating RNA
polymerase II at their promoters. The silencing of both c-Myc and N-Myc in ESC
results in reduced expression of PRC2 and H3K27me3 at Polycomb target
developmental regulators and upregulation of genes involved in primitive endoderm
differentiation. The ectopic expression of PRC2 in ESC, either silenced for c-Myc
and N-Myc or induced to differentiate by leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)
withdrawal, is sufficient to maintain the H3K27me3 mark at genes with bivalent
histone modifications and keep repressed the genes involved in ESC
differentiation. Thus, Myc proteins control the expression of developmental
regulators via the upregulation of the Polycomb PRC2 complex.

PMCID: PMC3272981
PMID: 22184065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 1;72(1):315-24. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0961. Epub
2011 Nov 8.

EZH2 Mediates epigenetic silencing of neuroblastoma suppressor genes CASZ1, CLU, 
RUNX3, and NGFR.

Wang C(1), Liu Z, Woo CW, Li Z, Wang L, Wei JS, Marquez VE, Bates SE, Jin Q, Khan
J, Ge K, Thiele CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cell & Molecular Biology Section, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial pediatric solid tumor with an 
undifferentiated status and generally poor prognosis, but the basis for these
characteristics remains unknown. In this study, we show that upregulation of the 
Polycomb protein histone methyltransferase EZH2, which limits differentiation in 
many tissues, is critical to maintain the undifferentiated state and poor
prognostic status of NB by epigenetic repression of multiple tumor suppressor
genes. We identified this role for EZH2 by examining the regulation of CASZ1, a
recently identified NB tumor suppressor gene whose ectopic restoration inhibits
NB cell growth and induces differentiation. Reducing EZH2 expression by RNA
interference-mediated knockdown or pharmacologic inhibiton with 3-deazaneplanocin
A increased CASZ1 expression, inhibited NB cell growth, and induced neurite
extension. Similarly, EZH2(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) displayed
3-fold higher levels of CASZ1 mRNA compared with EZH2(+/+) MEFs. In cells with
increased expression of CASZ1, treatment with histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor decreased expression of EZH2 and the Polycomb Repressor complex
component SUZ12. Under steady-state conditions, H3K27me3 and PRC2 components
bound to the CASZ1 gene were enriched, but this enrichment was decreased after
HDAC inhibitor treatment. We determined that the tumor suppressors CLU, NGFR, and
RUNX3 were also directly repressed by EZH2 like CASZ1 in NB cells. Together, our 
findings establish that aberrant upregulation of EZH2 in NB cells silences
several tumor suppressors, which contribute to the genesis and maintenance of the
undifferentiated phenotype of NB tumors.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3487161
PMID: 22068036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1208-13. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-367243. Epub 2011
Nov 3.

Inactivation of polycomb repressive complex 2 components in myeloproliferative
and myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Score J(1), Hidalgo-Curtis C, Jones AV, Winkelmann N, Skinner A, Ward D, Zoi K,
Ernst T, Stegelmann F, Döhner K, Chase A, Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1097-8.

The polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a highly conserved histone H3 lysine 
27 methyltransferase that regulates the expression of developmental genes.
Inactivating mutations of the catalytic component of PRC2, EZH2, are seen in
myeloid disorders. We reasoned that the other 2 core PRC2 components, SUZ12 and
EED, may also be mutational targets in these diseases, as well as associated
factors such as JARID2. SUZ12 mutations were identified in 1 of 2 patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome/myeloproliferative neoplasms with 17q acquired
uniparental disomy and in 2 of 2 myelofibrosis cases with focal 17q11 deletions. 
All 3 were missense mutations affecting the highly conserved VEFS domain.
Analysis of a further 146 myelodysplastic syndrome/myeloproliferative neoplasm
patients revealed an additional VEFS domain mutant, yielding a total mutation
frequency of 1.4% (2 of 148). We did not find mutations of JARID2 or EED in
association with acquired uniparental disomy for chromosome 6p or 11q,
respectively; however, screening unselected cases identified missense mutations
in EED (1 of 148; 1%) and JARID2 (3 of 148; 2%). All 3 SUZ12 mutations tested and
the EED mutation reduced PRC2 histone methyltransferase activity in vitro,
demonstrating that PRC2 function may be compromised in myeloid disorders by
mutation of distinct genes.

PMID: 22053108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Am J Transl Res. 2011;3(5):479-91. Epub 2011 Oct 13.

The gold (III) porphyrin complex, gold-2a, suppresses WNT1 expression in breast
cancer cells by enhancing the promoter association of YY1.

Chow KH, Liu J, Sun RW, Vanhoutte PM, Xu A, Chen J, Che CM, Wang Y.

The gold (III) porphyrin complex, gold-2a, elicits anti-tumor activity by
targeting the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway [Chow KH et al, Cancer Research
2010;70(1):329-37]. Here, the molecular mechanisms underlying the inhibitory
effects of this compound on WNT1 gene expression were elucidated further. A
response element to gold-2a was identified located within the -1290 to -1112 nt
region of the WNT1 promoter, containing a binding site for the transcription
regulator Yin Yang 1 (YY1). Gold-2a promoted the association of YY1 and
suppressor of zeste 12 (Suz12; a component of the polycomb repressor complex 2)
with the WNT1 promoter. Under normal culture conditions, the intracellular
translocalization of YY1 was synchronized with cell cycle progression and WNT1
expression. Gold-2a promoted the nuclear accumulation and abolished the nuclear
exportation of YY1, resulting in a persistent inhibition of WNT1 expression and a
cell cycle arrest at G1/S phase. A dimorphic role of YY1 in regulating cell
proliferation and division was revealed. Thus, the present study extends the
understanding of the anti-tumor mechanism of gold-2a to the epigenetic level,
which involves the modulation of the dynamic interactions between YY1 and a
specific region of the WNT1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC3204891
PMID: 22046489  [PubMed]


215. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Jul 1;21(10):1639-52. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0389. Epub 2012 
Jan 4.

Global gene expression analysis of very small embryonic-like stem cells reveals
that the Ezh2-dependent bivalent domain mechanism contributes to their
pluripotent state.

Shin DM(1), Liu R, Wu W, Waigel SJ, Zacharias W, Ratajczak MZ, Kucia M.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Institute at the James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY 40202, USA. d0shin03@amc.seoul.kr

Recently, we identified a population of Oct4(+)Sca-1(+)Lin(-)CD45(-) very small
embryonic-like stem cells (VSELs) in murine and human adult tissues. VSELs can
differentiate in vitro into cells from all 3 germ layers and in vivo
tissue-committed stem cells. Open chromatin structure of core pluripotency
transcription factors (TFs) supports the pluripotent state of VSELs. However, it 
has been difficult to determine how primitive VSELs maintain pluripotency, owing 
to their limited number in adult tissues. Here, we demonstrate by genome-wide
gene-expression analysis with a small number of highly purified murine bone
marrow-derived VSELs that Oct4(+) VSELs (i) express a similar, yet nonidentical, 
transcriptome as embryonic stem cells (ESCs), (ii) highly express cell cycle
checkpoint genes, (iii) express at a low level genes involved in protein turnover
and mitogenic pathways, and (iv) highly express enhancer of zeste drosophila
homolog 2 (Ezh2), a polycomb group protein. Furthermore, as a result of high
expression of Ezh2, VSELs, like ESCs, exhibit bivalently modified nucleosomes
(trimethylated H3K27 and H3K4) at promoters of important homeodomain-containing
developmental TFs, thus preventing premature activation of the lineage-committing
factors. Notably, spontaneous or RNA interference-enforced downregulation of Ezh2
during VSEL differentiation removes the bivalent domain (BD) structure, which
leads to de-repression of several BD-regulated genes. Therefore, we suggest that 
Oct4(+) VSELs, like other pluripotent stem cells, maintain their pluripotent
state through an Ezh2-dependent BD-mediated epigenetic mechanism. Furthermore,
our global survey of VSEL gene expression signature would not only advance our
understanding of biological process for their pluripotency, differentiation, and 
quiescence but should also help to develop better protocols for ex vivo expansion
of VSELs.

PMCID: PMC3376460
PMID: 22023227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Life Sci. 2011 Dec 5;89(23-24):886-95. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2011.09.011. Epub 2011 
Sep 29.

16-hydroxycleroda-3,13-dien-15,16-olide regulates the expression of
histone-modifying enzymes PRC2 complex and induces apoptosis in CML K562 cells.

Lin YH(1), Lee CC, Chang FR, Chang WH, Wu YC, Chang JG.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Natural Products, College of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

AIMS: Histone modifications play central epigenetic roles in regulating the
entire genome of the cell and cell proliferation. Herein, we investigated the
effects of the natural compound, 16-hydroxycleroda-3,13-dien-15,16-olide (PL3),
on the expressions of histone-modifying enzymes, and examined how it induces
apoptosis in leukemia K562 cells.
MAIN METHODS: Cell proliferation was determined by an MTT assay, and
histone-modifying enzyme gene expressions were investigated by a quantitative
real-time PCR. Protein expressions were analyzed by a Western blot analysis. The 
histone H3K27 distribution was observed with immunofluorescence staining. To
verify polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) complex downstream gene expressions, 
a gene-expression array was performed to determine gene regulations.
KEY FINDINGS: PL3 induced apoptosis and modulated many histone-modifying enzymes,
especially the two PRC2 components, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and
suppressor of zeste 12 homolog (Suz12). Genes repressed by PRC2 were shown to be 
reactivated by PL3. Of these, 10 genes targeted by the PRC2 complex were
identified, and expressions of 10 pro-/antiapoptotic genes were significantly
regulated; these effects may have contributed to PL3-induced apoptosis in K562
cells. Regulation of other histone-modifying enzymes, including Aurora B, may
also be involved in cell-cycle regulation.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our data suggest that the induction of apoptosis by PL3 might
partly occur through both a reduction in PRC2-mediated gene silencing and the
reactivation of downstream tumor suppressor gene expressions. PL3 acts as a novel
small-molecule histone modulator, which can potentially contribute to cancer
chemotherapy singly or as a combined medication.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21983300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Nucleus. 2011 Jul-Aug;2(4):277-82. doi: 10.4161/nucl.2.4.16266. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

Composition, recruitment and regulation of the PRC2 complex.

Nayak V(1), Xu C, Min J.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, 101 College St.,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The PRC2 histone methyltransferase complex is an important regulator of gene
expression programs in metazoans. Gene expression regulation by the PRC2 complex 
is critical for development and cell differentiation. Several recent studies have
begun to shed light on the molecular basis for the physiological function of the 
PRC2 complex. Here, we discuss some of these results and how they provide new
insights into the composition, recruitment and regulation of the PRC2 complex.

PMID: 21941108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 15;71(20):6320-6. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1021. Epub
2011 Aug 23.

Long noncoding RNA HOTAIR regulates polycomb-dependent chromatin modification and
is associated with poor prognosis in colorectal cancers.

Kogo R(1), Shimamura T, Mimori K, Kawahara K, Imoto S, Sudo T, Tanaka F, Shibata 
K, Suzuki A, Komune S, Miyano S, Mori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 
Fukuoka, Japan.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2012 Feb 15;72(4):1039.

The functional impact of recently discovered long noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) in
human cancer remains to be clarified. One long ncRNA which has attracted
attention is the Hox transcript antisense intergenic RNA termed HOTAIR, a long
ncRNA expressed from the developmental HOXC locus located on chromosome 12q13.13.
In cooperation with Polycomb complex PRC2, the HOTAIR long ncRNA is reported to
reprogram chromatin organization and promote breast cancer metastasis. In this
study, we examined the status and function of HOTAIR in patients with stage IV
colorectal cancer (CRC) who have liver metastases and a poor prognosis. HOTAIR
expression levels were higher in cancerous tissues than in corresponding
noncancerous tissues and high HOTAIR expression correlated tightly with the
presence of liver metastasis. Moreover, patients with high HOTAIR expression had 
a relatively poorer prognosis. In a subset of 32 CRC specimens, gene set
enrichment analysis using cDNA array data revealed a close correlation between
expression of HOTAIR and members of the PRC2 complex (SUZ12, EZH2, and H3K27me3).
Our findings suggest that HOTAIR expression is associated with a genome-wide
reprogramming of PRC2 function not only in breast cancer but also in CRC, where
upregulation of this long ncRNA may be a critical element in metastatic
progression.

PMID: 21862635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Sep;35(9):1364-72. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182262743.

Frequency of known gene rearrangements in endometrial stromal tumors.

Chiang S(1), Ali R, Melnyk N, McAlpine JN, Huntsman DG, Gilks CB, Lee CH, Oliva
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Translocations resulting in gene fusion are characteristic of endometrial stromal
tumors (ESTs). Rearrangements of JAZF1, SUZ12, PHF1, and EPC1 have been reported 
in endometrial stromal nodules (ESNs), endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESSs), and
rarely in undifferentiated endometrial sarcomas (UESs). Detection of JAZF1,
SUZ12, EPC1, and PHF1 rearrangement by fluorescence in situ hybridization was
performed on tissue microarrays consisting of 94 ESTs of classic and variant
morphology (20 ESNs, 43 primary uterine ESSs, 15 metastatic uterine ESSs, 4
primary extrauterine ESSs, 7 primary uterine UESs, and 5 unclassified ESTs), 16
Müllerian adenosarcomas, 2 malignant mixed Müllerian tumors, 2 uterine tumors
resembling ovarian sex-cord tumors, 2 highly cellular leiomyomas, 1
leiomyosarcoma, and 7 polypoid endometriosis. Rearrangements were detected in 42 
of 78 (54%) uterine ESTs, with JAZF1-SUZ12 fusion found in 50% of ESNs and in 33%
of ESSs and JAZF1-PHF1 and EPC1-PHF1 fusions found in 1% and <1% of ESSs,
respectively. PHF1 and JAZF1 were rearranged with unknown partners in 8 uterine
ESTs. JAZF1-SUZ12 fusion, EPC1-PHF1 fusion, and PHF1 rearrangement were found in 
3 extrauterine ESSs, whereas no rearrangements were observed in UESs or in any
other non-EST studied. Our data confirm that gene rearrangements are present in
more than 50% of uterine ESTs, with JAZF1-SUZ12 fusion being the most common,
followed by rare EPC1-PHF1 and JAZF1-PHF1 fusions. The presence of identical gene
rearrangements in both uterine and extrauterine ESTs suggests a similar
pathogenesis. The presence of detectable gene rearrangements in uterine ESS may
predict better patient outcome.

PMID: 21836477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Oct;32(10):1525-32. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr171. Epub 2011
Jul 27.

(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate and DZNep reduce polycomb protein level via a
proteasome-dependent mechanism in skin cancer cells.

Choudhury SR(1), Balasubramanian S, Chew YC, Han B, Marquez VE, Eckert RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) protein-dependent histone methylation and ubiquitination
drives chromatin compaction leading to reduced tumor suppressor expression and
increased cancer cell survival. Green tea polyphenols and S-adenosylhomocysteine 
(AdoHcy) hydrolase inhibitors are important candidate chemopreventive agents.
Previous studies indicate that (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), a potent
green tea polyphenol, suppresses PcG protein level and skin cancer cell survival.
Inhibition of AdoHcy hydrolase with 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) inhibits
methyltransferases by reducing methyl group availability. In the present study,
we examine the impact of EGCG and DZNep cotreatment on skin cancer cell function.
EGCG and DZNep, independently and in combination, reduce the level of PcG
proteins including Ezh2, eed, Suz12, Mel18 and Bmi-1. This is associated with
reduced H3K27me3 and H2AK119ub formation, histone modifications associated with
closed chromatin. Histone deacetylase 1 level is also reduced and acetylated H3
formation is increased. These changes are associated with increased tumor
suppressor expression and reduced cell survival and are partially reversed by
vector-mediated maintenance of Bmi-1 level. The reduction in PcG protein level is
associated with increased ubiquitination and is reversed by proteasome
inhibitors, suggesting proteasome-associated degradation.

PMCID: PMC3179425
PMID: 21798853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Cell Biol. 2011 May 2;193(3):475-87. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201101021.

Interruption of intrachromosomal looping by CCCTC binding factor decoy proteins
abrogates genomic imprinting of human insulin-like growth factor II.

Zhang H(1), Niu B, Hu JF, Ge S, Wang H, Li T, Ling J, Steelman BN, Qian G,
Hoffman AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ninth People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

Monoallelic expression of IGF2 is regulated by CCCTC binding factor (CTCF)
binding to the imprinting control region (ICR) on the maternal allele, with
subsequent formation of an intrachromosomal loop to the promoter region. The
N-terminal domain of CTCF interacts with SUZ12, part of the polycomb repressive
complex-2 (PRC2), to silence the maternal allele. We synthesized decoy CTCF
proteins, fusing the CTCF deoxyribonucleic acid-binding zinc finger domain to CpG
methyltransferase Sss1 or to enhanced green fluorescent protein. In normal human 
fibroblasts and breast cancer MCF7 cell lines, the CTCF decoy proteins bound to
the unmethylated ICR and to the IGF2 promoter region but did not interact with
SUZ12. EZH2, another part of PRC2, was unable to methylate histone H3-K27 in the 
IGF2 promoter region, resulting in reactivation of the imprinted allele. The
intrachromosomal loop between the maternal ICR and the IGF2 promoters was not
observed when IGF2 imprinting was lost. CTCF epigenetically governs allelic gene 
expression of IGF2 by orchestrating chromatin loop structures involving PRC2.

PMCID: PMC3087012
PMID: 21536749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Dairy Sci. 2011 May;94(5):2425-30. doi: 10.3168/jds.2010-3859.

Technical note: Validation of candidate reference genes for normalization of
quantitative PCR in bovine mammary epithelial cells responding to inflammatory
stimuli.

Bougarn S(1), Cunha P, Gilbert FB, Meurens F, Rainard P.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UR1282 Infectiologie Animale et Santé Publique, 37380 Nouzilly, France.

Mammary epithelial cells (MEC) participate in the first line of defense of the
mammary gland to invading pathogens. In vitro culture of MEC is widely used as a 
model to study the capacity of these cells to sense and respond to
mastitis-causing bacteria. Analysis of gene expression by quantitative PCR (qPCR)
following exposure to bacteria or bacterial constituents is a powerful tool to
assess responses of MEC to pathogens. Although internal standards such as
reference genes are required for qPCR to yield valid data, the validation of
proper genes to quantify mRNA transcripts in MEC exposed to pro-inflammatory
stimuli has never been reported. In this study, 10 commonly used reference genes 
belonging to different functional classes (ACTB, ATP5B, EIF2B2, GAPDH, PPIA,
SDHA, SUZ12, UXT, YWHAZ, and 18s rRNA) were analyzed by qPCR to determine the
most stable in bovine MEC unstimulated and stimulated with mastitis pathogens
(Staphylococcus aureus or Escherichia coli), microbial agonists of the innate
immune system (lipoteichoic acid and muramyl dipeptide, or lipopolysaccharide),
or proinflammatory cytokines (IL-17A and tumor necrosis factor-a). An M value was
used as a measure of gene stability as determined using the geNorm application.
This study demonstrated that the expression of the 10 reference genes was stable 
under the different experimental conditions. These data will be useful for bovine
mastitis research in selecting reference genes and validating reverse
transcription-qPCR data.

Copyright © 2011 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21524534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 May 13;408(3):393-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.025. Epub 2011 Apr 12.

PRAJA1 is a ubiquitin ligase for the polycomb repressive complex 2 proteins.

Zoabi M(1), Sadeh R, de Bie P, Marquez VE, Ciechanover A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vascular and Tumor Biology, The Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and
Research Institute, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jul 8;410(3):705. Marquez, Victor E [added].

Methylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 by the polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2) leads to transcriptional repression of genes which are critical to
development. PRC2 core complex is composed of the histone methyltransferase EZH2,
EED, and SUZ12. Knockdown of any of the PRC2 core subunits results in a
concomitant loss of the other subunits which is mediated by the ubiquitin
(Ub)-proteasome system (UPS). Inhibition of cellular methyltransferases by
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) also leads to dissociation of the PRC2 complex and
rapid degradation of its subunits. Interestingly, the expression of several Ub
ligases was induced following DZNep treatment, suggesting that PRC2 might repress
the Ub ligase(s) that target its subunits for degradation. Here we confirm that
individual PRC2 subunits are ubiquitinated and rapidly degraded by the
proteasome. One of the DZNep-induced Ub ligases, PRAJA1, can target PRC2 subunits
for proteasomal degradation. PRAJA1 directly ubiquitinates individual PRC2
subunits in a cell free system, which leads to their proteasomal degradation.
Expression of PRAJA1 but not of an inactive RING finger mutant of the protein,
enhanced the degradation of individual PRC2 subunits in cells. Taken together,
our results suggest a role for PRAJA1 in regulating the level of PRC2 by
targeting its free subunits for Ub-mediated proteasomal degradation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21513699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Mol Cancer. 2011 Apr 18;10:40. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-40.

Pharmacologic disruption of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 inhibits tumorigenicity
and tumor progression in prostate cancer.

Crea F(1), Hurt EM, Mathews LA, Cabarcas SM, Sun L, Marquez VE, Danesi R, Farrar 
WL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Stem Cell Section, Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer
Institute at Frederick, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
Frederick, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) mediates gene silencing through 
histone H3K27 methylation. PRC2 components are over-expressed in metastatic
prostate cancer (PC), and are required for cancer stem cell (CSC) self-renewal.
3-Dezaneplanocin-A (DZNeP) is an inhibitor of PRC2 with broad anticancer
activity.
METHOD: we investigated the effects of DZNeP on cell proliferation,
tumorigenicity and invasive potential of PC cell lines (LNCaP and DU145).
RESULTS: Exploring GEO and Oncomine databases, we found that specific PRC2 genes 
(EED, EZH2, SUZ12) predict poor prognosis in PC. Non-toxic DZNeP concentrations
completely eradicated LNCaP and DU145 prostatosphere formation, and significantly
reduced the expression of CSC markers. At comparable doses, other epigenetic
drugs were not able to eradicate CSCs. DZNeP was also able to reduce PC cell
invasion. Cells pre-treated with DZNeP were significantly less tumorigenic
(LNCaP) and formed smaller tumors (DU145) in immunocompromised mice.
CONCLUSION: DZNeP is effective both in vitro and in vivo against PC cells. DZNeP 
antitumor activity is in part mediated by inhibition of CSC tumorigenic
potential.

PMCID: PMC3100246
PMID: 21501485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Hepatology. 2011 Apr;53(4):1137-47. doi: 10.1002/hep.24163.

Proteins ZNF198 and SUZ12 are down-regulated in hepatitis B virus (HBV) X
protein-mediated hepatocyte transformation and in HBV replication.

Wang WH(1), Studach LL, Andrisani OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences and Purdue University Center for Cancer
Research, West Lafayette, IN, USA.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major etiologic factor in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) pathogenesis, involving effects of chronic liver
inflammation and of the weakly oncogenic HBV X protein (pX). pX-mediated
hepatocyte transformation requires Polo-like kinase1 (Plk1) activity, but the
mechanism is not fully understood. We identified by a genome-wide short hairpin
RNA (shRNA) library screen the genes zinc finger, MYM-type 2 (ZNF198) and
suppressor of zeste 12 homolog (Drosophila) (SUZ12) whose protein depletion
rescues pX-expressing cells from DNA damage-induced apoptosis. ZNF198 and SUZ12
are components of chromatin remodeling complexes and associate with promyelocytic
leukemia (PML) nuclear bodies. Knockdown of ZNF198 and SUZ12 by small interfering
RNA (siRNA) reduced p53 stability and DNA repair, rescued pX-expressing
hepatocytes from DNA damage-induced apoptosis, and increased pX-induced
polyploidy and oncogenic transformation, suggesting ZNF198 and SUZ12 have a role 
in pX-mediated transformation. Interestingly, during pX-mediated transformation
the protein but not messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of ZNF198 and SUZ12 progressively
decreased, whereas Plk1 levels increased. Inhibition of Plk1 activity restored
protein levels of ZNF198 and SUZ12. In addition, transfected Polo-box-domain
(PBD) of Plk1 coimmunoprecipitated with ZNF198 and SUZ12, suggesting that these
proteins are Plk1 substrates. Elevated Plk1 and reduced protein levels of ZNF198 
and SUZ12 were also observed in human liver cancer cell lines derived from
HBV-related tumors and in the presence of HBV replication. Importantly, knockdown
by siRNA of ZNF198 and SUZ12 enhanced HBV replication.CONCLUSION: Reduced protein
levels of ZNF198 and SUZ12 and elevated Plk1 occur during pX-mediated hepatocyte 
transformation in human liver cancer cell lines, as well as during HBV
replication, underscoring the significance of these genes both in HBV-mediated
HCC pathogenesis and HBV replication. We propose Plk1 activity down-regulates
ZNF198 and SUZ12, thereby enhancing both HBV replication and pX-mediated
oncogenic transformation.

2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3079326
PMID: 21480320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Jan;131(1):65-73. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1396-3.
Epub 2011 Apr 5.

FOXC1, a target of polycomb, inhibits metastasis of breast cancer cells.

Du J(1), Li L, Ou Z, Kong C, Zhang Y, Dong Z, Zhu S, Jiang H, Shao Z, Huang B, Lu
J.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University, 5268
Renmin Street, Changchun 130024, China.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins have recently been shown related to cancer
development. The PcG protein EZH2 is involved in progression of prostate and
breast cancers, and has been identified as a molecular marker in breast cancer.
Nevertheless, the molecular mechanism by which PcG proteins regulate cancer
progression and malignant metastasis is still unclear. PcG proteins methylate
H3K27 in undifferentiated epithelial cells, resulting in the repression of
differentiation genes such as HOX. FOXC1 is a member of the Forkhead box
transcription factor family, which plays an important role in differentiation,
and is involved in eye development. We discovered in this study that the
expression of FOXC1 gene was negatively correlated to that of PcG genes, i.e.,
Bmi1, EZH2, and SUZ12, in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. To investigate the
regulatory effects of PcG proteins on FOXC1 gene, the two cell lines were
transfected with either expression plasmids or siRNA plasmids of Bmi1, EZH2, and 
SUZ12, and we found that PcGs, especially EZH2, could repress the transcription
of FOXC1 gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showed that histone
methylation and acetylation modifications played critical roles in this
regulatory process. When FOXC1 was stably transfected into MDA-MB-231 cells, the 
migration and invasion of the cells were repressed. Moreover, the tumorigenicity 
and the spontaneous metastatic capability regulated by FOXC1 were determined by
using an orthotropic xenograft tumor model of athymic mice with the
FOXC1-MDA-MB-231HM and the GFP-MDA-MB-231HM cells, and the results showed that
FOXC1 in MDA-MB-231HM cells inhibited migration and invasion in vitro and reduced
the pulmonary metastasis in vivo. Data presented in this report contribute to the
understanding of the mechanisms by which EZH2 participates in tumor development.

PMID: 21465172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Jul;39(13):5424-38. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr170. Epub 2011
Mar 29.

Bromodomain protein 7 interacts with PRMT5 and PRC2, and is involved in
transcriptional repression of their target genes.

Tae S(1), Karkhanis V, Velasco K, Yaneva M, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Sif S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, OH 43210, USA.

Histone modification regulates gene expression, and one major regulatory step in 
this process is the ability of proteins that recognize epigenetic marks to
recruit enzymes required to specify transcriptional outcome. Here we show that
BRD7 is a component of hSWI-SNF complexes that interacts with PRMT5 and PRC2.
Recruitment studies revealed that BRD7 co-localizes with PRMT5 and PRC2 on
'suppressor of tumorigenecity 7' (ST7) and retinoblastoma-like protein 2 (RBL2)
promoters in patient-derived B cell lines, and that its association with these
target genes correlates with hypermethylation of H3R8, H4R3 and H3K27.
Furthermore, inhibition of BRD7 expression reduces PRMT5 and PRC2 recruitment to 
ST7 and RBL2 promoters; however, only ST7 becomes transcriptionally derepressed. 
Evaluation of the PRMT5- and PRC2-induced epigenetic marks revealed that while
H3(Me(2))R8, H4(Me(2))R3 and H3(Me(3))K27 marks are erased from the ST7 promoter,
demethylation of RBL2 promoter histones is incomplete. We also show that the
arginine demethylase (RDM) JMJD6, which can erase PRMT5-induced H4R3 methylation,
and the H3K27-lysine-specific demethylases, KDM6A/UTX and KDM6B/JMJD3, are
differentially recruited to ST7 and RBL2. These findings highlight the role
played by BRD7 in PRMT5- and PRC2-induced transcriptional silencing, and indicate
that recruitment of specific RDMs and KDMs is required for efficient
transcriptional derepression.

PMCID: PMC3141267
PMID: 21447565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 May 1;17(9):2613-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2156.
Epub 2011 Mar 2.

Aberrations of EZH2 in cancer.

Chase A(1), Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, and Human Genetics Division,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.

Control of gene expression is exerted at a number of different levels, one of
which is the accessibility of genes and their controlling elements to the
transcriptional machinery. Accessibility is dictated broadly by the degree of
chromatin compaction, which is influenced in part by polycomb group proteins.
EZH2, together with SUZ12 and EED, forms the polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2), which catalyzes trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3). PRC2
may recruit other polycomb complexes, DNA methyltransferases, and histone
deacetylases, resulting in additional transcriptional repressive marks and
chromatin compaction at key developmental loci. Overexpression of EZH2 is a
marker of advanced and metastatic disease in many solid tumors, including
prostate and breast cancer. Mutation of EZH2 Y641 is described in lymphoma and
results in enhanced activity, whereas inactivating mutations are seen in poor
prognosis myeloid neoplasms. No histone demethylating agents are currently
available for treatment of patients, but 3-deazaneplanocin (DZNep) reduces EZH2
levels and H3K27 trimethylation, resulting in reduced cell proliferation in
breast and prostate cancer cells in vitro. Furthermore, synergistic effects are
seen for combined treatment with DNA demethylating agents and histone
deacetylation inhibitors, opening up the possibility of refined epigenetic
treatments in the future.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21367748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Transgenic Res. 2011 Oct;20(5):1019-31. doi: 10.1007/s11248-010-9476-4. Epub 2011
Jan 9.

Overexpression of Jazf1 induces cardiac malformation through the upregulation of 
pro-apoptotic genes in mice.

Bae KB(1), Kim MO, Yu DH, Shin MJ, Kim HJ, Yuh HS, Ji YR, Kim JY, Kim JM, Hyun
BH, Lee HC, Chang WK, Park SB, Kim do H, Lee HS, Choo YS, Lee S, Ryoo ZY.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, College of Natural Sciences, Food
and Nutritional Genomics Research Center, Kyungpook National University, 1370
Sankyuk-dong, Buk-gu, Daegu 702-701, Korea.

The transcription factor Juxtaposed with another zinc finger gene 1 (JAZF1) is a 
zinc finger protein that binds to the nuclear orphan receptor TR4. Recent
evidence indicates that TR4 receptor functions as both a positive and negative
regulator of transcription, but the role of JAZF1 in transcriptional mechanisms
has not been elucidated. Recently, the incidence rate of congenital heart
malformations was reported to be significantly elevated in patients who had
neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) with chromosomal microdeletion syndrome. Furthermore,
Joined to JAZF1 (SUZ12) is expressed at high levels in the hearts of adult
patients with NF1 microdeletion syndrome. Therefore, we hypothesized that ectopic
expression of JAZF1 may lead to cardiac malformations that deleteriously affect
the survival of neonates and adults. We sought to elucidate the role of JAZF1 in 
cardiac development using a Jazf1-overexpressing (Jazf1-Tg) mouse model. In
Jazf1-Tg mice, Jazf1 mRNA expression was significantly elevated in the heart.
Jazf1-Tg mice also showed cardiac defects, such as high blood pressure,
electrocardiogram abnormalities, apoptosis of cardiomyocytes, ventricular
non-compaction, and mitochondrial defects. In addition, we found that the
expression levels of pro-apoptotic genes were elevated in the hearts of Jazf1-Tg 
mice. These findings suggest that Jazf1 overexpression may induce heart failure
symptoms through the upregulation of pro-apoptotic genes in cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 21221781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Feb 11;405(2):210-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.01.010. Epub 2011 Jan 8.

Characterization of histone H3K27 modifications in the ß-globin locus.

Kim YW(1), Kim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Pusan 609-735, South Korea.

Histone H3K27 is acetylated or methylated in the environment of nuclear
chromatin. Here, to characterize the modification pattern of H3K27 in locus
control region (LCR) and to understand the correlation of various H3K27
modifications with transcriptional activity of genes, we analyzed the human
ß-globin locus using the ChIP assay. The LCR of the human ß-globin locus was
enriched by H3K27ac and H3K27me1 in erythroid K562 cells. The highly transcribed 
globin genes were hyperacetylated at H3K27, but the repressed globin genes were
highly dimethylated at this lysine in these cells. However, in non-erythroid
293FT cells, the ß-globin locus was marked by a high level of H3K27me3. EZH2 and 
SUZ12, subunits of polycomb repressive complex 2, were comparably detected with
the H3K27me3 pattern in K562 and 293FT cells. In addition, H3K27ac, H3K27me1 and 
H3K27me3 were established in an enhancer-dependent manner in a model
minichromosomal locus containing an enhancer and its target gene. Taken together,
these results show that H3K27 modifications have distinctive correlations with
the chromatin state or transcription level of genes and are influenced by an
enhancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21219849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Oncogene. 2011 Apr 21;30(16):1956-62. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.568. Epub 2010 Dec
13.

Long non-coding RNA ANRIL is required for the PRC2 recruitment to and silencing
of p15(INK4B) tumor suppressor gene.

Kotake Y(1), Nakagawa T, Kitagawa K, Suzuki S, Liu N, Kitagawa M, Xiong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry 1, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
Shizuoka, Japan.

A 42<U+2009>kb region on human chromosome 9p21 encodes for three distinct tumor
suppressors, p16(INK4A), p14(ARF) and p15(INK4B), and is altered in an estimated 
30-40% of human tumors. The expression of the INK4A-ARF-INK4B gene cluster is
silenced by polycomb during normal cell growth and is activated by oncogenic
insults and during aging. How the polycomb is recruited to repress this gene
cluster is unclear. Here, we show that expression of oncogenic Ras, which
stimulates the expression of p15(INK4B) and p16(INK4A), but not p14(ARF),
inhibits the expression of ANRIL (antisense non-coding RNA in the INK4 locus), a 
3.8<U+2009>kb-long non-coding RNA expressed in the opposite direction from
INK4A-ARF-INK4B. We show that the p15(INK4B) locus is bound by SUZ12, a component
of polycomb repression complex 2 (PRC2), and is H3K27-trimethylated. Notably,
depletion of ANRIL disrupts the SUZ12 binding to the p15(INK4B) locus, increases 
the expression of p15(INK4B), but not p16(INK4A) or p14(ARF), and inhibits
cellular proliferation. Finally, RNA immunoprecipitation demonstrates that ANRIL 
binds to SUZ12 in vivo. Collectively, these results suggest a model in which
ANRIL binds to and recruits PRC2 to repress the expression of p15(INK4B) locus.

PMCID: PMC3230933
PMID: 21151178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Jan;13(1):87-94. doi: 10.1038/ncb2139. Epub 2010 Dec 5.

CDK1-dependent phosphorylation of EZH2 suppresses methylation of H3K27 and
promotes osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells.

Wei Y(1), Chen YH, Li LY, Lang J, Yeh SP, Shi B, Yang CC, Yang JY, Lin CY, Lai
CC, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) is the catalytic subunit of Polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and catalyses the trimethylation of histone H3 on Lys
27 (H3K27), which represses gene transcription. EZH2 enhances cancer-cell
invasiveness and regulates stem cell differentiation. Here, we demonstrate that
EZH2 can be phosphorylated at Thr 487 through activation of cyclin-dependent
kinase 1 (CDK1). The phosphorylation of EZH2 at Thr 487 disrupted EZH2 binding
with the other PRC2 components SUZ12 and EED, and thereby inhibited EZH2
methyltransferase activity, resulting in inhibition of cancer-cell invasion. In
human mesenchymal stem cells, activation of CDK1 promoted mesenchymal stem cell
differentiation into osteoblasts through phosphorylation of EZH2 at Thr 487.
These findings define a signalling link between CDK1 and EZH2 that may have an
important role in diverse biological processes, including cancer-cell invasion
and osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3076036
PMID: 21131960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Ann Hematol. 2011 Jun;90(6):643-53. doi: 10.1007/s00277-010-1128-5. Epub 2010 Dec
2.

Overexpression of the EZH2, RING1 and BMI1 genes is common in myelodysplastic
syndromes: relation to adverse epigenetic alteration and poor prognostic scoring.

Xu F(1), Li X, Wu L, Zhang Q, Yang R, Yang Y, Zhang Z, He Q, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The Sixth people Hospital, Shanghai JiaoTong
University, ShangHai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200233,
People's Republic of China.

Epigenetics refers to the study of clonally inherited changes in gene expression 
without accompanying genetic changes. Previous research on the epigenetics of
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) mainly focused on the inactivation of tumor
suppressor genes as a result of DNA methylation. However, the basic molecular
pathogenesis of epigenetics in MDS remains poorly understood. Recent studies have
revealed that DNA methylation and histone modification may be controlled by
Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins, which may give new clues toward understanding the 
epigenetic mechanism of MDS. In this study, we explored for the first time the
expression of PcG genes, including EZH2, EED, SUZ12, RING1, and BMI1, in various 
MDS subsets and acute myeloid leukemia (AML), as well as the relationship between
the expression of PcG genes and epigenetic alteration and prognosis-risk scoring.
Patients with MDS/AML showed overexpression of EZH2, RING1, and BMI1 genes
compared to their expression levels in patients with non-clonal cytopenia
diseases. The MDS patients with DNA methylation had higher EZH2 expression than
those without DNA methylation. The patients who received decitabine treatment
presented significantly reduced expression of EZH2 and RING1 besides decreased
p15(INK4B) methylation after decitabine treatment. Moreover, overexpression of
EZH2, RING1, and BMI1 was always linked to poor prognostic scoring. In
conclusion, overexpression of the EZH2, RING1, and BMI1 genes is common in MDS
and indicate poor prognosis. The products of these genes might participate in
epigenetic regulation of MDS. These studies may also contribute to our
understanding of the effective mechanism of decitabine.

PMID: 21125401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Cancer Res. 2010 Dec;8(12):1610-8. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0398. Epub
2010 Nov 29.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 promotes the proliferation and invasion of epithelial
ovarian cancer cells.

Li H(1), Cai Q, Godwin AK, Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)Women's Cancer Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, W446, 333 Cottman Avenue,
Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is the catalytic subunit of the polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) that includes noncatalytic subunits suppressor of
zeste 12 (SUZ12) and embryonic ectoderm development (EED). When present in PRC2, 
EZH2 catalyzes trimethylation on lysine 27 residue of histone H3 (H3K27Me3),
resulting in epigenetic silencing of gene expression. Here, we investigated the
expression and function of EZH2 in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). When compared
with primary human ovarian surface epithelial (pHOSE) cells, EZH2, SUZ12, and EED
were expressed at higher levels in all 8 human EOC cell lines tested.
Consistently, H3K27Me3 was also overexpressed in human EOC cell lines compared
with pHOSE cells. EZH2 was significantly overexpressed in primary human EOCs (n =
134) when compared with normal ovarian surface epithelium (n = 46; P < 0.001).
EZH2 expression positively correlated with expression of Ki67 (P < 0.001; a
marker of cell proliferation) and tumor grade (P = 0.034) but not tumor stage (P 
= 0.908) in EOC. There was no correlation of EZH2 expression with overall (P =
0.3) or disease-free survival (P = 0.2) in high-grade serous histotype EOC
patients (n = 98). Knockdown of EZH2 expression reduced the level of H3K27Me3 and
suppressed the growth of human EOC cells both in vitro and in vivo in xenograft
models. EZH2 knockdown induced apoptosis of human EOC cells. Finally, we showed
that EZH2 knockdown suppressed the invasion of human EOC cells. Together, these
data demonstrate that EZH2 is frequently overexpressed in human EOC cells and its
overexpression promotes the proliferation and invasion of human EOC cells,
suggesting that EZH2 is a potential target for developing EOC therapeutics.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3059727
PMID: 21115743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Oncol Lett. 2010 Nov;1(6):947-950. Epub 2010 Sep 23.

Absence of the JAZF1/SUZ12 chimeric transcript in the immortalized non-neoplastic
endometrial stromal cell line T HESCs.

Panagopoulos I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Archaeological Research Laboratory, Stockholm University,
Wallenberglaboratoriet, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.

Endometrial stromal sarcomas are rare malignancies, accounting for less than 10% 
of uterine sarcomas. The most characteristic chromosomal aberration of this tumor
type is the translocation t(7;17)(p15-p21;q12-q21) leading to the fusion of two
zinc finger genes, JAZF1 and SUZ12. Recently, the presence of the neoplastic
JAZF1/SUZ12 fusion transcript was reported in normal cells of human endometrium. 
One of the positive samples for the JAZF1/SUZ12 transcript was the immortalized T
HESCs cell line. This cell line was derived from the stromal cells obtained from 
an adult female with myomas and immortalized by transfection of a human
telomerase gene. Since T HESCs has a normal karyotype and no fusion of the two
genes occurs at the genomic level, the JAZF1/SUZ12 transcript was proposed to be 
generated by regulated trans-splicing between precursor RNAs for JAZF1 and SUZ12.
However, no confirmatory reports currently exist. To determine whether the
results could be reproduced, the T HESCs cell line was subjected to three
different RT-PCR amplifications for the JAZF1/SUZ12 fusion transcript. RT-PCR
assays did not amplify JUZF1/SUZ12 cDNA fragments in the T HESCs cell line,
whereas the same assays easily generated JUZF1/SUZ12-amplified transcripts in an 
endometrial stromal cell sarcoma carrying the t(7;17) chromosomal aberration.
Thus, the presence, if any, of a JUZF1/SUZ12 chimeric transcript in the
immortalized normal T HESCs is not a constant, reproducible result.

PMCID: PMC3412502
PMID: 22870092  [PubMed]


236. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 9;107(45):19266-71. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1008937107. Epub 2010 Oct 25.

Binding of different histone marks differentially regulates the activity and
specificity of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2).

Xu C(1), Bian C, Yang W, Galka M, Ouyang H, Chen C, Qiu W, Liu H, Jones AE,
MacKenzie F, Pan P, Li SS, Wang H, Min J.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, 101 College Street,
Toronto, ON, Canada.

The polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is the major methyltransferase for H3K27
methylation, a modification critical for maintaining repressed gene expression
programs throughout development. It has been previously shown that PRC2 maintains
histone methylation patterns during DNA replication in part through its ability
to bind to H3K27me3. However, the mechanism by which PRC2 recognizes H3K27me3 is 
unclear. Here we show that the WD40 domain of EED, a PRC2 component, is a
methyllysine histone-binding domain. The crystal structures of apo-EED and EED in
complex respectively with five different trimethyllysine histone peptides reveal 
that EED binds these peptides via the top face of its ß-propeller architecture.
The ammonium group of the trimethyllysine is accommodated by an aromatic cage
formed by three aromatic residues, while its aliphatic chain is flanked by a
fourth aromatic residue. Our structural data provide an explanation for the
preferential recognition of the Ala-Arg-Lys-Ser motif-containing trimethylated
H3K27, H3K9, and H1K26 marks by EED over lower methylation states and other
histone methyllysine marks. More importantly, we found that binding of different 
histone marks by EED differentially regulates the activity and specificity of
PRC2. Whereas the H3K27me3 mark stimulates the histone methyltransferase activity
of PRC2, the H1K26me3 mark inhibits PRC2 methyltransferase activity on the
nucleosome. Moreover, H1K26me3 binding switches the specificity of PRC2 from
methylating H3K27 to EED. In addition to determining the molecular basis of
EED-methyllysine recognition, our work provides the biochemical characterization 
of how the activity of a histone methyltransferase is oppositely regulated by two
histone marks.

PMCID: PMC2984210
PMID: 20974918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. RNA Biol. 2010 Sep-Oct;7(5):582-5. Epub 2010 Sep 1.

Long noncoding RNA in genome regulation: prospects and mechanisms.

Hung T(1), Chang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are pervasively transcribed and critical regulators
of the epigenome[1, 2]. These long, polyadenylated RNAs do not code for proteins,
but function directly as RNAs, recruiting chromatin modifiers to mediate
transcriptional changes in processes ranging from X-inactivation (XIST) to
imprinting (H19)[3]. The recent discovery that lncRNA HOTAIR can link chromatin
changes to cancer metastasis[4] furthers the relevance of lncRNAs to human
disease. Here, we discuss lncRNAs as regulatory modules and explore the
implications for disease pathogenesis. Although large-scale analyses of mammalian
transcriptomes have revealed that more than 50% of transcripts have no protein
coding potential[2, 5, 6], the functions of these putative transcripts are
largely unknown. A subset of these noncoding transcripts are termed long
noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), based on an arbitrary minimum length of 200
nucleotides. LncRNAs are roughly classified based on their position relative to
protein-coding genes: intergenic (between genes), intragenic/intronic (within
genes), and antisense[2]. Initial efforts to characterize these molecules
demonstrated that they function in cis, regulating their immediate genomic
neighbors. Examples include AIR, XIST, and Kcnq1ot (reviewed in [1, 7, 8]), which
recruit chromatin modifying complexes to silence adjacent sites. The scope of
lncRNAs in gene regulation was advanced with the finding that lncRNA HOTAIR
exhibited trans regulatory capacities. HOTAIR is transcribed at the intersection 
of opposing chromatin domains in the HOXC locus, but targets Polycomb Repressive 
Complex 2 (PRC2) to silence 40 kilobases of HOXD[9], a locus involved in
developmental patterning. A subsequent study revealed that HOTAIR is
overexpressed in approximately one quarter of human breast cancers, directing
PRC2 to approximately 800 ectopic sites in the genome, which leads to histone H3 
lysine 27 trimethylation and changes in gene expression[4]. The impacts of
lncRNA-mediated chromatin changes are noteworthy: not only did HOTAIR drive
metastasis in a mouse model, but HOTAIR expression in human breast cancer was
found to be an independent prognostic marker for death and metastasis[4]. The
fact that HOTAIR drives chromatin reprogramming genome-wide suggests that
long-range regulation by lncRNAs may be a widespread mechanism. This is supported
by a study showing that > 20% of tested lncRNAs are bound by PRC2 and other
chromatin modifiers[10]. Furthermore, this is an underestimate of the total RNAs 
involved in chromatin modification, as PRC2 target genes also transcribe smaller 
50-200 nt RNAs that interact with SUZ12 to mediate gene repression[11]. These
findings provoke questions regarding the initial triggers for HOTAIR
overexpression and whether understanding of lncRNA mechanics may have clinical
relevance.

PMCID: PMC3073254
PMID: 20930520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Cancer. 2010 Sep 30;9:265. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-265.

Clinical significance of Polycomb gene expression in brain tumors.

Crea F(1), Hurt EM, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Stem Cell Section, Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer
Institute at Frederick, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
Frederick, MD, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are crucial for neural cancer stem cell (NCSC)
self-renewal. However, the relative expression levels of PcG genes in different
subtypes of brain tumors, their prognostic role and their effects on cellular
pathways have not been investigated. For this purpose, we queried the Oncomine
database and found that 4 PcG genes (EZH2, RBBP7, SUZ12, YY1) are specifically
expressed in brain tumors. EZH2 expression increases with tumor grade in adult
and pediatric brain tumors, and is a poor prognostic factor. In glioblastoma,
EZH2 inhibits differentiation, and activates cancer-, cell cycle- and cellular
movement-related genes. In keeping with previously published data, our results
suggest that EZH2 is both a prognostic factor and a promising therapy target in
brain tumors.

PMCID: PMC2958980
PMID: 20920292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Feb;226(2):293-8. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22420.

RAR<U+03B3> is required for correct deposition and removal of Suz12 and H2A.Z in
embryonic stem cells.

Amat R(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York 10065, USA.

Retinoic acid (RA) induces embryonic stem cell differentiation. The effects of RA
are mediated by retinoic acid receptors (RARs) that promote epigenetic changes
controlling gene transcription. We show here that RAR<U+03B3>, in the absence of the
ligand RA, is required for deposition of the histone variant H2A.Z and the
polycomb group protein Suz12 at RA target genes, and that in embryonic stem cells
both RAR<U+03B3> and Suz12 exist in a multi-protein complex in the absence of ligand.
Addition of RA causes removal of H2A.Z and Suz12 from RAR<U+03B3> target genes when the 
genes are transcriptionally activated.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3369573
PMID: 20857416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mol Med. 2011 Jan-Feb;17(1-2):79-87. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2010.00079. Epub 2010
Sep 10.

Identification of genes potentially involved in the increased risk of malignancy 
in NF1-microdeleted patients.

Pasmant E(1), Masliah-Planchon J, Lévy P, Laurendeau I, Ortonne N, Parfait B,
Valeyrie-Allanore L, Leroy K, Wolkenstein P, Vidaud M, Vidaud D, Bièche I.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Descartes, Faculté des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et
Biologiques, Paris, France. eric.pasmant@gmail.com

Patients with NF1 microdeletion develop more neurofibromas at a younger age, and 
have an increased risk of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs). We
postulated that the increased risk of malignancy could be due to inactivation, in
addition to NF1, of a second tumor suppressor gene located in the typical 1.4-Mb 
microdeletion found in most of the microdeleted patients. We investigated the
expression of NF1, the other 16 protein-coding genes and the 2 microRNAs located 
in the 1.4-Mb microdeletion by means of real-time quantitative
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in a large series of
human dermal and plexiform neurofibromas and MPNSTs. Five genes were
significantly upregulated: OMG and SUZ12 in plexiform neurofibromas and ATAD5,
EVI2A and C17orf79 in MPNSTs. More interestingly, two genes were significantly
downregulated (RNF135 and CENTA2) in tumor Schwann cells from MPNST biopsies and 
in MPNST cell lines. This study points to the involvement of several genes
(particularly RNF135 and CENTA2) in the increased risk of malignancy observed in 
NF1-microdeleted patients.

PMCID: PMC3022985
PMID: 20844836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mol Cell. 2010 Sep 10;39(5):761-72. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.08.013.

Loss of miR-200 inhibition of Suz12 leads to polycomb-mediated repression
required for the formation and maintenance of cancer stem cells.

Iliopoulos D(1), Lindahl-Allen M, Polytarchou C, Hirsch HA, Tsichlis PN, Struhl
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2010 Sep 10;39(5):661-3.

In an inducible oncogenesis model, the miR-200 family is inhibited during CSC
formation but not transformation, and inhibition of miR-200b increases CSC
formation. Interestingly, miR-200b directly targets Suz12, a subunit of a
polycomb repressor complex (PRC2). Loss of miR-200 during CSC formation increases
Suz12 expression, Suz12 binding, H3-K27 trimethylation, and Polycomb-mediated
repression of the E-cadherin gene. miR-200b expression or Suz12 depletion blocks 
the formation and maintenance of mammospheres, and in combination with
chemotherapy suppresses tumor growth and prolongs remission in mouse xenografts. 
Conversely, ectopic expression of Suz12 in transformed cells is sufficient to
generate CSCs. The miR-200b-Suz12-cadherin pathway is important for CSC growth
and invasive ability in genetically distinct breast cancer cells, and its
transcriptional signature is observed in metastatic breast tumors. The
interaction between miR-200 and Suz12 is highly conserved, suggesting that it
represents an ancient regulatory mechanism to control the growth and function of 
stem cells.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2938080
PMID: 20832727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Hum Mutat. 2010 Oct;31(10):1163-73. doi: 10.1002/humu.21340.

Intrachromosomal mitotic nonallelic homologous recombination is the major
molecular mechanism underlying type-2 NF1 deletions.

Roehl AC(1), Vogt J, Mussotter T, Zickler AN, Spöti H, Högel J, Chuzhanova NA,
Wimmer K, Kluwe L, Mautner VF, Cooper DN, Kehrer-Sawatzki H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR) is responsible for the recurrent
rearrangements that give rise to genomic disorders. Although meiotic NAHR has
been investigated in multiple contexts, much less is known about mitotic NAHR
despite its importance for tumorigenesis. Because type-2 NF1 microdeletions
frequently result from mitotic NAHR, they represent a good model in which to
investigate the features of mitotic NAHR. We have used microsatellite analysis
and SNP arrays to distinguish between the various alternative recombinational
possibilities, thereby ascertaining that 17 of 18 type-2 NF1 deletions, with
breakpoints in the SUZ12 gene and its highly homologous pseudogene, originated
via intrachromosomal recombination. This high proportion of intrachromosomal NAHR
causing somatic type-2 NF1 deletions contrasts with the interchromosomal origin
of germline type-1 NF1 microdeletions, whose breakpoints are located within the
NF1-REPs (low-copy repeats located adjacent to the SUZ12 sequences). Further,
meiotic NAHR causing type-1 NF1 deletions occurs within recombination hotspots
characterized by high GC-content and DNA duplex stability, whereas the type-2
breakpoints associated with the mitotic NAHR events investigated here do not
cluster within hotspots and are located within regions of significantly lower
GC-content and DNA stability. Our findings therefore point to fundamental
mechanistic differences between the determinants of mitotic and meiotic NAHR.

Hum Mutat 31:1163-1173, 2010. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20725927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Science. 2010 Aug 6;329(5992):689-93. doi: 10.1126/science.1192002. Epub 2010 Jul
8.

Long noncoding RNA as modular scaffold of histone modification complexes.

Tsai MC(1), Manor O, Wan Y, Mosammaparast N, Wang JK, Lan F, Shi Y, Segal E,
Chang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) regulate chromatin states and
epigenetic inheritance. Here, we show that the lincRNA HOTAIR serves as a
scaffold for at least two distinct histone modification complexes. A 5' domain of
HOTAIR binds polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), whereas a 3' domain of HOTAIR 
binds the LSD1/CoREST/REST complex. The ability to tether two distinct complexes 
enables RNA-mediated assembly of PRC2 and LSD1 and coordinates targeting of PRC2 
and LSD1 to chromatin for coupled histone H3 lysine 27 methylation and lysine 4
demethylation. Our results suggest that lincRNAs may serve as scaffolds by
providing binding surfaces to assemble select histone modification enzymes,
thereby specifying the pattern of histone modifications on target genes.

PMCID: PMC2967777
PMID: 20616235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Am J Pathol. 2010 Aug;177(2):930-42. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090769. Epub 2010
Jun 17.

Deregulated expression of the polycomb-group protein SUZ12 target genes
characterizes mantle cell lymphoma.

Martín-Pérez D(1), Sánchez E, Maestre L, Suela J, Vargiu P, Di Lisio L, Martínez 
N, Alves J, Piris MA, Sánchez-Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma Group, Molecular Pathology Programme, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain.

Polycomb proteins are known to be of great importance in human cancer
pathogenesis. SUZ12 is a component of the Polycomb PRC2 complex that, along with 
EZH2, is involved in embryonic stem cell differentiation. EZH2 plays an essential
role in many cancer types, but an equivalent involvement of SUZ12 has not been as
thoroughly demonstrated. Here we show that SUZ12 is anomalously expressed in
human primary tumors, especially in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), pulmonary
carcinomas and melanoma, and is associated with gene locus amplification in some 
cases. Using MCL as a model, functional and genomic studies demonstrate that
SUZ12 loss compromises cell viability, increases apoptosis, and targets genes
involved in central oncogenic pathways associated with MCL pathogenesis. Our
results support the hypothesis that the abnormal expression of SUZ12 accounts for
some of the unexplained features of MCL, such as abnormal DNA repair and
increased resistance to apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2913342
PMID: 20558579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Mol Cell. 2010 Jun 11;38(5):675-88. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.03.019.

Short RNAs are transcribed from repressed polycomb target genes and interact with
polycomb repressive complex-2.

Kanhere A(1), Viiri K, Araújo CC, Rasaiyaah J, Bouwman RD, Whyte WA, Pereira CF, 
Brookes E, Walker K, Bell GW, Pombo A, Fisher AG, Young RA, Jenner RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, University College London, London W1T 4JF,
UK.

Polycomb proteins maintain cell identity by repressing the expression of
developmental regulators specific for other cell types. Polycomb repressive
complex-2 (PRC2) catalyzes trimethylation of histone H3 lysine-27 (H3K27me3).
Although repressed, PRC2 targets are generally associated with the
transcriptional initiation marker H3K4me3, but the significance of this remains
unclear. Here, we identify a class of short RNAs, approximately 50-200
nucleotides in length, transcribed from the 5' end of polycomb target genes in
primary T cells and embryonic stem cells. Short RNA transcription is associated
with RNA polymerase II and H3K4me3, occurs in the absence of mRNA transcription, 
and is independent of polycomb activity. Short RNAs form stem-loop structures
resembling PRC2 binding sites in Xist, interact with PRC2 through SUZ12, cause
gene repression in cis, and are depleted from polycomb target genes activated
during cell differentiation. We propose that short RNAs play a role in the
association of PRC2 with its target genes.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2886029
PMID: 20542000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2010 Jun 1;15:1018-22.

Polycomb group proteins are essential for spinal cord development.

Wang C(1), Zhao JJ, Lu CL, Han XD, An LS, Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate school of Peking Union Medical College, Number 5 Dong Dan San Tiao,
Beijing 100005, China.

Birth defects are the leading cause of infantile mortality, followed by neural
tube defects (NTD) and congenital heart defects. Spina bifida and anencephaly are
among the most common forms of NTD. NTD etiologies are complex, and are
associated with both genetic and environmental factors. Polycomb group proteins
are essential for vertebrate development; therefore, the purpose of this study
was to determine the role of PcGs in spinal cord morphogenesis in normal and
all-trans-retinoic acid (RA)-treated fetal rat models of spina bifida. Pregnant
rats were gavage-fed RA, resulting in fetal NTD, and embryos were obtained on day
15.5, 17.5, and 19.5. Western blot and immunohistochemistry were used to reveal
PcGs expression in the normal and RA-treated E15.5-19.5 rat sacral cords. Western
blot and immunohistochemistry revealed decreased EED, RNF2, SUZ12, and H3K27me3
expression in the normal, E15.5-19.5, rat sacral cords. In addition, the spinal
cord of RA-treated rats during embryonic development exhibited altered PcGs
protein expression. Administration of excess RA results in NTD. Our results
suggest that the Polycomb proteins may be involved in spinal cord development.

PMID: 20515739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Hum Mutat. 2010 Jun;31(6):E1506-18. doi: 10.1002/humu.21271.

NF1 microdeletions in neurofibromatosis type 1: from genotype to phenotype.

Pasmant E(1), Sabbagh A, Spurlock G, Laurendeau I, Grillo E, Hamel MJ, Martin L, 
Barbarot S, Leheup B, Rodriguez D, Lacombe D, Dollfus H, Pasquier L, Isidor B,
Ferkal S, Soulier J, Sanson M, Dieux-Coeslier A, Bièche I, Parfait B, Vidaud M,
Wolkenstein P, Upadhyaya M, Vidaud D; members of the NF France Network.

Author information: 
(1)UMR745 INSERM, Université Paris Descartes, Faculté des Sciences
Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, 4 av. de l'Observatoire, 75006, Paris, France.
eric.pasmant@etu.univ-paris5.fr

In 5-10% of patients, neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) results from microdeletions 
that encompass the entire NF1 gene and a variable number of flanking genes. Two
recurrent microdeletion types are found in most cases, with microdeletion
breakpoints located in paralogous regions flanking NF1 (proximal NF1-REP-a and
distal NF1-REP-c for the 1.4 Mb type-1 microdeletion, and SUZ12 and SUZ12P for
the 1.2 Mb type-2 microdeletion). A more severe phenotype is usually associated
with NF1 microdeletion patients than in those with intragenic mutations. We
characterized NF1 microdeletions in 70 unrelated NF1 microdeleted patients using 
a high-resolution NF1 custom array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH).
Genotype-phenotype correlations were studied in 58 of these microdeletion
patients and compared to 389 patients with intragenic truncating NF1 mutations
and phenotyped in the same standardized way. Our results confirmed in an unbiased
manner the existence of a contiguous gene syndrome with a significantly higher
incidence of learning disabilities and facial dysmorphism in microdeleted
patients compared to patients with intragenic NF1 mutations. Microdeleted NF1
patients also showed a trend toward significance for childhood overgrowth.
High-resolution array-CGH identified a new recurrent approximately 1.0 Mb
microdeletion type, designated as type-3, with breakpoints in the paralogous
regions middle NF1-REP-b and distal NF1-REP-c.

PMID: 20513137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Blood. 2010 Aug 5;116(5):731-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-12-260760. Epub 2010 May 
5.

Opposing roles of polycomb repressive complexes in hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells.

Majewski IJ(1), Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Corbin J, Pakusch M, Ebert A, Busslinger
M, Koseki H, Hu Y, Smyth GK, Alexander WS, Hilton DJ, Blewitt ME.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are transcriptional repressors with a central role 
in the establishment and maintenance of gene expression patterns during
development. We have investigated the role of polycomb repressive complexes
(PRCs) in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and progenitor populations. We show
that mice with loss of function mutations in PRC2 components display enhanced
HSC/progenitor population activity, whereas mutations that disrupt PRC1 or
pleiohomeotic repressive complex are associated with HSC/progenitor cell defects.
Because the hierarchical model of PRC action would predict synergistic effects of
PRC1 and PRC2 mutation, these opposing effects suggest this model does not hold
true in HSC/progenitor cells. To investigate the molecular targets of each
complex in HSC/progenitor cells, we measured genome-wide expression changes
associated with PRC deficiency, and identified transcriptional networks that are 
differentially regulated by PRC1 and PRC2. These studies provide new insights
into the mechanistic interplay between distinct PRCs and have important
implications for approaching PcG proteins as therapeutic targets.

PMID: 20445021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mol Reprod Dev. 2010 Jun;77(6):540-9. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21180.

Regulation of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 during early porcine embryonic development.

Gao Y(1), Hyttel P, Hall VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, Copenhagen, Denmark. ygao000@gmail.com

The epigenetic marks H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 are important repressive and permissive
histone modifications, respectively, which are involved in gene regulation such
as Hox gene expression during embryonic development. In this study, we
investigated the global levels of these two histone modifications. We also
investigated the expression of H3K27me3's methyltransferase (EZH2), EZH2
co-factors (EED and SUZ12) and demethylases (JMJD3 and UTX), as well as H3K4me3's
methylases (ASH1L and MLL1) and demethylase (RBP2) in porcine pre-implantation
embryos. In addition, the expression of Hox genes, HOXA2, HOXA3, HOXA7, HOXA10,
HOXB4, HOXB7, HOXC8, HOXD8, and HOXD10 was investigated. We found that global
levels of H3K27me3 decreased from the 1- to the 4-cell stage, corresponding to
the time of major embryonic genome activation. Subsequently, the levels increased
in hatched blastocysts, particularly in the trophectoderm. The expression levels 
of EZH2, EED, SUZ12, JMJD3, and UTX correlated well with these findings. The
global levels of H3K4me3 decreased from the 1-cell to the morula stage and
increased in hatched blastocysts, especially in trophectoderm. A peak in
expression of ASH1L was seen at the 4-cell stage, but overall, expression of
ASH1L, MLL1, and RBP2 correlated poorly with H3K4me3. HOXA3, A7, and B4 were
expressed in 4-cell embryos, and HOXA7, A10, B4, and D8 were expressed in hatched
blastocysts, and did not correlate well to global methylation of H3K27me3 or
H3K4me3. Thus, H3K4me3 may play a role in early porcine embryonic genome
activation, whereas, H3K27me3 may be involved in initial cell lineage segregation
in the blastocyst.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20422712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Aug;38(15):4958-69. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq244. Epub 2010
Apr 12.

Characterization of an antagonistic switch between histone H3 lysine 27
methylation and acetylation in the transcriptional regulation of Polycomb group
target genes.

Pasini D(1), Malatesta M, Jung HR, Walfridsson J, Willer A, Olsson L, Skotte J,
Wutz A, Porse B, Jensen ON, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are transcriptional repressors, which regulate
proliferation and cell fate decisions during development, and their deregulated
expression is a frequent event in human tumours. The Polycomb repressive complex 
2 (PRC2) catalyzes trimethylation (me3) of histone H3 lysine 27 (K27), and it is 
believed that this activity mediates transcriptional repression. Despite the
recent progress in understanding PcG function, the molecular mechanisms by which 
the PcG proteins repress transcription, as well as the mechanisms that lead to
the activation of PcG target genes are poorly understood. To gain insight into
these mechanisms, we have determined the global changes in histone modifications 
in embryonic stem (ES) cells lacking the PcG protein Suz12 that is essential for 
PRC2 activity. We show that loss of PRC2 activity results in a global increase in
H3K27 acetylation. The methylation to acetylation switch correlates with the
transcriptional activation of PcG target genes, both during ES cell
differentiation and in MLL-AF9-transduced hematopoietic stem cells. Moreover, we 
provide evidence that the acetylation of H3K27 is catalyzed by the
acetyltransferases p300 and CBP. Based on these data, we propose that the PcG
proteins in part repress transcription by preventing the binding of
acetyltransferases to PcG target genes.

PMCID: PMC2926606
PMID: 20385584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 7;285(19):14534-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.115345. Epub 2010
Mar 15.

Epigenetic regulatory mechanisms distinguish retinoic acid-mediated
transcriptional responses in stem cells and fibroblasts.

Kashyap V(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York 10065, USA.

Retinoic acid (RA), a vitamin A metabolite, regulates transcription by binding to
RA receptor (RAR) and retinoid X receptor (RXR) heterodimers. This
transcriptional response is determined by receptor interactions with
transcriptional regulators and chromatin modifying proteins. We compared
transcriptional responses of three RA target genes (Hoxa1, Cyp26a1, RARbeta(2))
in primary embryo fibroblasts (mouse embryonic fibroblasts), immortalized
fibroblasts (Balb/c3T3), and F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells. Hoxa1 and Cyp26a1
transcripts are not expressed, but RARbeta(2) transcripts are induced by RA in
mouse embryonic fibroblasts and Balb/c3T3 cells. Retinoid receptors (RARgamma,
RXRalpha), coactivators (pCIP (NCOA3, SRC3)), and p300 and RNA polymerase II are 
recruited only to the RARbeta(2) RA response element (RARE) in Balb/c3T3, whereas
these proteins are recruited to RAREs of all three genes by RA in F9 cells. In
F9, RA reduces polycomb (PcG) protein Suz12 and the associated H3K27me3
repressive epigenetic modification at the RAREs of all three genes. In contrast, 
in Balb/c3T3 cells cultured in the +/-RA, Suz12 is not associated with the Hoxa1,
RARbeta(2), and Cyp26a1 RAREs, whereas slow levels of the H3K27me3 mark are seen 
at these RAREs. Thus, Suz12 is not required for gene repression in the absence of
RA. Even though the Hoxa1 RARE and proximal promoter show high levels of H3K9,K14
acetylation in Balb/c3T3, the Hoxa1 gene is not transcriptionally activated by
RA. In Balb/c3T3, CpG islands are methylated in the Cyp26a1 promoter region but
not in the Hoxa1 promoter or in these promoters in F9 cells. We have delineated
the complex mechanisms that control RA-mediated transcription in fibroblasts
versus stem cells.

PMCID: PMC2863236
PMID: 20231276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2010 May;9(5):838-50. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M900489-MCP200. Epub 
2010 Feb 11.

Quantitative mass spectrometry of histones H3.2 and H3.3 in Suz12-deficient mouse
embryonic stem cells reveals distinct, dynamic post-translational modifications
at Lys-27 and Lys-36.

Jung HR(1), Pasini D, Helin K, Jensen ON.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Epigenetics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark.

SUZ12 is a core component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and is
required for the differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). PRC2 is
associated with transcriptional repression via methylation of H3 Lys-27. We
applied quantitative mass spectrometry to investigate the effects of Suz12
deficiency on H3.2 and H3.3 from mouse ESCs. Using high mass accuracy MS combined
with CID or electron transfer dissociation (ETD) tandem mass spectrometry, we
identified a total of 81 unique modified peptides from H3.2 and H3.3 and assigned
46 modifications at 22 different positions, including distinct coexisting
modifications. In certain cases, high mass accuracy LTQ-Orbitrap MS/MS allowed
precise localization of near isobaric coexisting PTMs such as trimethylation and 
acetylation within individual peptides. ETD MS/MS facilitated sequencing and
annotation of phosphorylated histone peptides. The combined use of ETD and CID
MS/MS increased the total number of identified modified peptides. Comparative
quantitative analysis of histones from wild type and Suz12-deficient ESCs using
stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture and LC-MS/MS revealed a 
dramatic reduction of H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 and an increase of H3K27ac, thereby
uncovering an antagonistic methyl/acetyl switch at H3K27. The reduction in H3K27 
methylation and increase in H3K27 acetylation was accompanied by H3K36
acetylation and methylation. Estimation of the global isoform percentage of
unmodified and modified histone peptides (amino acids 27-40) showed the relative 
distribution of distinct coexisting histone marks. Our study revealed limitations
of antibody-based Western blotting methods for detection of coexisting protein
modifications and demonstrated the utility of quantitative tandem mass
spectrometry for detailed analysis of the dynamics of coexisting
post-translational modifications in proteins.

PMCID: PMC2871418
PMID: 20150217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 19;285(12):8719-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.077081. Epub 2010
Jan 11.

Epithelial cell adhesion molecule regulation is associated with the maintenance
of the undifferentiated phenotype of human embryonic stem cells.

Lu TY(1), Lu RM, Liao MY, Yu J, Chung CH, Kao CF, Wu HC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Milan 20131, Italy.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are unique pluripotent cells capable of
self-renewal and differentiation into all three germ layers. To date, more cell
surface markers capable of reliably identifying hESCs are needed. The epithelial 
cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) is a type I transmembrane glycoprotein expressed
in several progenitor cell populations and cancers. It has been used to enrich
cells with tumor-initiating activity in xenograft transplantation studies. Here, 
we comprehensively profile the expression of EpCAM by immunofluorescence
microscopy, Western blotting, and flow cytometry using an anti-EpCAM monoclonal
antibody (mAb) OC98-1. We found EpCAM to be highly and selectively expressed by
undifferentiated rather than differentiated hESCs. The protein and transcript
level of EpCAM rapidly diminished as soon as hESC had differentiated. This
silencing was closely and exclusively associated with the radical transformation 
of histone modification at the EpCAM promoter. Moreover, we demonstrated that the
dynamic pattern of lysine 27 trimethylation of histone 3 was conferred by the
interplay of SUZ12 and JMJD3, both of which were involved in maintaining hESC
pluripotency. In addition, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis to
elucidate the direct regulation by EpCAM of several reprogramming genes,
including c-MYC, OCT-4, NANOG, SOX2, and KLF4, to help maintain the
undifferentiation of hESCs. Collectively, our results suggest that EpCAM might be
used as a surface marker for hESC. The expression of EpCAM may be regulated by
epigenetic mechanisms, and it is strongly associated with the maintenance of the 
undifferentiated state of hESCs.

PMCID: PMC2838295
PMID: 20064925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Cell. 2009 Dec 24;139(7):1290-302. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.12.002.

Jarid2/Jumonji coordinates control of PRC2 enzymatic activity and target gene
occupancy in pluripotent cells.

Peng JC(1), Valouev A, Swigut T, Zhang J, Zhao Y, Sidow A, Wysocka J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) regulates key developmental genes in
embryonic stem (ES) cells and during development. Here we show that
Jarid2/Jumonji, a protein enriched in pluripotent cells and a founding member of 
the Jumonji C (JmjC) domain protein family, is a PRC2 subunit in ES cells.
Genome-wide ChIP-seq analyses of Jarid2, Ezh2, and Suz12 binding reveal that
Jarid2 and PRC2 occupy the same genomic regions. We further show that Jarid2
promotes PRC2 recruitment to the target genes while inhibiting PRC2 histone
methyltransferase activity, suggesting that it acts as a "molecular rheostat"
that finely calibrates PRC2 functions at developmental genes. Using Xenopus
laevis as a model we demonstrate that Jarid2 knockdown impairs the induction of
gastrulation genes in blastula embryos and results in failure of differentiation.
Our findings illuminate a mechanism of histone methylation regulation in
pluripotent cells and during early cell-fate transitions.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2911953
PMID: 20064375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Hum Mutat. 2010 Mar;31(3):325-34. doi: 10.1002/humu.21191.

Extended runs of homozygosity at 17q11.2: an association with type-2 NF1
deletions?

Roehl AC(1), Cooper DN, Kluwe L, Helbrich A, Wimmer K, Högel J, Mautner VF,
Kehrer-Sawatzki H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Large deletions in the NF1 gene region at 17q11.2 are caused by nonallelic
homologous recombination (NAHR). The recurrent type-2 NF1 deletions span 1.2 Mb, 
with breakpoints in the SUZ12 gene and SUZ12P. Type-2 NF1 deletions occur
preferentially during mitosis and are associated with somatic mosaicism. A panel 
of 16 type-2 NF1 deletions was used as a model system in which to investigate
whether extended homozygosity across 17q11.2 might be associated with somatic
deletion. Using SNP arrays, a 3.2 Mb interval encompassing the NF1 deletion
region was found to harbor runs of homozygosity (ROHs) in different human
populations. However, ROHs >or=500 kb directly flanking the NF1 deletion region
on both sides were not found to occur disproportionately in NF1 patients
harboring type-2 deletions compared to controls. Although low allelic diversity
in 17q11.2 is unlikely to be a key factor in promoting NAHR-mediated somatic
type-2 deletions, a specific ROH of 588 kb (roh1), located some 525 kb proximal
to the deletion interval, was found to occur more frequently (P=0.012) in the
type-2 deletion patients compared with controls. We postulate that roh1 may act
remotely, via an as yet unknown mechanism, to increase the frequency of somatic
recombination between the distally duplicated SUZ12 sequences.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20052761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. PLoS Biol. 2010 Jan;8(1):e1000276. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000276. Epub 2010
Jan 5.

2-D structure of the A region of Xist RNA and its implication for PRC2
association.

Maenner S(1), Blaud M, Fouillen L, Savoye A, Marchand V, Dubois A,
Sanglier-Cianférani S, Van Dorsselaer A, Clerc P, Avner P, Visvikis A, Branlant
C.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté des Sciences et Techniques, AREMS, Nancy Université, UMR 7214 CNRS-UHP
1, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France.

In placental mammals, inactivation of one of the X chromosomes in female cells
ensures sex chromosome dosage compensation. The 17 kb non-coding Xist RNA is
crucial to this process and accumulates on the future inactive X chromosome. The 
most conserved Xist RNA region, the A region, contains eight or nine repeats
separated by U-rich spacers. It is implicated in the recruitment of late
inactivated X genes to the silencing compartment and likely in the recruitment of
complex PRC2. Little is known about the structure of the A region and more
generally about Xist RNA structure. Knowledge of its structure is restricted to
an NMR study of a single A repeat element. Our study is the first experimental
analysis of the structure of the entire A region in solution. By the use of
chemical and enzymatic probes and FRET experiments, using oligonucleotides
carrying fluorescent dyes, we resolved problems linked to sequence redundancies
and established a 2-D structure for the A region that contains two long stem-loop
structures each including four repeats. Interactions formed between repeats and
between repeats and spacers stabilize these structures. Conservation of the
spacer terminal sequences allows formation of such structures in all sequenced
Xist RNAs. By combination of RNP affinity chromatography, immunoprecipitation
assays, mass spectrometry, and Western blot analysis, we demonstrate that the A
region can associate with components of the PRC2 complex in mouse ES cell nuclear
extracts. Whilst a single four-repeat motif is able to associate with components 
of this complex, recruitment of Suz12 is clearly more efficient when the entire A
region is present. Our data with their emphasis on the importance of inter-repeat
pairing change fundamentally our conception of the 2-D structure of the A region 
of Xist RNA and support its possible implication in recruitment of the PRC2
complex.

PMCID: PMC2796953
PMID: 20052282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Apr;67(7):1165-76. doi: 10.1007/s00018-009-0242-9. Epub
2010 Jan 5.

Histone deacetylase controls adult stem cell aging by balancing the expression of
polycomb genes and jumonji domain containing 3.

Jung JW(1), Lee S, Seo MS, Park SB, Kurtz A, Kang SK, Kang KS.

Author information: 
(1)Adult Stem Cell Research Center, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.

Aging is linked to loss of the self-renewal capacity of adult stem cells. Here,
we observed that human multipotent stem cells (MSCs) underwent cellular
senescence in vitro. Decreased expression of histone deacetylases (HDACs),
followed by downregulation of polycomb group genes (PcGs), such as BMI1, EZH2 and
SUZ12, and by upregulation of jumonji domain containing 3 (JMJD3), was observed
in senescent MSCs. Similarly, HDAC inhibitors induced cellular senescence through
downregulation of PcGs and upregulation of JMJD3. Regulation of PcGs was
associated with HDAC inhibitor-induced hypophosphorylation of RB, which causes RB
to bind to and decrease the transcriptional activity of E2F. JMJD3 expression
regulation was dependant on histone acetylation status at its promoter regions. A
histone acetyltransferase (HAT) inhibitor prevented replicative senescence of
MSCs. These results suggest that HDAC activity might be important for MSC
self-renewal by balancing PcGs and JMJD3 expression, which govern cellular
senescence by p16(INK4A) regulation.

PMCID: PMC2835723
PMID: 20049504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Development. 2009 Dec;136(23):4011-20. doi: 10.1242/dev.041160.

Conditional knockdown of Nanog induces apoptotic cell death in mouse migrating
primordial germ cells.

Yamaguchi S(1), Kurimoto K, Yabuta Y, Sasaki H, Nakatsuji N, Saitou M, Tada T.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Engineering, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto
University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

The pluripotency factor Nanog is expressed in peri-implantation embryos and
primordial germ cells (PGCs). Nanog-deficient mouse embryos die soon after
implantation. To explore the function of Nanog in germ cells, Nanog RNA was
conditionally knocked down in vivo by shRNA. Nanog shRNA transgenic (NRi-Tg) mice
were generated through the formation of germline chimeras with NRi-Tg embryonic
stem cells. In E12.5 Cre-induced ER-Cre/NRi-Tg and TNAP-Cre/NRi-Tg
double-transgenic embryos, the number of alkaline phosphatase-positive and
SSEA1-positive PGCs decreased significantly. In the E9.5 and E10.5 migrating
Nanog-knockdown PGCs, TUNEL-positive apoptotic cell death became prominent in
vivo and in vitro, despite Oct4 expression. Single-cell microarray analysis of
E10.5 Nanog-knockdown PGCs revealed significant up- and downregulation of a
substantial number of genes, including Tial1, Id1 and Suz12. These data suggest
that Nanog plays a key role in the proliferation and survival of migrating PGCs
as a safeguard of the PGC-specific molecular network.

PMID: 19906868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Nov 1;10:100. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-100.

Evaluation of real-time PCR endogenous control genes for analysis of gene
expression in bovine endometrium.

Walker CG(1), Meier S, Mitchell MD, Roche JR, Littlejohn M.

Author information: 
(1)DairyNZ Ltd,, Hamilton, New Zealand. Caroline.Walker@vialactia.com

BACKGROUND: Quantitative real-time PCR gene expression results are generally
normalised using endogenous control genes. These reference genes should be
expressed at a constant level across all sample groups in a study, and should not
be influenced by study treatments or conditions. There has been no systematic
investigation of endogenous control genes for bovine endometrium to date. The
suitability of both commonly used and novel endogenous control genes was
evaluated in this study, with the latter being selected from stably expressed
transcripts identified through microarray analysis of bovine endometrium. Fifteen
candidate endogenous control genes were assessed across different tissue subtypes
in pregnant and cycling Holstein-Friesian dairy cows from two divergent genetic
backgrounds.
RESULTS: The expression profiles of five commonly used endogenous control genes
(GAPDH, PPIA, RPS9, RPS15A, and UXT) and 10 experimentally derived candidate
endogenous control genes (SUZ12, C2ORF29, ZNF131, ACTR1A, HDAC1, SLC30A6, CNOT7, 
DNAJC17, BBS2, and RANBP10) were analysed across 44 samples to determine the most
stably expressed gene. Gene stability was assessed using the statistical
algorithms GeNorm and Normfinder. All genes presented with low overall
variability (0.87 to 1.48% CV of Cq). However, when used to normalise a
differentially expressed gene (oxytocin receptor - OXTR) in the samples, the
reported relative gene expression levels were significantly affected by the
control gene chosen. Based on the results of this analysis, SUZ12 is proposed as 
the most appropriate control gene for use in bovine endometrium during early
pregnancy or the oestrus cycle.
CONCLUSION: This study establishes the suitability of novel endogenous control
genes for comparing expression levels in endometrial tissues of pregnant and
cycling bovines, and demonstrates the utility of microarray analysis as a method 
for identifying endogenous control gene candidates.

PMCID: PMC2774697
PMID: 19878604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Dev Dyn. 2009 Dec;238(12):3185-92. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22120.

Characterization of the expression pattern of the PRC2 core subunit Suz12 during 
embryonic development of Xenopus laevis.

Aldiri I(1), Vetter ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA.

The Polycomb repressive complex 2 is a multimeric aggregate that mediates
silencing of a broad range of genes, and is associated with important biological 
contexts such as stem cell maintenance and cancer progression. PRC2 mainly
trimethylates lysine 27 of histone H3 and is composed of three essential core
subunits: EZH2, EED, and SUZ12. The Xenopus orthologs of PRC2 subunits Ezh2 and
Eed have been described but Suz12 remained unidentified. Here, we report the
cloning of the Xenopus Suz12, and determine its spatiotemporal expression during 
development. Xsuz12 transcript is provided maternally and continues to be
expressed throughout development, particularly in the anterior part of the
developing central nervous system. Importantly, comparative analysis of the
expression of the PRC2 subunits Xez, Xeed, and Xrbbp4 indicates that their
expression largely coincides with Xsuz12 in the nervous system, suggesting that
PRC2 may have unexplored functions in the development of the frog central nervous
system.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3360962
PMID: 19877271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Feb;49(2):107-18. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20722.

SUZ12 is a candidate target of the non-canonical WNT pathway in the progression
of chronic myeloid leukemia.

Pizzatti L(1), Binato R, Cofre J, Gomes BE, Dobbin J, Haussmann ME, D'Azambuja D,
Bouzas LF, Abdelhay E.

Author information: 
(1)Divisão de Laboratórios do CEMO, Instituto Nacional do Câncer, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil. pizzatti@inca.gov.br

Polycomb proteins form multiprotein complexes that repress target genes by
chromatin remodeling. In this work, we report that the SUZ12 polycomb gene is
over-expressed in bone marrow samples of patients at the blastic phase of chronic
myeloid leukemia. We also found a direct interaction between polycomb group genes
and the WNT signaling pathway in chronic myeloid leukemia transformation.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay 
(ChIP), and mass spectrometry assays identified noncanonical WNT pathway members,
such as WNT5A and WNT11, bound to the SUZ12 promoter. Immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence with WNT5A and WNT11 antibodies confirmed nuclear
localization. Knockdown of WNTs 1, 5A, and 11 with RNAi approaches showed that
WNT members are capable of activating SUZ12 transcription with varying promoter
affinities. Finally, we suggest that SUZ12 is blocking cellular differentiation, 
as SUZ12 knockdown release differentiation programs in chronic myeloid blastic
phase (CML-BP) transformed cell line.

PMID: 19847889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Nature. 2009 Oct 8;461(7265):762-7. doi: 10.1038/nature08398. Epub 2009 Sep 20.

Role of the polycomb protein EED in the propagation of repressive histone marks.

Margueron R(1), Justin N, Ohno K, Sharpe ML, Son J, Drury WJ 3rd, Voigt P, Martin
SR, Taylor WR, De Marco V, Pirrotta V, Reinberg D, Gamblin SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry, New York
University Medical School, 522 First Avenue, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Polycomb group proteins have an essential role in the epigenetic maintenance of
repressive chromatin states. The gene-silencing activity of the Polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) depends on its ability to trimethylate lysine 27 of
histone H3 (H3K27) by the catalytic SET domain of the EZH2 subunit, and at least 
two other subunits of the complex: SUZ12 and EED. Here we show that the
carboxy-terminal domain of EED specifically binds to histone tails carrying
trimethyl-lysine residues associated with repressive chromatin marks, and that
this leads to the allosteric activation of the methyltransferase activity of
PRC2. Mutations in EED that prevent it from recognizing repressive
trimethyl-lysine marks abolish the activation of PRC2 in vitro and, in
Drosophila, reduce global methylation and disrupt development. These findings
suggest a model for the propagation of the H3K27me3 mark that accounts for the
maintenance of repressive chromatin domains and for the transmission of a histone
modification from mother to daughter cells.

PMCID: PMC3772642
PMID: 19767730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Oncogene. 2009 Nov 19;28(46):4095-104. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.273. Epub 2009 Sep
14.

Suppression of lung adenocarcinoma through menin and polycomb gene-mediated
repression of growth factor pleiotrophin.

Gao SB(1), Feng ZJ, Xu B, Wu Y, Yin P, Yang Y, Hua X, Jin GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Medical College, Xiamen University,
Xiamen 361005, Fujian, PR China.

Menin upregulates transcription of cell-cycle inhibitors to suppress endocrine
tumors, but it is poorly understood how menin suppresses non-endocrine tumors
such as lung cancer. Here, we show that menin inhibits proliferation of human
lung cancer cells and growth of lung cancer in mice. The menin-mediated tumor
suppression requires repression of growth factor pleiotrophin (PTN), which binds 
to its cell surface receptor, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) that is activated 
in certain lung adenocarcinomas. Menin represses PTN transcription and
PTN-induced proliferation of human lung cancer cells, and menin expression is
substantially reduced in primary human lung adenocarcinomas. Notably, menin binds
the PTN locus and enhances Polycomb gene Enhancer of Zeste homolog 2
(EZH2)-mediated histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27m3), a negative mark
for gene transcription but does not affect histone H3K4 methylation that is
usually upregulated by menin in endocrine cells. Together, our findings indicate 
that menin suppresses lung cancer partly through increasing Polycomb
gene-mediated H3K27 methylation and repressing PTN transcription, unraveling a
novel, epigenetically regulated PTN-ALK signaling pathway in suppressing lung
cancer.

PMID: 19749796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Epigenetics. 2009 Aug 16;4(6):404-14. Epub 2009 Aug 29.

Targeting of EZH2 to a defined genomic site is sufficient for recruitment of
Dnmt3a but not de novo DNA methylation.

Rush M(1), Appanah R, Lee S, Lam LL, Goyal P, Lorincz MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Life Sciences Institute, The University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, CA.

Polycomb-mediated gene silencing and DNA methylation underlie many epigenetic
processes important in normal development as well as in cancer. An interaction
between EZH2 of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which trimethylates
lysine 27 on Histone 3 (H3K27me3), and all three DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs)
has been reported, implicating a role for PRC2 in directing DNA methylation.
Interestingly, however, the majority of H3K27me3 marked genes lack DNA
methylation in ES cells, indicating that EZH2 recruitment may not be sufficient
to promote DNA methylation. Here, we employed a Gal4DBD/gal4UAS-based system to
directly test if EZH2 binding at a defined genomic site is sufficient to promote 
de novo DNA methylation in a murine erythroleukaemia cell line. Targeting of a
Gal4DBD-EZH2 fusion to an intergenic transgene bearing a gal4 binding-site array 
promoted localized recruitment of Suz12 and Bmi1, subunits of PRC2 and PRC1,
respectively, and deposition of H3K27me3. Further analysis of the H3K27me3-marked
site revealed the persistence of H3K4me2, a mark inversely correlated with DNA
methylation. Strikingly, while Dnmt3a was also recruited in an EZH2-dependent
manner, de novo DNA methylation of the transgene was not observed. Thus, while
targeting of EZH2 to a specific genomic site is sufficient for recruitment of
Dnmt3a, additional events are required for de novo DNA methylation.

PMID: 19717977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Blood. 2009 Sep 24;114(13):2733-43. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-213496. Epub 2009 
Jul 28.

Combined epigenetic therapy with the histone methyltransferase EZH2 inhibitor
3-deazaneplanocin A and the histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat against
human AML cells.

Fiskus W(1), Wang Y, Sreekumar A, Buckley KM, Shi H, Jillella A, Ustun C, Rao R, 
Fernandez P, Chen J, Balusu R, Koul S, Atadja P, Marquez VE, Bhalla KN.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Georgia Cancer Center, Augusta, GA30912, USA.

The polycomb repressive complex (PRC) 2 contains 3 core proteins, EZH2, SUZ12,
and EED, in which the SET (suppressor of variegation-enhancer of zeste-trithorax)
domain of EZH2 mediates the histone methyltransferase activity. This induces
trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3, regulates the expression of HOX genes,
and promotes proliferation and aggressiveness of neoplastic cells. In this study,
we demonstrate that treatment with the S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibitor
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) depletes EZH2 levels, and inhibits trimethylation of 
lysine 27 on histone H3 in the cultured human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) HL-60 
and OCI-AML3 cells and in primary AML cells. DZNep treatment induced p16, p21,
p27, and FBXO32 while depleting cyclin E and HOXA9 levels. Similar findings were 
observed after treatment with small interfering RNA to EZH2. In addition, DZNep
treatment induced apoptosis in cultured and primary AML cells. Furthermore,
compared with treatment with each agent alone, cotreatment with DZNep and the
pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat caused more depletion of EZH2,
induced more apoptosis of AML, but not normal CD34(+) bone marrow progenitor
cells, and significantly improved survival of nonobese diabetic/severe combined
immunodeficiency mice with HL-60 leukemia. These findings indicate that the
combination of DZNep and panobinostat is effective and relatively selective
epigenetic therapy against AML cells.

PMCID: PMC2756128
PMID: 19638619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 11;284(37):24981-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.011973. Epub 2009
Jul 14.

Defective chromatin structure in somatic cell cloned mouse embryos.

Zhang M(1), Wang F, Kou Z, Zhang Y, Gao S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100094,
China.

Epigenetic reprogramming plays a central role in the development of cloned
embryos generated by somatic cell nuclear transfer, and it is believed that
aberrant reprogramming leads to the abnormal development of most cloned embryos. 
Recent studies show that trimethylation of H3K27 (H3K27me3) contributes to the
maintenance of embryonic stem cell pluripotency because the differentiation genes
are always occupied by nucleosomes trimethylated at H3K27, which represses gene
expression. Here, we provide evidence that differential H3K27me3 modification
exists between normal fertilization-produced blastocysts and somatic cell nuclear
transfer cloned blastocysts; H3K27me3 was specifically found in cells of the
inner cell mass (ICM) of normal blastocysts, whereas there was no modification of
H3K27me3 in the ICM of cloned blastocysts. Subsequently, we demonstrated that the
differentiation-related genes, which are marked by H3K27me3 in embryonic stem
cells, were expressed at significantly higher levels in cloned embryos than in
normal embryos. The polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) component genes (Eed,
Ezh2, and Suz12), which are responsible for the generation of H3K27me3, were
expressed at lower levels in the cloned embryos. Our results suggest that reduced
expression of PRC2 component genes in cloned embryos results in defective
modification of H3K27me3 to the differentiation-related genes in pluripotent ICM 
cells. This results in premature expression of developmental genes and death of
somatic cloned embryos shortly after implantation. Taken together, these studies 
suggest that H3K27me3 might be an important epigenetic marker with which to
evaluate the developmental potential of cloned embryos.

PMCID: PMC2757202
PMID: 19602512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2009 Jul;41(7):588-93.

Regulation of CD11b transcription by decreasing PRC2 and increased acH4 level
during ATRA-induced HL-60 differentiation.

Tang H(1), Chen F, Tan Q, Tan S, Liu L, Zhang F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha
410008, China.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which mediates trimethylation of lysine 27 
on histone H3 (K27me3), plays an important role in many types of stem cell
differentiation. Here, we try to reveal how PRC2, PRC2-mediated repressive
histone marker H3K27me3, and active histone marker histone H4 acetylation (acH4) 
regulate the CD11b transcription during alltrans retinoic acid (ATRA)-induced
HL-60 leukemia cell differentiation. By using quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR) and western blot analysis, we found that the mRNA and
protein expression levels of two members of PRC2 were decreased during
ATRA-induced HL-60 differentiation, respectively. When treated with ATRA for 72
h, the EZH2 and SUZ12 mRNA levels were decreased to 35% and 38% of the control
group, respectively. At the same time, the granulocytic mature surface marker
CD11b expression was increased significantly at mRNA level detected by qPCR and
protein level detected by flow cytometry. By using chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assay, we compared the local changes in SUZ12 binding and PRC2-mediated H3K27me3 
at the promoter of CD11b during ATRA-induced HL-60 differentiation. Both the
levels of SUZ12 binding and PRC2-mediated H3K27me3 at the promoter of CD11b were 
decreased for 4.1 and 3.8 folds, respectively. And we also found the increase in 
the acH4 level up to 4 folds after 72 h of ATRA treatment. These results
suggested that the histone modification including PRC2-mediated repressive
histone marker H3K27me3 and active histone marker acH4 may involve in CD11b
transcription during HL-60 leukemia cells reprogramming to terminal
differentiation.

PMID: 19578722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. EMBO Rep. 2009 Aug;10(8):881-6. doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.102. Epub 2009 Jul 3.

Epigenetic reprogramming during wound healing: loss of polycomb-mediated
silencing may enable upregulation of repair genes.

Shaw T(1), Martin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol,
Bristol, UK. tshaw@sgul.ac.uk

Tissue repair is a complex process that requires wound-edge cells to proliferate 
and migrate, which in turn necessitates induction of a large repair
transcriptome. Epigenetic modifications have emerged as crucial regulators of
gene expression. Here, we ask whether epigenetic reprogramming might contribute
to the concerted induction of repair genes by wound-edge cells. Polycomb group
proteins (PcGs) co-operatively silence genes by laying down repressive marks such
as histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3), which can be removed by
specific demethylases. We show that PcGs Eed, Ezh2 and Suz12 are significantly
downregulated during murine skin repair, whereas the newly described demethylases
Jmjd3 and Utx are markedly upregulated. Correspondingly, we find a striking
reduction of repressive H3K27me3 in the wound epidermis. Quantitative chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies have revealed that there is less Eed bound to the
regulatory regions of two paradigm wound-induced genes, Myc and Egfr, suggesting 
that loss of polycomb-mediated silencing might contribute to the induction of
repair genes.

PMCID: PMC2726669
PMID: 19575012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Mol Reprod Dev. 2009 Nov;76(11):1033-42. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21061.

Differential remodeling of mono- and trimethylated H3K27 during porcine embryo
development.

Park KE(1), Magnani L, Cabot RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana
47907, USA.

Histone methylation plays an important role in regulating chromatin structure and
gene expression. Methylation of the lysine residue 27 of histone H3 (H3K27) is an
epigenetic mark that is closely linked with transcriptional repression; global
patterns of H3K27 methylation undergo dramatic changes during cleavage
development in the mouse. The aim of this study was to characterize the H3K27
methylation pattern in cleavage stage porcine embryos obtained either by in vivo 
or in vitro fertilization or parthenogenetic activation and to determine the
expression patterns of EED, EZH2, and SUZ12 (regulators of H3K27 methylation). We
found that monomethylated H3K27 was detectable in the nuclei of oocytes and
pronuclear, 2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell, and blastocyst stage embryos. Trimethylated
H3K27 was detectable in the nuclei of GV stage oocytes, the chromosome of MII
stage oocytes and a single pronucleus of the pronuclear stage embryos produced by
fertilization; the signals were faint or absent in nuclei of two-cell through
blastocyst stage embryos. In addition, EED transcripts were increased from the
four-cell stage (P < 0.05) in embryos obtained by in vitro fertilization,
parthenogenetic activation and in vivo fertilization. EZH2 transcript levels were
highest in the GV-stage oocyte (P < 0.05). SUZ12 transcripts were transiently
increased at the four-cell stage (P < 0.05) in parthenogenetic and in vivo
derived embryos. Our results suggest that H3K27 trimethylation is an epigenetic
marker of maternally derived chromatin that is globally remodeled during porcine 
embryogenesis.

PMID: 19536841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 12;4(6):e5884. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005884.

The malignant pleural effusion as a model to investigate intratumoral
heterogeneity in lung cancer.

Basak SK(1), Veena MS, Oh S, Huang G, Srivatsan E, Huang M, Sharma S, Batra RK.

Author information: 
(1)Wadsworth Stem Cell Institute, Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare
System, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Malignant Pleural Effusions (MPE) may be useful as a model to study hierarchical 
progression of cancer and/or intratumoral heterogeneity. To strengthen the
rationale for developing the MPE-model for these purposes, we set out to find
evidence for the presence of cancer stem cells (CSC) in MPE and demonstrate an
ability to sustain intratumoral heterogeneity in MPE-primary cultures. Our
studies show that candidate lung CSC-expression signatures (PTEN, OCT4, hTERT,
Bmi1, EZH2 and SUZ12) are evident in cell pellets isolated from MPE, and
MPE-cytopathology also labels candidate-CSC (CD44, cMET, MDR-1, ALDH)
subpopulations. Moreover, in primary cultures that use MPE as the source of both 
tumor cells and the tumor microenvironment (TME), candidate CSC are maintained
over time. This allows us to live-sort candidate CSC-fractions from the MPE-tumor
mix on the basis of surface markers (CD44, c-MET, uPAR, MDR-1) or differences in 
xenobiotic metabolism (ALDH). Thus, MPE-primary cultures provide an avenue to
extract candidate CSC populations from individual (isogenic) MPE-tumors. This
will allow us to test whether these cells can be discriminated in functional
bioassays. Tumor heterogeneity in MPE-primary cultures is evidenced by variable
immunolabeling, differences in colony-morphology, and differences in
proliferation rates of cell subpopulations. Collectively, these data justify the 
ongoing development of the MPE-model for the investigation of intratumoral
heterogeneity, tumor-TME interactions, and phenotypic validation of candidate
lung CSC, in addition to providing direction for the pre-clinical development of 
rational therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC2697051
PMID: 19536353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Dis Model Mech. 2009 Jul-Aug;2(7-8):412-8. doi: 10.1242/dmm.001602. Epub 2009 Jun
17.

Haploinsufficiency of the murine polycomb gene Suz12 results in diverse
malformations of the brain and neural tube.

Miró X(1), Zhou X, Boretius S, Michaelis T, Kubisch C, Alvarez-Bolado G, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Göttingen D-37077, Germany. xmiro@gwdg.de

Polycomb proteins are epigenetic regulators of gene expression. Human central
nervous system (CNS) malformations are congenital defects of the brain and spinal
cord. One example of a human CNS malformation is Chiari malformation (CM), which 
presents as abnormal brainstem growth and cerebellar herniation, sometimes
accompanied by spina bifida and cortical defects; it can occur in families.
Clinically, CM ranges from an asymptomatic condition to one with incapacitating
or lethal symptoms, including neural tube defects and hydrocephalus. However, no 
genes that are causally involved in any manifestation of CM or similar
malformations have been identified. Here, we show that a pathway that involves
Zac1 (also known as Plagl1 or Lot1) and controls neuronal proliferation is
altered in mice that are heterozygous for the polycomb gene Suz12, resulting in a
phenotype that overlaps with some clinical manifestations of the CM spectrum.
Suz12 heterozygotes show cerebellar herniation and an enlarged brainstem,
accompanied by occipital cortical alterations and spina bifida. Downward
displacement of the cerebellum causes hydrocephalus in the most severely impaired
cases. Although the involvement of polycomb genes in human disease is starting to
be recognized, this is the first demonstration of their role in nervous system
malformations. Our work strongly suggests that brain malformations such as CM can
result from altered epigenetic regulation of genes involved in cell proliferation
in the brain.

PMID: 19535498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2009 Sep;48(9):828-41. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20687.

DNA hypermethylation accompanied by transcriptional repression in follicular
lymphoma.

Bennett LB(1), Schnabel JL, Kelchen JM, Taylor KH, Guo J, Arthur GL, Papageorgio 
CN, Shi H, Caldwell CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, University of
Missouri-Columbia School of Medicine, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.
bennettlb@health.missouri.edu

High-throughput microarray technologies were used to study DNA methylation
accompanied by transcriptional changes in follicular lymphoma (FL). Using
Methylated CpG Island Amplification with Microarrays to study CpG Island DNA
methylation in FL, we discovered widespread hypermethylation of homeobox genes
and previously identified targets of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) in cell
lines and primary tumors, but not in benign follicular hyperplasia (BFH). DNA
methylation for HOXA11, HOXD10, HOXB7, HOXC12, PAX6, LHX9, SFMBT2, EN2, and PAX7 
was independently validated in the RL cell line and HOXA11, HOXD10, PAX6, and EN2
in primary tumors. Combined Bisulfite Restriction Analysis (COBRA) also
established DNA methylation for the previously identified PRC2 targets DCC, DES, 
GAD2, AQP5, GPR61, GRIA4, GJD2, and AMPH in FL but not in BFH. Gene expression
analyses revealed 411 genes that were hypermethylated and transcriptionally
repressed in RL, 74% of which were reactivated by the demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azaD) plus or minus the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA). Forty genes were also downregulated in primary FL. Our
results suggest that extensive hypermethylation in promoters of polycomb target
genes is a characteristic of FL and that loss of expression of certain SUZ12
target genes could be functionally relevant for lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC2738630
PMID: 19530241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 1;8(13):1991-6. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

Epigenetic maintenance of stemness and malignancy in peripheral neuroectodermal
tumors by EZH2.

Burdach S(1), Plehm S, Unland R, Dirksen U, Borkhardt A, Staege MS, Müller-Tidow 
C, Richter GH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Department of 
Pediatrics and Children's Cancer Research Center, Technische Universität München,
Munich, Germany. somagene@lrz.tum.de

Chromatin modifications are increasingly recognized as a key mechanism in cancer.
The histone methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste, Drosophila, Homolog 2 (EZH2),
the enzymatic subunit of the polycomb PRC2 complex methylates histone H3K27,
thereby, mediating gene silencing. EZH2 is overexpressed in a variety of tumor
tissue including breast and prostate. Ewing tumors (ET), alias peripheral
neuroectodermal tumors (PNET), are highly malignant tumors molecularly defined by
ews/ets translocations. We found EWS-FLI1 bound to the EZH2 promoter in vivo.
Other components of the PRC2 complex, like EED or SUZ12 were not deregulated in
ET. Downregulation of EZH2 by RNA interference suppressed tumor development and
metastasis in vivo and microarray analysis of EZH2 knock down revealed an
EZH2-maintained, undifferentiated, reversible phenotype in ET. EZH2 suppression
resulted in a generalized loss of H3K27me3 as well as increase in H3 acetylation.
ChIP-Chip assays for H3K27me3 verified such genes that had specifically lost
H3K27me3 upon EZH2 silencing, suggesting that stemness features are preserved via
epigenetic mechanisms. Taken together, the genetic EWS-FLI1 translocation is
intimately linked to global and gene specific epigenetic alterations in ET
biology. EZH2 mediates neuroectodermal and endothelial embryonal tumor stem cell 
growth and metastatic spread induced by a translocation derived chimeric
transcription factor.

PMID: 19502792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 15;69(8):3570-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2807. Epub
2009 Apr 7.

Tobacco smoke induces polycomb-mediated repression of Dickkopf-1 in lung cancer
cells.

Hussain M(1), Rao M, Humphries AE, Hong JA, Liu F, Yang M, Caragacianu D, Schrump
DS.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Section, Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1201, USA.

Limited information is available about epigenetic mechanisms by which cigarette
smoke enhances the initiation and progression of lung cancer. To examine this
issue, A549 and Calu-6 lung cancer cells were cultured in normal media with or
without tobacco smoke condensate (TSC) under clinically relevant exposure
conditions. Ten-day TSC exposure dramatically increased the tumorigenicity of
lung cancer cells in nude mice. Microarray and quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) experiments revealed that this phenomenon coincided
with diminished expression of Dickkopf-1 (Dkk-1). Western blot, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, methylation-specific PCR, and pyrosequencing experiments
showed that repression of Dkk-1 coincided with decreased H4K16Ac, increased
H3K27me3, and recruitment of SirT1, EZH2, SUZ12, and Bmi1 without DNA
hypermethylation within the Dkk-1 promoter despite prolonged TSC exposures.
Removal of TSC from culture media resulted in loss of promoter-associated
polycomb repressor complexes and reexpression of Dkk-1. siRNA-mediated knockdown 
of EZH2 and SirT1 partially abrogated TSC-mediated inhibition of Dkk-1
expression. Western blot and quantitative RT-PCR array experiments showed that
TSC exposure as well as knockdown of Dkk-1 activated Wnt signaling and
significantly up-regulated Wnt5a in lung cancer cells. Knockdown of Dkk-1
recapitulated the dramatic protumorigenic effects of TSC exposure in Calu-6
cells. Despite the transient nature of Dkk-1 repression following TSC exposure in
vitro, Dkk-1 remained silenced in tumor xenografts derived from TSC-treated
Calu-6 cells. Collectively, these data provide evidence that cigarette smoke
directly engages polycomb machinery to activate a signaling network implicated in
maintenance of cancer stem cells.

PMID: 19351856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 May;37(9):2940-50. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp149. Epub 2009 Mar
17.

AEBP2 as a potential targeting protein for Polycomb Repression Complex PRC2.

Kim H(1), Kang K, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA
70803, USA.

AEBP2 is a zinc finger protein that has been shown to interact with the mammalian
Polycomb Repression Complex 2 (PRC2). In the current study, we characterized this
unknown protein and tested its potential targeting roles for the PRC2. AEBP2 is
an evolutionarily well-conserved gene that is found in the animals ranging from
flying insects to mammals. The transcription of mammalian AEBP2 is driven by two 
alternative promoters and produces at least two isoforms of the protein. These
isoforms show developmental stage-specific expression patterns: the
adult-specific larger form (51 kDa) and the embryo-specific smaller form (32
kDa). The AEBP2 protein binds to a DNA-binding motif with an unusual bipartite
structure, CTT(N)15-23cagGCC with lower-case being less critical. A large
fraction of AEBP2's target loci also map closely to the known target loci of the 
PRC2. In fact, many of these loci are co-occupied by the two proteins, AEBP2 and 
SUZ12. This suggests that AEBP2 is most likely a targeting protein for the
mammalian PRC2 complex.

PMCID: PMC2685092
PMID: 19293275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar 31;106(13):5187-91. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0812888106. Epub 2009 Mar 11.

An embryonic stem cell chromatin remodeling complex, esBAF, is an essential
component of the core pluripotency transcriptional network.

Ho L(1), Jothi R, Ronan JL, Cui K, Zhao K, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Programs in Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Distinctive SWI/SNF-like ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling esBAF complexes are
indispensable for the maintenance and pluripotency of mouse embryonic stem (ES)
cells [Ho L, et al. (2009) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 10.1073/pnas.0812889106]. To
understand the mechanism underlying the roles of these complexes in ES cells, we 
performed high-resolution genome-wide mapping of the core ATPase subunit, Brg,
using ChIP-Seq technology. We find that esBAF, as represented by Brg, binds to
genes encoding components of the core ES transcriptional circuitry, including
Polycomb group proteins. esBAF colocalizes extensively with transcription factors
Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog genome-wide, and shows distinct functional interactions with
Oct4 and Sox2 at its target genes. Surprisingly, no significant colocalization of
esBAF with PRC2 complexes, represented by Suz12, is observed. Lastly, esBAF
colocalizes with Stat3 and Smad1 genome-wide, consistent with a direct and
critical role in LIF and BMP signaling for maintaining self-renewal. Taken
together, our studies indicate that esBAF is an essential component of the core
pluripotency transcriptional network, and might also be a critical component of
the LIF and BMP signaling pathways essential for maintenance of self-renewal and 
pluripotency.

PMCID: PMC2654397
PMID: 19279218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Anim Genet. 2009 Apr;40(2):242-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2008.01818.x. Epub
2008 Dec 30.

Mapping and expression analyses during porcine foetal muscle development of 12
genes involved in histone modifications.

Peng YB(1), Yerle M, Liu B.

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Molecular Biology and Animal Breeding, Key Lab of Agricultural Animal
Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of Education, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.

Histone modifications (methylation and demethylation) regulate gene expression
and play a role in cell proliferation and differentiation by their actions on
chromatin structure. In this context, we studied the temporal expression profiles
of genes acting on histone methylation and demethylation during skeletal muscle
proliferation and differentiation. Quantitative real-time PCR was used to
quantify the mRNA levels of CARM1, JARID1A, JMJD2A, LSD1, PRMT2, PRMT5, SMYD1,
SMYD2, SMYD3, SETDB1, Suv39h2 and SUZ12 in foetal skeletal muscle. Our results
showed that CARM1, JARID1A, JMJD2A, SMYD1 and SMYD2 were differentially expressed
in embryonic muscles of 33 days post-conception (dpc), 65 dpc and 90 dpc. These
12 genes were mapped to porcine chromosomes (SSC) 2q21-24, 5q25, 6q35, 6q12-21,
6p15, 7q21, 3q21-27, 9q26, 10p16, 4q15-16, 10q14-16 and 12p12 respectively.
Taking into account the reported QTL mapping results, gene expression analysis
and radiation hybrid mapping results, these results suggest that five genes
(CARM1, JARID1A, JMJD2A, SMYD1 and SMYD2) could be good candidate genes for
growth and backfat thickness traits.

PMID: 19133938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Cancer Res. 2009 Jan 1;69(1):282-91. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3274.

A multifactorial signature of DNA sequence and polycomb binding predicts aberrant
CpG island methylation.

McCabe MT(1), Lee EK, Vertino PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Emory University School of Medicine, 1365C
Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Aberrant CpG island methylation is associated with transcriptional silencing of
regulatory genes in human cancer. Although most CpG islands remain unmethylated, 
a subset accrues aberrant methylation in cancer via unknown mechanisms.
Previously, we showed that CpG islands differ in their intrinsic propensity
towards hypermethylation. We developed a classifier (PatMAn) based on the
frequencies of seven DNA sequence patterns that discriminated methylation-prone
(MP) and methylation-resistant (MR) CpG islands. Here, we report on the
genome-wide application and direct testing of PatMAn in cancer. Although trained 
on data from a cell culture model of de novo methylation involving the
overexpression of DNMT1, PatMAn accurately predicted CpG islands at increased
risk of hypermethylation in cancer cell lines and primary tumors. Analysis of CpG
islands predicted to be MP revealed a strong association with embryonic targets
of polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2), indicating that PatMAn predicts not only
aberrant methylation, but also PRC2 binding. A second classifier (SUPER-PatMAn)
that integrates the seven PatMAn DNA patterns with SUZ12 enriched regions as a
marker of PRC2 occupancy showed improved performance (prediction accuracy,
81-88%). In addition to many non-PRC2 targets, SUPER-PatMAn identified a subset
of PRC2 targets that were more likely to be hypermethylated in cancer.
Genome-wide, CpG islands predicted to be MP were enriched in genes known to
undergo hypermethylation in cancer, genes functioning in transcriptional
regulation, and components of developmental pathways. These findings show that
hypermethylation of certain gene loci is controlled in part by an underlying
susceptibility influenced by both local sequence context and trans-acting
factors.

PMCID: PMC2653261
PMID: 19118013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Cell. 2008 Nov 14;135(4):649-61. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.09.056. Epub 2008 Nov
6.

H2AZ is enriched at polycomb complex target genes in ES cells and is necessary
for lineage commitment.

Creyghton MP(1), Markoulaki S, Levine SS, Hanna J, Lodato MA, Sha K, Young RA,
Jaenisch R, Boyer LA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA.

Elucidating how chromatin influences gene expression patterns and ultimately cell
fate is fundamental to understanding development and disease. The histone variant
H2AZ has emerged as a key regulator of chromatin function and plays an essential 
but unknown role during mammalian development. Here, genome-wide analysis reveals
that H2AZ occupies the promoters of developmentally important genes in a manner
that is remarkably similar to that of the Polycomb group (PcG) protein Suz12. By 
using RNAi, we demonstrate a role for H2AZ in regulating target gene expression, 
find that H2AZ and PcG protein occupancy is interdependent at promoters, and
further show that H2AZ is necessary for ES cell differentiation. Notably, H2AZ
occupies a different subset of genes in lineage-committed cells, suggesting that 
its dynamic redistribution is necessary for cell fate transitions. Thus, H2AZ,
together with PcG proteins, may establish specialized chromatin states in ES
cells necessary for the proper execution of developmental gene expression
programs.

PMCID: PMC2853257
PMID: 18992931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Tumour Biol. 2008;29(5):323-9. doi: 10.1159/000170879. Epub 2008 Nov 5.

Expression parameters of the polycomb group proteins BMI1, SUZ12, RING1 and CBX7 
in urothelial carcinoma of the bladder and their prognostic relevance.

Hinz S(1), Kempkensteffen C, Christoph F, Krause H, Schrader M, Schostak M,
Miller K, Weikert S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 
stefan.hinz@charite.de

BACKGROUND: The polycomb group (PCG) proteins are epigenetic transcriptional
repressors involved in the control of cellular proliferation and oncogenesis.
This study aimed at examining whether mRNA tumor levels of the PCG family members
BMI1, SUZ12, RING1, and CBX7 relate to histopathological parameters in urothelial
carcinomas of the bladder and whether they may provide prognostic information
following tumor resection.
METHODS: The relative gene expression of BMI1, SUZ12, RING1, and CBX7 was
analyzed by real-time RT-PCR in tumor tissue obtained from 93 patients with
urothelial carcinoma of the bladder undergoing surgical treatment. Expression
data was correlated with pathological variables and outcome.
RESULTS: PCG family members BMI1, SUZ12, RING1, and CBX7 are commonly expressed
in urothelial carcinomas of the bladder. The relative CBX7 mRNA expression levels
gradually decreased from superficial (pTa) to invasive (pT1) and finally to
muscle-invasive (> or =pT2) tumors (p = 0.008). Furthermore, CBX7 expression was 
statistically significantly correlated with tumor grade (p = 0.04). No
correlation of mRNA levels with histopathological tumor features or tumor
recurrence was observed for the other PCG components investigated.
CONCLUSION: Expression levels of CBX7 inversely correlate with the progression of
tumor stage and grade in urothelial carcinomas of the bladder, suggesting that
downregulation of CBX7 indicates aggressive urothelial carcinoma phenotype.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18984978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;10(11):1291-300. doi: 10.1038/ncb1787. Epub 2008 Oct 19.

A model for transmission of the H3K27me3 epigenetic mark.

Hansen KH(1), Bracken AP, Pasini D, Dietrich N, Gehani SS, Monrad A, Rappsilber
J, Lerdrup M, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research & Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes
Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen N., Denmark. klaus.hansen@bric.dk

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;10(12):1484.

Organization of chromatin by epigenetic mechanisms is essential for establishing 
and maintaining cellular identity in developing and adult organisms. A key
question that remains unresolved about this process is how epigenetic marks are
transmitted to the next cell generation during cell division. Here we provide a
model to explain how trimethylated Lys 27 of histone 3 (H3K27me3), which is
catalysed by the EZH2-containing Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2), is
maintained in proliferating cells. We show that the PRC2 complex binds to the
H3K27me3 mark and colocalizes with this mark in G1 phase and with sites of
ongoing DNA replication. Efficient binding requires an intact trimeric PRC2
complex containing EZH2, EED and SUZ12, but is independent of the catalytic SET
domain of EZH2. Using a heterologous reporter system, we show that transient
recruitment of the PRC2 complex to chromatin, upstream of the transcriptional
start site, is sufficient to maintain repression through endogenous PRC2 during
subsequent cell divisions. Thus, we suggest that once the H3K27me3 is
established, it recruits the PRC2 complex to maintain the mark at sites of DNA
replication, leading to methylation of H3K27 on the daughter strands during
incorporation of newly synthesized histones. This mechanism ensures maintenance
of the H3K27me3 epigenetic mark in proliferating cells, not only during DNA
replication when histones synthesized de novo are incorporated, but also outside 
S phase, thereby preserving chromatin structure and transcriptional programs.

PMID: 18931660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Invest Dermatol. 2009 Mar;129(3):615-21. doi: 10.1038/jid.2008.274. Epub 2008
Sep 18.

Mechanisms of loss of heterozygosity in neurofibromatosis type 1-associated
plexiform neurofibromas.

Steinmann K(1), Kluwe L, Friedrich RE, Mautner VF, Cooper DN, Kehrer-Sawatzki H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Germany.

Plexiform neurofibromas constitute a serious burden for patients with
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), a common autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by pigmentary changes and tumorous skin lesions (neurofibromas).
Despite the prominence of these benign tumors in NF1 patients, the mechanisms
underlying the tumor-associated loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in plexiform
neurofibromas have not been extensively studied. We performed LOH analysis on 43 
plexiform neurofibromas from 31 NF1 patients, the largest study of its kind to
date. A total of 13 (30%) plexiform neurofibromas exhibited LOH involving 17q
markers. In three tumors, LOH was found to be confined to the NF1 gene region.
However, in none of the tumors was a somatic NF1 microdeletion, mediated by
non-allelic homologous recombination between either NF1-REPs or SUZ12 genes,
detected. Thus, NF1 microdeletions do not appear to be frequent somatic events in
plexiform neurofibromas. Determination of NF1 gene copy number by multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification indicated that although tumors with
smaller regions of LOH were characterized by 17q deletions, no NF1 gene copy
number changes were detected in six plexiform neurofibromas with more extensive
LOH. To our knowledge, mitotic recombination has not previously been reported to 
be a frequent cause of LOH in plexiform neurofibromas.

PMID: 18800150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Reproduction. 2008 Dec;136(6):777-85. doi: 10.1530/REP-08-0045. Epub 2008 Sep 10.

Polycomb gene expression and histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation changes during
bovine preimplantation development.

Ross PJ(1), Ragina NP, Rodriguez RM, Iager AE, Siripattarapravat K,
Lopez-Corrales N, Cibelli JB.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of, Animal Science Physiology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.

Trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3) is established by polycomb
group genes and is associated with stable and heritable gene silencing. The aim
of this study was to characterize the expression of polycomb genes and the
dynamics of H3K27me3 during bovine oocyte maturation and preimplantation
development. Oocytes and in vitro-produced embryos were collected at different
stages of development. Polycomb gene expression was analyzed by real-time
quantitative RT-PCR and immunofluorescence. Global H3K27me3 levels were
determined by semiquantitative immunofluorescence. Transcripts for EZH2, EED, and
SUZ12 were detected at all stages analyzed, with EZH2 levels being the highest of
the three at early stages of development. By the time the embryo reached the
blastocyst stage, the level of PcG gene mRNA levels significantly increased.
Immunofluorescence staining indicated nuclear expression of EZH2 at all stages
while nuclear localized EED and SUZ12 were only evident at the morula and
blastocyst stages. Semiquantitative analysis of H3K27me3 levels showed that
nuclear fluorescence intensity was the highest in immature oocytes, which
steadily decreased after fertilization to reach a nadir at the eight-cell stage, 
and then increased at the blastocyst stage. These results suggest that the
absence of polycomb repressive complex 2 proteins localized to the nucleus of
early embryos could be responsible for the gradual decrease in H3K27me3 during
early preimplantation development.

PMID: 18784248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 16;105(37):14076-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0805206105. Epub 2008 Sep 9.

Cell type-specific DNA methylation patterns in the human breast.

Bloushtain-Qimron N(1), Yao J, Snyder EL, Shipitsin M, Campbell LL, Mani SA, Hu
M, Chen H, Ustyansky V, Antosiewicz JE, Argani P, Halushka MK, Thomson JA,
Pharoah P, Porgador A, Sukumar S, Parsons R, Richardson AL, Stampfer MR, Gelman
RS, Nikolskaya T, Nikolsky Y, Polyak K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Cellular identity and differentiation are determined by epigenetic programs. The 
characteristics of these programs in normal human mammary epithelium and their
similarity to those in stem cells are unknown. To begin investigating these
issues, we analyzed the DNA methylation and gene expression profiles of distinct 
subpopulations of mammary epithelial cells by using MSDK (methylation-specific
digital karyotyping) and SAGE (serial analysis of gene expression). We identified
discrete cell-type and differentiation state-specific DNA methylation and gene
expression patterns that were maintained in a subset of breast carcinomas and
correlated with clinically relevant tumor subtypes. CD44+ cells were the most
hypomethylated and highly expressed several transcription factors with known stem
cell function including HOXA10 and TCF3. Many of these genes were also
hypomethylated in BMP4-treated compared with undifferentiated human embryonic
stem (ES) cells that we analyzed by MSDK for comparison. Further highlighting the
similarity of epigenetic programs of embryonic and mammary epithelial cells,
genes highly expressed in CD44+ relative to more differentiated CD24+ cells were 
significantly enriched for Suz12 targets in ES cells. The expression of FOXC1,
one of the transcription factors hypomethylated and highly expressed in CD44+
cells, induced a progenitor-like phenotype in differentiated mammary epithelial
cells. These data suggest that epigenetically controlled transcription factors
play a key role in regulating mammary epithelial cell phenotypes and imply
similarities among epigenetic programs that define progenitor cell
characteristics.

PMCID: PMC2532972
PMID: 18780791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Science. 2008 Sep 5;321(5894):1357-61. doi: 10.1126/science.1156725.

A neoplastic gene fusion mimics trans-splicing of RNAs in normal human cells.

Li H(1), Wang J, Mor G, Sklar J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

Erratum in
    Science. 2015 Oct 2;350(6256):aad3463.
    Science. 2015 Nov 20;350(6263):921.

Comment in
    Science. 2008 Sep 5;321(5894):1302-4.

Chromosomal rearrangements that create gene fusions are common features of human 
tumors. The prevailing view is that the resultant chimeric transcripts and
proteins are abnormal, tumor-specific products that provide tumor cells with a
growth and/or survival advantage. We show that normal endometrial stromal cells
contain a specific chimeric RNA joining 5' exons of the JAZF1 gene on chromosome 
7p15 to 3' exons of the Polycomb group gene JJAZ1/SUZ12 on chromosome 17q11 and
that this RNA is translated into JAZF1-JJAZ1, a protein with anti-apoptotic
activity. The JAZF1-JJAZ1 RNA appears to arise from physiologically regulated
trans-splicing between precursor messenger RNAs for JAZF1 and JJAZ1. The chimeric
RNA and protein are identical to those produced from a gene fusion found in human
endometrial stromal tumors. These observations suggest that certain gene fusions 
may be pro-neoplastic owing to constitutive expression of chimeric gene products 
normally generated by trans-splicing of RNAs in developing tissues.

PMID: 18772439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 7;283(45):30919-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804029200. Epub 2008 
Aug 27.

Epigenetic silencing of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta activity by
YY1/polycomb group/DNA methyltransferase complex.

Ko CY(1), Hsu HC, Shen MR, Chang WC, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan
70101, Taiwan.

Human CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (CEBPD) has been reported as a tumor
suppressor because it both induces growth arrest involved in differentiation and 
plays a crucial role as a regulator of pro-apoptotic gene expression. In this
study, CEBPD gene expression is down-regulated, and "loss of function"
alterations in CEBPD gene expression are observed in cervical cancer and
hepatocellular carcinoma. Suppressor of zeste 12 (SUZ12), a component of the
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), silences CEBPD promoter activity, enhancing
the methylation of exogenous CEBPD promoter through the proximal CpG islands.
Moreover, this molecular approach is consistent with the opposite mRNA expression
pattern between SUZ12 and CEBPD in cervical cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma
patients. We further demonstrated that Yin-Yang-1 (YY1) physically interacts with
SUZ12 and can act as a mediator to recruit the polycomb group proteins and DNA
methyltransferases to participate in the CEBPD gene silencing process. Taking
these results into consideration, we not only demonstrate the advantage of
SUZ12-silenced CEBPD expression in tumor formation but also clarify an in vivo
evidence for YY1-mediated silencing paths of SUZ12 and DNA methyltransferases on 
the CEBPD promoter.

PMCID: PMC2662167
PMID: 18753137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Sep;185(2):74-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.04.020.

An endometrial stromal sarcoma cell line with the JAZF1/PHF1 chimera.

Panagopoulos I(1), Mertens F, Griffin CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, SE-221 85 Lund,
Sweden. Ioannis.Panagopoulos@med.lu.se

Endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESS) are rare malignancies, accounting for less
than 10% of uterine sarcomas. Apart from the chromosomal rearrangement
t(7;17)(p15;q21), which leads to the JAZF1/SUZ12 chimera, cytogenetic studies
have shown that the chromosome band 6p21 is often rearranged in ESS. The
translocation partners involved in the 6p21 rearrangements differ among the
tumors, but chromosome 7 is involved in most aberrations. A JAZF1/PHF1 fusion
gene was recently found in two tumors showing an exchange between 6p and 7p
rearrangement. In the present study, we show that a low-grade ESS cell line
carrying a der(7)t(6;7)(p21;p22) also harbors the a JAZF1/PHF1 fusion. In the
fusion transcript, exon 3 of JAZF1 was fused with exon 2 of PHF1. At the
junction, there was an insertion of 26 nucleotides, originating from intron 3 of 
JAZF1, thus maintaining an open reading frame of the chimeric transcript. The
predicted 684-amino acid JAZF1/PHF1 chimeric protein retained one zinc finger
domain from JAZF1 and the two zinc finger domains from PHF1, and its oncogenic
mechanism should be similar to that of the JAZF1/SUZ12 protein. The present cell 
line constitutes an excellent model for further studies on the impact of the
JAZF1/PHF1 fusion.

PMID: 18722875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. PLoS Genet. 2008 Aug 1;4(8):e1000145. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000145.

Antagonism between DNA and H3K27 methylation at the imprinted Rasgrf1 locus.

Lindroth AM(1), Park YJ, McLean CM, Dokshin GA, Persson JM, Herman H, Pasini D,
Miró X, Donohoe ME, Lee JT, Helin K, Soloway PD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States of America.

At the imprinted Rasgrf1 locus in mouse, a cis-acting sequence controls DNA
methylation at a differentially methylated domain (DMD). While characterizing
epigenetic marks over the DMD, we observed that DNA and H3K27 trimethylation are 
mutually exclusive, with DNA and H3K27 methylation limited to the paternal and
maternal sequences, respectively. The mutual exclusion arises because one mark
prevents placement of the other. We demonstrated this in five ways: using
5-azacytidine treatments and mutations at the endogenous locus that disrupt DNA
methylation; using a transgenic model in which the maternal DMD inappropriately
acquired DNA methylation; and by analyzing materials from cells and embryos
lacking SUZ12 and YY1. SUZ12 is part of the PRC2 complex, which is needed for
placing H3K27me3, and YY1 recruits PRC2 to sites of action. Results from each
experimental system consistently demonstrated antagonism between H3K27me3 and DNA
methylation. When DNA methylation was lost, H3K27me3 encroached into sites where 
it had not been before; inappropriate acquisition of DNA methylation excluded
normal placement of H3K27me3, and loss of factors needed for H3K27 methylation
enabled DNA methylation to appear where it had been excluded. These data reveal
the previously unknown antagonism between H3K27 and DNA methylation and identify 
a means by which epigenetic states may change during disease and development.

PMCID: PMC2475503
PMID: 18670629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Oct;28(20):6473-82. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00204-08. Epub 2008 Jul 
28.

CTCF regulates allelic expression of Igf2 by orchestrating a promoter-polycomb
repressive complex 2 intrachromosomal loop.

Li T(1), Hu JF, Qiu X, Ling J, Chen H, Wang S, Hou A, Vu TH, Hoffman AR.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, California 94304,
USA.

CTCF is a zinc finger DNA-binding protein that regulates the epigenetic states of
numerous target genes. Using allelic regulation of mouse insulin-like growth
factor II (Igf2) as a model, we demonstrate that CTCF binds to the unmethylated
maternal allele of the imprinting control region (ICR) in the Igf2/H19 imprinting
domain and forms a long-range intrachromosomal loop to interact with the three
clustered Igf2 promoters. Polycomb repressive complex 2 is recruited through the 
interaction of CTCF with Suz12, leading to allele-specific methylation at lysine 
27 of histone H3 (H3-K27) and to suppression of the maternal Igf2 promoters.
Targeted mutation or deletion of the maternal ICR abolishes this chromatin loop, 
decreases allelic H3-K27 methylation, and causes loss of Igf2 imprinting. RNA
interference knockdown of Suz12 also leads to reactivation of the maternal Igf2
allele and biallelic Igf2 expression. CTCF and Suz12 are coprecipitated from
nuclear extracts with antibodies specific for either protein, and they interact
with each other in a two-hybrid system. These findings offer insight into general
epigenetic mechanisms by which CTCF governs gene expression by orchestrating
chromatin loop structures and by serving as a DNA-binding protein scaffold to
recruit and bind polycomb repressive complexes.

PMCID: PMC2577414
PMID: 18662993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. PLoS One. 2008 Jul 16;3(7):e2704. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002704.

The polycomb repressive complex 2 is a potential target of SUMO modifications.

Riising EM(1), Boggio R, Chiocca S, Helin K, Pasini D.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.

BACKGROUND: The Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) functions as a
transcriptional repressor through a mechanism that involves methylation of
Histone H3 at lysine 27. The PRC2 complex activity is essential for cellular
proliferation, development, and cell fate decisions. PRC2 target genes include
important regulators of development and proliferation as well as tumor suppressor
genes. Consistent with this, the activity of several Polycomb group (PcG)
proteins is deregulated in human cancer suggesting an important role for PcGs in 
tumor development. Whereas the downstream functions of PcGs are well
characterized, the mechanisms of their recruitment to target genes and the
regulation of their activity are not fully understood.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that the two PRC2 components SUZ12 and EZH2 are 
sumoylated in vitro and in vivo. Among several putative sumoylation sites we have
mapped the major site of SUZ12 sumoylation. Furthermore, we show that SUZ12
interacts with the E2-conjugating enzyme UBC9 both in vitro and in vivo and that 
mutation of the SUZ12 sumoylation site does not abolish this binding. Finally, we
provide evidence that the E3-ligase PIASXbeta interacts and enhances the
sumoylation of SUZ12 in vivo suggesting that PIASXbeta could function as an
E3-ligase for SUZ12.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data identify sumoylation as a novel
post-translational modification of components of the PRC2 complex, which could
suggest a potential new mechanism to modulate PRC2 repressive activity. Further
work aimed to identify the physiological conditions for these modifications will 
be required to understand the role of SUZ12 and EZH2 sumoylation in PcG-mediated 
epigenetic regulation of transcription.

PMCID: PMC2442188
PMID: 18628979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Cell. 2008 Jun 13;133(6):1106-17. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.04.043.

Integration of external signaling pathways with the core transcriptional network 
in embryonic stem cells.

Chen X(1), Xu H, Yuan P, Fang F, Huss M, Vega VB, Wong E, Orlov YL, Zhang W,
Jiang J, Loh YH, Yeo HC, Yeo ZX, Narang V, Govindarajan KR, Leong B, Shahab A,
Ruan Y, Bourque G, Sung WK, Clarke ND, Wei CL, Ng HH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore 138672.

Transcription factors (TFs) and their specific interactions with targets are
crucial for specifying gene-expression programs. To gain insights into the
transcriptional regulatory networks in embryonic stem (ES) cells, we use
chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with ultra-high-throughput DNA sequencing
(ChIP-seq) to map the locations of 13 sequence-specific TFs (Nanog, Oct4, STAT3, 
Smad1, Sox2, Zfx, c-Myc, n-Myc, Klf4, Esrrb, Tcfcp2l1, E2f1, and CTCF) and 2
transcription regulators (p300 and Suz12). These factors are known to play
different roles in ES-cell biology as components of the LIF and BMP signaling
pathways, self-renewal regulators, and key reprogramming factors. Our study
provides insights into the integration of the signaling pathways into the
ES-cell-specific transcription circuitries. Intriguingly, we find specific
genomic regions extensively targeted by different TFs. Collectively, the
comprehensive mapping of TF-binding sites identifies important features of the
transcriptional regulatory networks that define ES-cell identity.

PMID: 18555785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Jun 10;26(17):2846-53. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.17.0266.

"Stemness" genomics law governs clinical behavior of human cancer: implications
for decision making in disease management.

Glinsky GV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational & Functional Genomics Laboratory, Ordway Research Institute,
Ordway Cancer Center, Center for Medical Science, 150 New Scotland Ave, Albany,
NY 12208, USA. gglinsky@ordwayresearch.org

One of the most significant accomplishments of translational oncogenomics is a
realistic promise of efficient diagnostic tests that would facilitate
implementation of the concept of individualized cancer therapies. Recent
discovery of the BMI1 pathway rule indicates that gene expression signatures
(GESs) associated with the "stemness" state of a cell might be informative as
molecular predictors of cancer therapy outcome. We illustrate a potential
clinical utility of this concept using GESs derived from genomic analysis of
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) during transition from self-renewing, pluripotent
state to differentiated phenotypes. Signatures of multiple stemness pathways
(signatures of BMI1, Nanog/Sox2/Oct4, EED, and Suz12 pathways; transposon
exclusion zones and ESC pattern 3 signatures; signatures of Polycomb-bound and
bivalent chromatin domain transcription factors) seem informative in
stratification of cancer patients into low- and high-intensity treatment groups
on the basis of prediction of the long-term therapy outcome. A stemness cancer
therapy outcome predictor (CTOP) algorithm combining scores of nine stemness
signatures outperforms individual signatures and demonstrates a superior
prognostic accuracy in retrospective supervised analysis of large cohorts of
breast, prostate, lung, and ovarian cancer patients. Our analysis suggests that
stemness genomics law governs clinical behavior of human malignancies and defines
epigenetic boundaries of therapy-resistant and -sensitive tumors within distinct 
stemness/differentiation programs. One of the main conclusions of our analysis is
that near-term progress in practical implementation of the concept of
personalized cancer therapies would depend on timely delivery to practicing
physicians of relevant scientific information regarding the outcome of
prospective trials validating prognostic performance of CTOP tests in a clinical 
setting.

PMID: 18539963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Aug;28(15):4772-81. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00323-08. Epub 2008 Jun 
2.

Polycomb complex 2 is required for E-cadherin repression by the Snail1
transcription factor.

Herranz N(1), Pasini D, Díaz VM, Francí C, Gutierrez A, Dave N, Escrivà M,
Hernandez-Muñoz I, Di Croce L, Helin K, García de Herreros A, Peiró S.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Recerca en Càncer, IMIM-Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain.

The transcriptional factor Snail1 is a repressor of E-cadherin (CDH1) gene
expression essential for triggering epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Snail1
represses CDH1, directly binding its promoter and inducing the synthesis of the
Zeb1 repressor. In this article, we show that repression of CDH1 by Snail1, but
not by Zeb1, is dependent on the activity of Polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2). Embryonic stem (ES) cells null for Suz12, one of the components of PRC2, 
show higher levels of Cdh1 mRNA than control ES cells. In tumor cells,
interference of PRC2 activity prevents the ability of Snail1 to downregulate CDH1
and partially derepresses CDH1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated
that Snail1 increases the binding of Suz12 to the CDH1 promoter and the
trimethylation of lysine 27 in histone H3. Moreover, Snail1 interacts with Suz12 
and Ezh2, as shown by coimmunoprecipitation experiments. In conclusion, these
results demonstrate that Snail1 recruits PRC2 to the CDH1 promoter and requires
the activity of this complex to repress E-cadherin expression.

PMCID: PMC2493371
PMID: 18519590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Stem Cells. 2008 Jul;26(7):1808-17. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0322. Epub 2008
May 8.

Accumulation of malignant renal stem cells is associated with epigenetic changes 
in normal renal progenitor genes.

Metsuyanim S(1), Pode-Shakked N, Schmidt-Ott KM, Keshet G, Rechavi G, Blumental
D, Dekel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Stem Cell Research Institute, Safra
Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.

Recent studies indicate a dual epigenetic role of the Polycomb group (PcG)
proteins in self-renewal of stem cells and oncogenesis. Their elevation in our
previous human kidney microarray screen led us examine whether they participate
in processes involving normal and malignant renal progenitors. We therefore
analyzed the expression of the PcG genes (EZH2, BMI-1, EED, SUZ12) in relation to
that of the nephric-progenitor genes (WT1, PAX2, SALL1, SIX2, CITED1) using
real-time polymerase chain reaction and methylation assays during renal
development, regeneration, and tumorigenesis. Although all of the
nephric-progenitor genes were shown to be developmentally regulated, analysis of 
polycomb gene expression during murine nephrogenesis and in an in vitro induction
model of the nephrogenic mesenchyme indicated dynamic regulation only for EZH2 in
the normal renal progenitor population. In contrast, induction of adult kidney
regeneration by ischemia/reperfusion injury resulted primarily in rapid elevation
of BMI-1, whereas EZH2 was silenced. Analysis of renal tumorigenesis in stem
cell-like tumor xenografts established by serial passage of Wilms' tumor (WT) in 
immunodeficient mice showed cooperative upregulation of all PcG genes. This was
accompanied by upregulation of WT1, PAX2, and SALL1 but downregulation of SIX2.
Accordingly, methylation-specific quantitative polymerase chain reaction
demonstrated promoter hypomethylation of WT1, PAX2, and SIX2 in primary WT and
fetal kidneys, whereas progressive WT xenografts showed hypermethylation of SIX2,
possibly leading to loss of renal differentiation. PcG genes vary in expression
during renal development, regeneration, and tumorigenesis. We suggest a link
between polycomb activation and epigenetic alterations of the renal progenitor
population in initiation and progression of renal cancer.

PMID: 18467665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 4;283(27):18905-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709322200. Epub 2008 
May 2.

Polycomb group protein-associated chromatin is reproduced in post-mitotic G1
phase and is required for S phase progression.

Aoto T(1), Saitoh N, Sakamoto Y, Watanabe S, Nakao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regeneration Medicine, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins form two distinct complexes, PRC1 and PRC2, to
regulate developmental target genes by maintaining the epigenetic state in cells.
PRC2 methylates histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27), and PRC1 then recognizes
methyl-H3K27 to form repressive chromatin. However, it remains unknown how PcG
proteins maintain stable and plastic chromatin during cell division. Here we
report that PcG-associated chromatin is reproduced in the G(1) phase in
post-mitotic cells and is required for subsequent S phase progression. In
dividing cells, H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27Me(3)) marked mitotic chromosome arms 
where PRC2 (Suz12 and Ezh2) co-existed, whereas PRC1 (Bmi1 and Pc2) appeared in
distinct foci in the pericentromeric regions. As each PRC complex was
increasingly assembled from mitosis to G(1) phase, PRC1 formed H3K27Me(3)-based
chromatin intensively during middle and late G(1) phase; this chromatin was
highly resistant to in situ nuclease treatment. Thus, the transition from mitosis
to G(1) phase is crucial for PcG-mediated chromatin inheritance. Knockdown of
Suz12 markedly reduced the amount of H3K27Me(3) on mitotic chromosomes, and as a 
consequence, PRC1 foci were not fully transmitted to post-mitotic daughter cells.
S phase progression was markedly delayed in these Suz12-knockdown cells. The fact
that PcG-associated chromatin is reproduced during post-mitotic G(1) phase
suggests the possibility that PcG proteins enable their target chromatin to be
remodeled in response to stimuli in the G(1) phase.

PMID: 18453536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. PLoS Biol. 2008 Apr 15;6(4):e93. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060093.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) restricts hematopoietic stem cell activity.

Majewski IJ(1), Blewitt ME, de Graaf CA, McManus EJ, Bahlo M, Hilton AA, Hyland
CD, Smyth GK, Corbin JE, Metcalf D, Alexander WS, Hilton DJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2008 Apr 29;6(4):e113.

Polycomb group proteins are transcriptional repressors that play a central role
in the establishment and maintenance of gene expression patterns during
development. Using mice with an N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU)-induced mutation in
Suppressor of Zeste 12 (Suz12), a core component of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2
(PRC2), we show here that loss of Suz12 function enhances hematopoietic stem cell
(HSC) activity. In addition to these effects on a wild-type genetic background,
mutations in Suz12 are sufficient to ameliorate the stem cell defect and
thrombocytopenia present in mice that lack the thrombopoietin receptor (c-Mpl).
To investigate the molecular targets of the PRC2 complex in the HSC compartment, 
we examined changes in global patterns of gene expression in cells deficient in
Suz12. We identified a distinct set of genes that are regulated by Suz12 in
hematopoietic cells, including eight genes that appear to be highly responsive to
PRC2 function within this compartment. These data suggest that PRC2 is required
to maintain a specific gene expression pattern in hematopoiesis that is
indispensable to normal stem cell function.

PMCID: PMC2292752
PMID: 18416604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Stem Cells. 2008 Jun;26(6):1496-505. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0102. Epub 2008 
Apr 10.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 is dispensable for maintenance of embryonic stem
cell pluripotency.

Chamberlain SJ(1), Yee D, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) methylates histone H3 tails at lysine 27 and
is essential for embryonic development. The three core components of PRC2, Eed,
Ezh2, and Suz12, are also highly expressed in embryonic stem (ES) cells, where
they are postulated to repress developmental regulators and thereby prevent
differentiation to maintain the pluripotent state. We performed gene expression
and chimera analyses on low- and high-passage Eed(null) ES cells to determine
whether PRC2 is required for the maintenance of pluripotency. We report here that
although developmental regulators are overexpressed in Eed(null) ES cells, both
low- and high-passage cells are functionally pluripotent. We hypothesize that
they are pluripotent because they maintain expression of critical pluripotency
factors. Given that EED is required for stability of EZH2, the catalytic subunit 
of the complex, these data suggest that PRC2 is not necessary for the maintenance
of the pluripotent state in ES cells. We propose a positive-only model of
embryonic stem cell maintenance, where positive regulation of pluripotency
factors is sufficient to mediate stem cell pluripotency. Disclosure of potential 
conflicts of interest is found at the end of this article.

PMCID: PMC2630378
PMID: 18403752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Virchows Arch. 2008 May;452(5):515-24. doi: 10.1007/s00428-008-0596-7.

Helicobacter pylori-infection-associated CpG island hypermethylation in the
stomach and its possible association with polycomb repressive marks.

Yoo EJ(1), Park SY, Cho NY, Kim N, Lee HS, Kang GH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epigenetics, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

Helicobacter pylori infection can induce CpG island (CGI) hypermethylation in
gastric mucosa. Recently, genes occupied by Polycomb proteins in embryonic stem
cells were shown to be vulnerable to aberrant DNA hypermethylation in cancers. To
explore the relationship between H. pylori infection and DNA methylation changes 
in neoplastic and non-neoplastic stomach, we analyzed 25 CGIs and repetitive DNA 
elements from 82 chronic gastritis and 69 gastric carcinomas. Twenty-three CGIs
showed significantly higher methylation levels in H. pylori-negative gastric
carcinoma (n = 28) than in H. pylori-negative chronic gastritis (n = 39; P <
0.05), indicating cancer-associated methylation. Eight CGIs exhibited
significantly higher methylation levels in H. pylori-positive chronic gastritis
(n = 43) than in H. pylori-negative chronic gastritis (n = 39; P < 0.05). Six
CGIs showed both cancer-associated and H. pylori-associated hypermethylation. Six
(75%) of the eight H. pylori-associated hypermethylated genes contained at least 
one of three repressive marks (Suzl2 occupancy, Eed occupancy, histone H3 K27
trimethylation), whereas 31% of the remaining cancer-associated hypermethylated
genes had at least one mark. The findings suggest that H. pylori infection
strongly induces CGI hypermethylation in gastric epithelial cells and that
susceptibility to H. pylori-induced DNA hypermethylation may be determined by
Polycomb repressive marks in stem or progenitor cells.

PMID: 18335237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Nat Genet. 2008 Mar;40(3):310-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.91. Epub 2008 Feb 10.

Multiple loci identified in a genome-wide association study of prostate cancer.

Thomas G(1), Jacobs KB, Yeager M, Kraft P, Wacholder S, Orr N, Yu K, Chatterjee
N, Welch R, Hutchinson A, Crenshaw A, Cancel-Tassin G, Staats BJ, Wang Z,
Gonzalez-Bosquet J, Fang J, Deng X, Berndt SI, Calle EE, Feigelson HS, Thun MJ,
Rodriguez C, Albanes D, Virtamo J, Weinstein S, Schumacher FR, Giovannucci E,
Willett WC, Cussenot O, Valeri A, Andriole GL, Crawford ED, Tucker M, Gerhard DS,
Fraumeni JF Jr, Hoover R, Hayes RB, Hunter DJ, Chanock SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

We followed our initial genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 527,869 SNPs on
1,172 individuals with prostate cancer and 1,157 controls of European
origin-nested in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer
Screening Trial prospective study-by testing 26,958 SNPs in four independent
studies (total of 3,941 cases and 3,964 controls). In the combined joint
analysis, we confirmed three previously reported loci (two independent SNPs at
8q24 and one in HNF1B (formerly known as TCF2 on 17q); P < 10(-10)). In addition,
loci on chromosomes 7, 10 (two loci) and 11 were highly significant (between P < 
7.31 x 10(-13) and P < 2.14 x 10(-6)). Loci on chromosome 10 include MSMB, which 
encodes beta-microseminoprotein, a primary constituent of semen and a proposed
prostate cancer biomarker, and CTBP2, a gene with antiapoptotic activity; the
locus on chromosome 7 is at JAZF1, a transcriptional repressor that is fused by
chromosome translocation to SUZ12 in endometrial cancer. Of the nine loci that
showed highly suggestive associations (P < 2.5 x 10(-5)), four best fit a
recessive model and included candidate susceptibility genes: CPNE3, IL16 and
CDH13. Our findings point to multiple loci with moderate effects associated with 
susceptibility to prostate cancer that, taken together, in the future may predict
high risk in select individuals.

PMID: 18264096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 May;16(5):572-80. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5202002. Epub 2008
Jan 23.

Copy number variations in the NF1 gene region are infrequent and do not
predispose to recurrent type-1 deletions.

Steinmann K(1), Kluwe L, Cooper DN, Brems H, De Raedt T, Legius E, Mautner VF,
Kehrer-Sawatzki H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Gross deletions of the NF1 gene at 17q11.2 belong to the group of 'genomic
disorders' characterized by local sequence architecture that predisposes to
genomic rearrangements. Segmental duplications within regions associated with
genomic disorders are prone to non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR), which
mediates gross rearrangements. Copy number variants (CNVs) without obvious
phenotypic consequences also occur frequently in regions of genomic disorders. In
the NF1 gene region, putative CNVs have been reportedly detected by array
comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH). These variants include
duplications and deletions within the NF1 gene itself (CNV1) and a duplication
that encompasses the SUZ12 gene, the distal NF1-REPc repeat and the RHOT1 gene
(CNV2). To explore the possibility that these CNVs could have played a role in
promoting deletion mutagenesis in type-1 deletions (the most common type of gross
NF1 deletion), non-affected transmitting parents of patients with type-1 NF1
deletions were investigated by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
(MLPA). However, neither CNV1 nor CNV2 were detected. This would appear to
exclude these variants as frequent mediators of NAHR giving rise to type-1
deletions. Using MLPA, we were also unable to confirm CNV1 in healthy controls as
previously reported. We conclude that locus-specific techniques should be used to
independently confirm putative CNVs, originally detected by array CGH, to avoid
false-positive results. In one patient with an atypical deletion, a duplication
in the region of CNV2 was noted. This duplication could have occurred
concomitantly with the deletion as part of a complex rearrangement or may
alternatively have preceded the deletion.

PMID: 18212816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;28(5):1862-72. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

Role of hPHF1 in H3K27 methylation and Hox gene silencing.

Cao R(1), Wang H, He J, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, 
USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are required for maintaining the silent state of
the homeotic genes and other important developmental regulators. The silencing
function of the PcG proteins has been linked to their intrinsic histone modifying
enzymatic activities. The EED-EZH2 complex, containing the core subunits EZH2,
EED, SUZ12, and RbAp48, functions as a histone H3K27-specific methyltransferase. 
Here we describe the identification and characterization of a related EED-EZH2
protein complex which is distinguished from the previous complex by the presence 
of another PcG protein, hPHF1. Consistent with the ability of hPHF1 to stimulate 
the enzymatic activity of the core EED-EZH2 complex in vitro, manipulation of
mPcl1, the mouse counterpart of hPHF1, in NIH 3T3 cells and cells of the mouse
male germ cell line GC1spg results in global alteration of H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 
levels and Hox gene expression. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of mPcl1
affects association of the Eed-Ezh2 complex with certain Hox genes, such as
HoxA10, as well as Hox gene expression concomitant with an alteration on the
H3K27me2 levels of the corresponding promoters. Therefore, our results reveal
hPHF1 as a component of a novel EED-EZH2 complex and demonstrate its important
role in H3K27 methylation and Hox gene silencing.

PMCID: PMC2258785
PMID: 18086877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Dec 11;104(50):20001-6. Epub 2007 Dec 6.

Effects of rearrangement and allelic exclusion of JJAZ1/SUZ12 on cell
proliferation and survival.

Li H(1), Ma X, Wang J, Koontz J, Nucci M, Sklar J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

Polycomb group genes (PcGs) have been implicated in cancer based on altered
levels of expression observed in certain tumors and the behavior of cultured
cells containing inserted PcG transgenes. Endometrial stromal tumors provide
evidence for a direct causal relationship because they contain several
chromosomal translocations and resultant gene fusions involving PcGs, the most
common of which joins portions of the JAZF1 gene to the PcGJJAZ1/SUZ12. We show
here that both benign and malignant forms of this tumor have the JAZF1-JJAZ1
fusion but only the malignant form also exhibits exclusion of the unrearranged
JJAZ1 allele. To evaluate the effects of both the JJAZ1/SUZ12 fusion and allelic 
exclusion on functions related to cell growth, we studied HEK293 cells that were 
modified with respect to JJAZ1 expression. We found that the JAZF1-JJAZ1 fusion
restored levels of the polycomb protein EZH2 and histone 3 lysine 27
trimethylation, which were reduced by knockdown of endogenous JJAZ1. At the same 
time, the presence of JAZF1-JJAZ1 markedly inhibited apoptosis and induced above 
normal proliferation rates, although the latter effect occurred only when normal 
JJAZ1 was suppressed. Our findings suggest a genetic pathway for progression of a
benign precursor to a sarcoma involving increased cell survival associated with
acquisition of a PcG rearrangement, followed by accelerated cellular
proliferation upon allelic exclusion of the unrearranged copy of that gene.
Furthermore, these results indicate the likely functional importance of allelic
exclusion of genes disrupted by chromosomal translocations, as seen in a variety 
of other cancers.

PMCID: PMC2148412
PMID: 18077430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Mar 1;17(5):690-709. Epub 2007 Nov 20.

DNA methyltransferase 3B (DNMT3B) mutations in ICF syndrome lead to altered
epigenetic modifications and aberrant expression of genes regulating development,
neurogenesis and immune function.

Jin B(1), Tao Q, Peng J, Soo HM, Wu W, Ying J, Fields CR, Delmas AL, Liu X, Qiu
J, Robertson KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UF Shands Cancer Center
Program in Cancer Genetics, Epigenetics, and Tumor Virology, University of
Florida, PO Box 100245, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Genome-wide DNA methylation patterns are established and maintained by the
coordinated action of three DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), DNMT1, DNMT3A and
DNMT3B. DNMT3B hypomorphic germline mutations are responsible for two-thirds of
immunodeficiency, centromere instability, facial anomalies (ICF) syndrome cases, 
a rare recessive disease characterized by immune defects, instability of
pericentromeric satellite 2-containing heterochromatin, facial abnormalities and 
mental retardation. The molecular defects in transcription, DNA methylation and
chromatin structure in ICF cells remain relatively uncharacterized. In the
present study, we used global expression profiling to elucidate the role of
DNMT3B in these processes using cell lines derived from ICF syndrome and normal
individuals. We show that there are significant changes in the expression of
genes critical for immune function, development and neurogenesis that are highly 
relevant to the ICF phenotype. Approximately half the upregulated genes we
analyzed were marked with low-level DNA methylation in normal cells that was lost
in ICF cells, concomitant with loss of repressive histone modifications,
particularly H3K27 trimethylation, and gains in transcriptionally active H3K9
acetylation and H3K4 trimethylation marks. In addition, we consistently observed 
loss of binding of the SUZ12 component of the PRC2 polycomb repression complex
and DNMT3B to derepressed genes, including a number of homeobox genes critical
for immune system, brain and craniofacial development. We also observed altered
global levels of certain histone modifications in ICF cells, particularly
ubiquitinated H2AK119. Therefore, this study provides important new insights into
the role of DNMT3B in modulating gene expression and chromatin structure and
reveals new connections between DNMT3B and polycomb-mediated repression.

PMID: 18029387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Dec;81(6):1201-20. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Type 2 NF1 deletions are highly unusual by virtue of the absence of nonallelic
homologous recombination hotspots and an apparent preference for female mitotic
recombination.

Steinmann K(1), Cooper DN, Kluwe L, Chuzhanova NA, Senger C, Serra E, Lazaro C,
Gilaberte M, Wimmer K, Mautner VF, Kehrer-Sawatzki H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Approximately 5% of patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) exhibit gross
deletions that encompass the NF1 gene and its flanking regions. The breakpoints
of the common 1.4-Mb (type 1) deletions are located within low-copy repeats
(NF1-REPs) and cluster within a 3.4-kb hotspot of nonallelic homologous
recombination (NAHR). Here, we present the first comprehensive breakpoint
analysis of type 2 deletions, which are a second type of recurring NF1 gene
deletion. Type 2 deletions span 1.2 Mb and are characterized by breakpoints
located within the SUZ12 gene and its pseudogene, which closely flank the
NF1-REPs. Breakpoint analysis of 13 independent type 2 deletions did not reveal
any obvious hotspots of NAHR. However, an overrepresentation of
polypyrimidine/polypurine tracts and triplex-forming sequences was noted in the
breakpoint regions that could have facilitated NAHR. Intriguingly, all 13 type 2 
deletions identified so far are characterized by somatic mosaicism, which
indicates a positional preference for mitotic NAHR within the NF1 gene region.
Indeed, whereas interchromosomal meiotic NAHR occurs between the NF1-REPs giving 
rise to type 1 deletions, NAHR during mitosis appears to occur intrachromosomally
between the SUZ12 gene and its pseudogene, thereby generating type 2 deletions.
Such a clear distinction between the preferred sites of mitotic versus meiotic
NAHR is unprecedented in any other genomic disorder induced by the local genomic 
architecture. Additionally, 12 of the 13 mosaic type 2 deletions were found in
females. The marked female preponderance among mosaic type 2 deletions contrasts 
with the equal sex distribution noted for type 1 and/or atypical NF1 deletions.
Although an influence of chromatin structure was strongly suspected, no
sex-specific differences in the methylation pattern exhibited by the SUZ12 gene
were apparent that could explain the higher rate of mitotic recombination in
females.

PMCID: PMC2276354
PMID: 17999360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. FEBS J. 2007 Dec;274(23):6065-73. Epub 2007 Oct 26.

Recruitment of coregulator complexes to the beta-globin gene locus by TFII-I and 
upstream stimulatory factor.

Crusselle-Davis VJ(1), Zhou Z, Anantharaman A, Moghimi B, Dodev T, Huang S,
Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Upstream stimulatory factor and TFII-I are ubiquitously expressed
helix-loop-helix transcription factors that interact with E-box sequences and or 
initiator elements. We previously demonstrated that upstream stimulatory factor
is an activator of beta-globin gene expression whereas TFII-I is a repressor. In 
the present study, we demonstrate that upstream stimulatory factor interacts with
the coactivator p300 and that this interaction is restricted to erythroid cells
expressing the adult beta-globin gene. Furthermore, we demonstrate that Suz12, a 
component of the polycomb repressor complex 2, is recruited to the beta-globin
gene. Reducing expression of Suz12 significantly activates beta-globin gene
expression in an erythroid cell line with an embryonic phenotype. Suz12 also
interacts with the adult beta-globin gene during early stages of erythroid
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells. Our data suggest that TFII-I
contributes to the recruitment of the polycomb repressor complex 2 complex to the
beta-globin gene. Together, these data demonstrate that the antagonistic
activities of upstream stimulatory factor and TFII-I on beta-globin gene
expression are mediated at least in part by protein complexes that render the
promoter associated chromatin accessible or inaccessible for the transcription
complex.

PMID: 17970752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 16;282(46):33421-34. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Retinoic acid receptor isotype specificity in F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells
results from the differential recruitment of coregulators to retinoic response
elements.

Gillespie RF(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Weill Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Cornell 
University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

The retinoic acid receptor (RAR) alpha, beta(2), and gamma isotypes each regulate
specific subsets of target genes in F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells. We used
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays to monitor the association of RARgamma,
retinoic X receptor (RXR) alpha, and coregulators with the RARbeta(2), Hoxa1, and
Cyp26A1 retinoic acid response elements (RAREs) in F9 wild type and RARalpha,
-beta(2), and -gamma null cells. Additionally we quantitatively monitored
expression of the corresponding mRNAs. We demonstrated that the association of
RARgamma and/or RXRalpha with a RARE was not sufficient for retinoic acid
(RA)-mediated transcription of the corresponding target gene. However, the
ability of RARgamma and/or RXRalpha to recruit pCIP
(AIB1/ACTR/RAC-3/TRAM-1/SRC-3) and p300 to a RARE did correlate with
RA-associated transcription of target mRNAs. Therefore, the specific functions of
the RAR isotypes do not manifest at the level of their DNA binding but rather
from a differential ability to recruit specific components of the transcriptional
machinery. We also demonstrated that RA-mediated displacement of the polycomb
group protein SUZ12 from a RARE was inhibited in the absence of RARgamma. Thus,
transcriptional components of the RAR signaling pathway are specifically required
for displacement of SUZ12 from RAREs during RA-mediated differentiation of F9
cells.

PMID: 17875646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Mol Biol. 2007 Sep 14;372(2):298-316. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

Retinoid regulated association of transcriptional co-regulators and the polycomb 
group protein SUZ12 with the retinoic acid response elements of Hoxa1,
RARbeta(2), and Cyp26A1 in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Gillespie RF(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program of Weill Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Hox gene expression is activated by all-trans retinoic acid (RA), through binding
to retinoic acid receptor-retinoid X receptor (RAR-RXR) heterodimers bound at RA 
response elements (RAREs) of target genes. The RARs and RXRs each have three
isotypes (alpha, beta, and gamma), which are encoded by distinct genes. Hox genes
are also repressed by polycomb group proteins (PcG), though how these proteins
are targeted is unclear. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation assays to
investigate the association of RXRalpha, RARgamma, cofactors, and the PcG protein
SUZ12 with the Hoxa1, RARbeta2, and Cyp26A1 RAREs in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells
(teratocarcinoma stem cells) during RA treatment. We demonstrate that RARgamma
and RXRalpha are associated with RAREs prior to and during RA treatment. pCIP,
p300, and RNA polymerase II levels increased at target RAREs upon exposure to RA.
Conversely, SUZ12 was found associated with all RAREs studied and these
associations were attenuated by treatment with RA. Upon RA removal, SUZ12
re-associated with RAREs. H3ac, H3K4me2, and H3K27me3 marks were simultaneously
detected at target loci, indicative of a bivalent domain chromatin structure.
During RA mediated differentiation, H3K27me3 levels decreased at target RAREs
whereas H3ac and H3K4me2 levels remained constant. These studies provide insight 
into the dynamics of association of co-regulators with RAREs and demonstrate a
novel link between RA signaling and PcG repression.

PMCID: PMC2972191
PMID: 17663992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Cancer Cell. 2007 Jun;11(6):513-25.

Role of the polycomb repressive complex 2 in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Villa R(1), Pasini D, Gutierrez A, Morey L, Occhionorelli M, Viré E, Nomdedeu JF,
Jenuwein T, Pelicci PG, Minucci S, Fuks F, Helin K, Di Croce L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Regulacio Genomica, c/ Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2007 Jun;11(6):475-8.

Epigenetic changes are common alterations in cancer cells. Here, we have
investigated the role of Polycomb group proteins in the establishment and
maintenance of the aberrant silencing of tumor suppressor genes during
transformation induced by the leukemia-associated PML-RARalpha fusion protein. We
show that in leukemic cells knockdown of SUZ12, a key component of Polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), reverts not only histone modification but also
induces DNA demethylation of PML-RARalpha target genes. This results in promoter 
reactivation and granulocytic differentiation. Importantly, the epigenetic
alterations caused by PML-RARalpha can be reverted by retinoic acid treatment of 
primary blasts from leukemic patients. Our results demonstrate that the direct
targeting of Polycomb group proteins by an oncogene plays a key role during
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 17560333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Genes Dev. 2007 May 1;21(9):1050-63. Epub 2007 Apr 16.

Pharmacologic disruption of Polycomb-repressive complex 2-mediated gene
repression selectively induces apoptosis in cancer cells.

Tan J(1), Yang X, Zhuang L, Jiang X, Chen W, Lee PL, Karuturi RK, Tan PB, Liu ET,
Yu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 138672, Singapore.

Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2)-mediated histone methylation plays an
important role in aberrant cancer gene silencing and is a potential target for
cancer therapy. Here we show that S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibitor
3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) induces efficient apoptotic cell death in cancer
cells but not in normal cells. We found that DZNep effectively depleted cellular 
levels of PRC2 components EZH2, SUZ12, and EED and inhibited associated histone
H3 Lys 27 methylation (but not H3 Lys 9 methylation). By integrating RNA
interference (RNAi), genome-wide expression analysis, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) studies, we have identified a prominent set of genes
selectively repressed by PRC2 in breast cancer that can be reactivated by DZNep. 
We further demonstrate that the preferential reactivation of a set of these genes
by DZNep, including a novel apoptosis affector, FBXO32, contributes to
DZNep-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells. Our results demonstrate the
unique feature of DZNep as a novel chromatin remodeling compound and suggest that
pharmacologic reversal of PRC2-mediated gene repression by DZNep may constitute a
novel approach for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC1855231
PMID: 17437993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Chromosome Res. 2007;15(3):299-314. Epub 2007 May 10.

The polycomb group protein SUZ12 regulates histone H3 lysine 9 methylation and
HP1 alpha distribution.

de la Cruz CC(1), Kirmizis A, Simon MD, Isono K, Koseki H, Panning B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Regulation of histone methylation is critical for proper gene expression and
chromosome function. Suppressor of Zeste 12 (SUZ12) is a requisite member of the 
EED/EZH2 histone methyltransferase complexes, and is required for full activity
of these complexes in vitro. In mammals and flies, SUZ12/Su(z)12 is necessary for
trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me3) on facultative
heterochromatin. However, Su(z)12 is unique among Polycomb Group Proteins in that
Su(z)12 mutant flies exhibit gross defects in position effect variegation,
suggesting a role for Su(z)12 in constitutive heterochromatin formation. We
investigated the role of Suz12 in constitutive heterochromatin and discovered
that Suz12 is required for histone H3 lysine 9 tri-methylation (H3K9me3) in
differentiated but not undifferentiated mouse embryonic stem cells. Knockdown of 
SUZ12 in human cells caused a reduction in H3K27me3 and H3K9me3, and altered the 
distribution of HP1 alpha. In contrast, EZH2 knockdown caused loss of H3K27me3
but not H3K9me3, indicating that SUZ12 regulates H3-K9 methylation in an
EZH2-independent fashion. This work uncovers a role for SUZ12 in H3-K9
methylation.

PMID: 17406994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2007 Jul 15;308(4):384-95.

Mining of putative cis-acting elements for chromatin mediated regulation of Hox
genes in mammals by in-silico analysis.

Bengani H(1), Ganapathi M, Singh GP, Brahmachari V.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Delhi, Delhi, 
India.

The remarkable conservation in developmental strategies across phyla is well
reflected in the conservation of the homeotic gene complexes responsible for
establishing the body plan in embryonic development. On the other hand, changes
in the strategy of transcription regulation are believed to form one of the major
factors in the evolution of developmental mechanisms and phenotypic evolution of 
species. Apart from transcription regulation by gene specific transcription
factors, the role of regulators mediating modifications of chromatin proteins,
especially of HOX gene clusters in Drosophila is well documented. By comparative 
genomics we have identified novel motifs conserved in mouse, chimpanzee and human
in the noncoding upstream/intronic sequences of Hox genes by in silico analysis. 
These motifs lack the binding sites for known transcription factors and are
significantly over represented in the target genes of one of the core components 
of Polycomb Repressive Complex namely Supressor of zeste 12 (SUZ12) in human
embryonic cells reported by Lee et al. [2006a. Cell 125:301-313]. Therefore, we
predict that they could be the sites of interaction of chromatin modifying
complexes for epigenetic regulation.

PMID: 17358016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 May;27(10):3769-79. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

The polycomb group protein Suz12 is required for embryonic stem cell
differentiation.

Pasini D(1), Bracken AP, Hansen JB, Capillo M, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Epigenetics and BRIC, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 
2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins form multiprotein complexes, called Polycomb
repressive complexes (PRCs). PRC2 contains the PcG proteins EZH2, SUZ12, and EED 
and represses transcription through methylation of lysine (K) 27 of histone H3
(H3). Suz12 is essential for PRC2 activity and its inactivation results in early 
lethality of mouse embryos. Here, we demonstrate that Suz12(-/-) mouse embryonic 
stem (ES) cells can be established and expanded in tissue culture. The Suz12(-/-)
ES cells are characterized by global loss of H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and 
higher expression levels of differentiation-specific genes. Moreover, Suz12(-/-) 
ES cells are impaired in proper differentiation, resulting in a lack of
repression of ES cell markers as well as activation of differentiation-specific
genes. Finally, we demonstrate that the PcGs are actively recruited to several
genes during ES cell differentiation, which despite an increase in H3K27me3
levels is not always sufficient to prevent transcriptional activation. In
summary, we demonstrate that Suz12 is required for the establishment of specific 
expression programs required for ES cell differentiation. Furthermore, we provide
evidence that PcGs have different mechanisms to regulate transcription during
cellular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1899991
PMID: 17339329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Genes Dev. 2007 Jan 1;21(1):49-54.

pRB family proteins are required for H3K27 trimethylation and Polycomb repression
complexes binding to and silencing p16INK4alpha tumor suppressor gene.

Kotake Y(1), Cao R, Viatour P, Sage J, Zhang Y, Xiong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Program in Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Genetic studies have demonstrated that Bmi1 promotes cell proliferation and stem 
cell self-renewal with a correlative decrease of p16(INK4a) expression. Here, we 
demonstrate that Polycomb genes EZH2 and BMI1 repress p16 expression in human and
mouse primary cells, but not in cells deficient for pRB protein function. The p16
locus is H3K27-methylated and bound by BMI1, RING2, and SUZ12. Inactivation of
pRB family proteins abolishes H3K27 methylation and disrupts BMI1, RING2, and
SUZ12 binding to the p16 locus. These results suggest a model in which pRB
proteins recruit PRC2 to trimethylate p16, priming the BMI1-containing PRC1L
ubiquitin ligase complex to silence p16.

PMCID: PMC1759899
PMID: 17210787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cell Cycle. 2006 Nov;5(22):2613-25. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Integration of HapMap-based SNP pattern analysis and gene expression profiling
reveals common SNP profiles for cancer therapy outcome predictor genes.

Glinsky GV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ordway Cancer Center, Ordway Research Institute, Inc., Albany, New York 12208,
USA. gglinsky@ordwayresearch.org

Recent completion of the initial phase of a haplotype map of human genome
(www.hapmap.org) provides opportunity for integrative analysis on a genome-wide
scale of microarray-based gene expression profiling and SNP variation patterns
for discovery of cancer-causing genes and genetic markers of therapy outcome.
Here we applied this approach for analysis of SNPs of cancer-associated genes,
expression profiles of which predicts the likelihood of treatment failure and
death after therapy in patients diagnosed with multiple types of cancer.
Unexpectedly, this analysis reveals a common SNP pattern for a majority (60 of
74; 81%) of analyzed cancer treatment outcome predictor (CTOP) genes. Our
analysis suggests that heritable germ-line genetic variations driven by
geographically localized form of natural selection determining population
differentiations may have a significant impact on cancer treatment outcome by
influencing the individual's gene expression profile. We demonstrate a
translational utility of this approach by building a highly informative CTOP
algorithm combining prognostic power of multiple gene expression-based CTOP
models derived from signatures of oncogenic pathways associated with activation
of BMI1; Myc; Her2/neu; Ras; beta-catenin; Suz12; E2F; and CCND1 oncogenes.
Application of a CTOP algorithm to large databases of early-stage breast and
prostate tumors identifies cancer patients with 100% probability of a cure with
existing cancer therapies as well as patients with nearly 100% likelihood of
treatment failure, thus providing a clinically feasible framework essential for
introduction of rational evidence-based individualized therapy selection and
prescription protocols. Our analysis indicates that genetic determinants of human
disease susceptibility and severity are encoded by population differentiation SNP
variants. Evolution of these SNPs is driven by geographically-localized form of
natural selection causing population differentiation. Recent analysis identifies 
a class of SNPs regulating gene expression in normal individuals and likely
determining unique genome-wide expression profiles of each individual. We propose
that critical disease-causing combinations of SNP variants arise from SNPs
regulating mRNA levels and determining genome-wide haplotype patterns of
individual's disease susceptibility.

PMID: 17172834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 Dec;5(12):3096-104.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors deplete enhancer of zeste 2 and associated
polycomb repressive complex 2 proteins in human acute leukemia cells.

Fiskus W(1), Pranpat M, Balasis M, Herger B, Rao R, Chinnaiyan A, Atadja P,
Bhalla K.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Georgia Cancer Center, 1120 15th Street, CN2101A, Augusta, 
GA 30912, USA.

Human enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2) protein belongs to the multiprotein polycomb
repressive complex 2, which also includes suppressor of zeste 12 (SUZ12) and
embryonic ectoderm development (EED). The polycomb repressive complex 2 complex
possesses histone methyltransferase activity mediated by the Su(var)3-9, enhancer
of zeste, and trithorax domain of EZH2, which methylates histone H3 on lysine
(K)-27 (H3K27). In the present studies, we determined that treatment with the
hydroxamate histone deacetylase inhibitor LBH589 or LAQ824 depleted the protein
levels of EZH2, SUZ12, and EED in the cultured (K562, U937, and HL-60) and
primary human acute leukemia cells. This was associated with decreased levels of 
trimethylated and dimethylated H3K27, with concomitant depletion of the homeobox 
domain containing HOXA9 and of MEIS1 transcription factors. Knockdown of EZH2 by 
EZH2 small interfering RNA also depleted SUZ12 and EED, inhibited histone
methyltransferase activity, and reduced trimethylated and dimethylated H3K27
levels, with a concomitant loss of clonogenic survival of the cultured acute
myelogenous leukemia (AML) cells. EZH2 small interfering RNA sensitized the AML
cells to LBH589-mediated depletion of EZH2, SUZ12, and EED; loss of clonogenic
survival; and LBH589-induced differentiation of the AML cells. These findings
support the rationale to test anti-EZH2 treatment combined with hydroxamate
histone deacetylase inhibitors as an antileukemia epigenetic therapy, especially 
against AML with coexpression of EZH2, HOXA9, and MEIS1 genes.

PMID: 17172412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 25;281(34):24790-802. Epub 2006 Jun 9.

Tumor suppressor p16INK4A regulates polycomb-mediated DNA hypermethylation in
human mammary epithelial cells.

Reynolds PA(1), Sigaroudinia M, Zardo G, Wilson MB, Benton GM, Miller CJ, Hong C,
Fridlyand J, Costello JF, Tlsty TD.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143-0511, USA.

Alterations in DNA methylation are important in cancer, but the acquisition of
these alterations is poorly understood. Using an unbiased global screen for CpG
island methylation events, we have identified a non-random pattern of DNA
hypermethylation acquired in p16-repressed cells. Interestingly, this pattern
included loci located upstream of a number of homeobox genes. Upon removal of
p16(INK4A) activity in primary human mammary epithelial cells, polycomb
repressors, EZH2 and SUZ12, are up-regulated and recruited to HOXA9, a locus
expressed during normal breast development and epigenetically silenced in breast 
cancer. We demonstrate that at this targeted locus, the up-regulation of polycomb
repressors is accompanied by the recruitment of DNA methyltransferases and the
hypermethylation of DNA, an endpoint, which we show to be dependent on SUZ12
expression. These results demonstrate a causal role of p16(INK4A) disruption in
modulating DNA hypermethylation, and identify a dynamic and active process
whereby epigenetic modulation of gene expression is activated as an early event
in breast tumor progression.

PMID: 16766534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. EMBO J. 2006 Jul 12;25(13):3110-22. Epub 2006 Jun 8.

Recruitment of PRC1 function at the initiation of X inactivation independent of
PRC2 and silencing.

Schoeftner S(1), Sengupta AK, Kubicek S, Mechtler K, Spahn L, Koseki H, Jenuwein 
T, Wutz A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

In mammals X inactivation is initiated by expression of Xist RNA and involves the
recruitment of Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) and 2 (PRC2), which mediate
chromosome-wide ubiquitination of histone H2A and methylation of histone H3,
respectively. Here, we show that PRC1 recruitment by Xist RNA is independent of
gene silencing. We find that Eed is required for the recruitment of the canonical
PRC1 proteins Mph1 and Mph2 by Xist. However, functional Ring1b is recruited by
Xist and mediates ubiquitination of histone H2A in Eed deficient embryonic stem
(ES) cells, which lack histone H3 lysine 27 tri-methylation. Xist expression
early in ES cell differentiation establishes a chromosomal memory, which allows
efficient H2A ubiquitination in differentiated cells and is independent of
silencing and PRC2. Our data show that Xist recruits PRC1 components by both PRC2
dependent and independent modes and in the absence of PRC2 function is sufficient
for the establishment of Polycomb-based memory systems in X inactivation.

PMCID: PMC1500994
PMID: 16763550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Genome Res. 2006 Jul;16(7):890-900. Epub 2006 Jun 2.

Suz12 binds to silenced regions of the genome in a cell-type-specific manner.

Squazzo SL(1), O'Geen H, Komashko VM, Krig SR, Jin VX, Jang SW, Margueron R,
Reinberg D, Green R, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and the Genome Center, University of
California-Davis, Davis, California 95616, USA.

Suz12 is a component of the Polycomb group complexes 2, 3, and 4 (PRC 2/3/4).
These complexes are critical for proper embryonic development, but very few
target genes have been identified in either mouse or human cells. Using a variety
of ChIP-chip approaches, we have identified a large set of Suz12 target genes in 
five different human and mouse cell lines. Interestingly, we found that Suz12
target promoters are cell type specific, with transcription factors and homeobox 
proteins predominating in embryonal cells and glycoproteins and
immunoglobulin-related proteins predominating in adult tumors. We have also
characterized the localization of other components of the PRC complex with Suz12 
and investigated the overall relationship between Suz12 binding and markers of
active versus inactive chromatin, using both promoter arrays and custom tiling
arrays. Surprisingly, we find that the PRC complexes can be localized to discrete
binding sites or spread through large regions of the mouse and human genomes.
Finally, we have shown that some Suz12 target genes are bound by OCT4 in
embryonal cells and suggest that OCT4 maintains stem cell self-renewal, in part, 
by recruiting PRC complexes to certain genes that promote differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1484456
PMID: 16751344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jul 7;345(3):1051-8. Epub 2006 May 11.

Association of Polycomb group SUZ12 with WD-repeat protein MEP50 that binds to
histone H2A selectively in vitro.

Furuno K(1), Masatsugu T, Sonoda M, Sasazuki T, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Population Genetics, Department of Molecular Genetics,
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

SUZ12 is a Polycomb group protein that forms Polycomb repressive complexes
(PRC2/3) together with EED and histone methyltransferase EZH2. Although the
essential role of SUZ12 in regulating the activity of the PRC2/3 complexes has
been demonstrated, additional function of this protein was suggested. Here, we
show that SUZ12 interacts with WD-repeat protein MEP50 in vitro and in vivo. We
show that the MEP50 binds histone H2A selectively among core histones, and
mediates transcriptional repression of protein arginine methyltransferase PRMT5, 
which is known to methylate H2A and H4. These results suggest that SUZ12 might
have a role in transcriptional regulation through physical interaction with MEP50
that can be an adaptor between PRMT5 and its substrate H2A.

PMID: 16712789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Development. 2006 Jun;133(12):2371-81. Epub 2006 May 10.

Distinct roles of Polycomb group gene products in transcriptionally repressed and
active domains of Hoxb8.

Fujimura Y(1), Isono K, Vidal M, Endoh M, Kajita H, Mizutani-Koseki Y, Takihara
Y, van Lohuizen M, Otte A, Jenuwein T, Deschamps J, Koseki H.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and Immunology, 1-7-22 Suehiro, Tsurumi-ku, 
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

Erratum in
    Development. 2014 Sep;141(17):3431-6.

To address the molecular mechanisms underlying Polycomb group (PcG)-mediated
repression of Hox gene expression, we have focused on the binding patterns of PcG
gene products to the flanking regions of the Hoxb8 gene in expressing and
non-expressing tissues. In parallel, we followed the distribution of histone
marks of transcriptionally active H3 acetylated on lysine 9 (H3-K9) and
methylated on lysine 4 (H3-K4), and of transcriptionally inactive chromatin
trimethylated on lysine 27 (H3-K27). Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that 
the association of PcG proteins, and H3-K9 acetylation and H3-K27 trimethylation 
around Hoxb8 were distinct in tissues expressing and not expressing the gene. We 
show that developmental changes of these epigenetic marks temporally coincide
with the misexpression of Hox genes in PcG mutants. Functional analyses, using
mutant alleles impairing the PcG class 2 component Rnf2 or the Suz12 mutation
decreasing H3-K27 trimethylation, revealed that interactions between class 1 and 
class 2 PcG complexes, mediated by trimethylated H3-K27, play decisive roles in
the maintenance of Hox gene repression outside their expression domain. Within
the expression domains, class 2 PcG complexes appeared to maintain the
transcriptionally active status via profound regulation of H3-K9 acetylation. The
present study indicates distinct roles for class 2 PcG complexes in
transcriptionally repressed and active domains of Hoxb8 gene.

PMID: 16687444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Anal Biochem. 2006 Sep 1;356(1):145-7. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

An improved cloning strategy for chromatin-immunoprecipitation-derived DNA
fragments.

Huang JM(1), Kim JD, Kim H, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Center for BioModular Multi-Scale Systems, 
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA.

PMID: 16647032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cell. 2006 Apr 21;125(2):301-13.

Control of developmental regulators by Polycomb in human embryonic stem cells.

Lee TI(1), Jenner RG, Boyer LA, Guenther MG, Levine SS, Kumar RM, Chevalier B,
Johnstone SE, Cole MF, Isono K, Koseki H, Fuchikami T, Abe K, Murray HL, Zucker
JP, Yuan B, Bell GW, Herbolsheimer E, Hannett NM, Sun K, Odom DT, Otte AP,
Volkert TL, Bartel DP, Melton DA, Gifford DK, Jaenisch R, Young RA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2006 Apr 21;125(2):233-6.

Polycomb group proteins are essential for early development in metazoans, but
their contributions to human development are not well understood. We have mapped 
the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) subunit SUZ12 across the entire
nonrepeat portion of the genome in human embryonic stem (ES) cells. We found that
SUZ12 is distributed across large portions of over two hundred genes encoding key
developmental regulators. These genes are occupied by nucleosomes trimethylated
at histone H3K27, are transcriptionally repressed, and contain some of the most
highly conserved noncoding elements in the genome. We found that PRC2 target
genes are preferentially activated during ES cell differentiation and that the ES
cell regulators OCT4, SOX2, and NANOG cooccupy a significant subset of these
genes. These results indicate that PRC2 occupies a special set of developmental
genes in ES cells that must be repressed to maintain pluripotency and that are
poised for activation during ES cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3773330
PMID: 16630818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Science. 2006 Apr 21;312(5772):349.

Development. Gene-suppressing proteins reveal secrets of stem cells.

Holden C.

PMID: 16627706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Genes Dev. 2006 May 1;20(9):1123-36. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

Genome-wide mapping of Polycomb target genes unravels their roles in cell fate
transitions.

Bracken AP(1), Dietrich N, Pasini D, Hansen KH, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark.

The Polycomb group (PcG) proteins form chromatin-modifying complexes that are
essential for embryonic development and stem cell renewal and are commonly
deregulated in cancer. Here, we identify their target genes using genome-wide
location analysis in human embryonic fibroblasts. We find that
Polycomb-Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1), PRC2, and tri-methylated histone H3K27
co-occupy >1000 silenced genes with a strong functional bias for embryonic
development and cell fate decisions. We functionally identify 40 genes
derepressed in human embryonic fibroblasts depleted of the PRC2 components (EZH2,
EED, SUZ12) and the PRC1 component, BMI-1. Interestingly, several markers of
osteogenesis, adipogenesis, and chrondrogenesis are among these genes, consistent
with the mesenchymal origin of fibroblasts. Using a neuronal model of
differentiation, we delineate two different mechanisms for regulating PcG target 
genes. For genes activated during differentiation, PcGs are displaced. However,
for genes repressed during differentiation, we paradoxically find that they are
already bound by the PcGs in nondifferentiated cells despite being actively
transcribed. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that PcGs are part of
a preprogrammed memory system established during embryogenesis marking certain
key genes for repressive signals during subsequent developmental and
differentiation processes.

PMCID: PMC1472472
PMID: 16618801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Nat Cell Biol. 2006 Feb;8(2):195-202. Epub 2006 Jan 15.

The Polycomb group protein Eed protects the inactive X-chromosome from
differentiation-induced reactivation.

Kalantry S(1), Mills KC, Yee D, Otte AP, Panning B, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and the Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7264, USA.

The Polycomb group (PcG) encodes an evolutionarily conserved set of
chromatin-modifying proteins that are thought to maintain cellular
transcriptional memory by stably silencing gene expression. In mouse embryos that
are mutated for the PcG protein Eed, X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) is not
stably maintained in extra-embryonic tissues. Eed is a component of a
histone-methyltransferase complex that is thought to contribute to stable
silencing in undifferentiated cells due to its enrichment on the inactive
X-chromosome in cells of the early mouse embryo and in stem cells of the
extra-embryonic trophectoderm lineage. Here, we demonstrate that the inactive
X-chromosome in Eed(-/-) trophoblast stem cells and in cells of the
trophectoderm-derived extra-embryonic ectoderm in Eed(-/-) embryos remain
transcriptionally silent, despite lacking the PcG-mediated histone modifications 
that normally characterize the facultative heterochromatin of the inactive
X-chromosome. Whereas undifferentiated Eed(-/-) trophoblast stem cells maintained
XCI, reactivation of the inactive X-chromosome occurred when these cells were
differentiated. These results indicate that PcG complexes are not necessary to
maintain transcriptional silencing of the inactive X-chromosome in
undifferentiated stem cells. Instead, PcG proteins seem to propagate cellular
memory by preventing transcriptional activation of facultative heterochromatin
during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1400591
PMID: 16415857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Mol Cell. 2005 Dec 22;20(6):845-54.

Role of Bmi-1 and Ring1A in H2A ubiquitylation and Hox gene silencing.

Cao R(1), Tsukada Y, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 27599, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins exist in at least two biochemically distinct
protein complexes, the EED-EZH2 complex and the PRC1 complex, that respectively
possess H3-K27 methyltransferase and H2A-K119 ubiquitin E3 ligase activities. How
the enzymatic activities are regulated and what their role is in Hox gene
silencing are not clear. Here, we demonstrate that Bmi-1 and Ring1A, two
components of the PRC1 complex, play important roles in H2A ubiquitylation and
Hox gene silencing. We show that both proteins positively regulate H2A
ubiquitylation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrate that
Bmi-1 and other components of the two PcG complexes bind to the promoter of
HoxC13. Knockout Bmi-1 results in significant loss of H2A ubiquitylation and
upregulation of Hoxc13 expression, whereas EZH2-mediated H3-K27 methylation is
not affected. Our results suggest that EZH2-mediated H3-K27 methylation functions
upstream of PRC1 and establishes a critical role for Bmi-1 and Ring1A in H2A
ubiquitylation and Hox gene silencing.

PMID: 16359901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Ann Hum Genet. 2005 Sep;69(Pt 5):508-16.

Evidence by expression analysis of candidate genes for congenital heart defects
in the NF1 microdeletion interval.

Venturin M(1), Bentivegna A, Moroni R, Larizza L, Riva P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical Faculty--University of Milan,
Italy.

It was recently reported that congenital heart disease is significantly more
frequent in patients with NF1 microdeletion syndrome than in those with classical
NF1. The outcome of congenital heart disease in this subset of patients is likely
caused by the haploinsufficiency of gene/s in the deletion interval. Following in
silico analysis of the deleted region, we found two genes known to be expressed
in adult heart, the Joined to JAZF1 (SUZ12) and the Centaurin-alpha 2 (CENTA2)
genes, and seven other genes with poorly defined patterns of expression and
function. With the aim of defining their expression profiles in human fetal
tissues (15th-21st weeks of gestation), expression analysis by RT-PCR and
Northern blotting was performed. C17orf40, SUZ12 and CENTA2 were found to be
mainly expressed in fetal heart, and following RT-PCR on mouse embryos and
embryonic heart and brain at different stages of development, we found that the
orthologous genes C17orf40, Suz12 and Centa2 are also expressed in early stages
of development, before and during the formation of the four heart chambers. The
presence of binding sites for Nkx2-5, a transcription factor expressed early in
heart development, in all three mouse orthologous genes was predicted by
bioinformatics, thus reinforcing the hypothesis that these genes might be
involved in heart development and may be plausible candidates for congenital
heart disease.

PMID: 16138909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Chromosoma. 2005 Aug;114(3):183-92. Epub 2005 Jun 29.

Developmental regulation of Suz 12 localization.

de la Cruz CC(1), Fang J, Plath K, Worringer KA, Nusinow DA, Zhang Y, Panning B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Chromatin modifications are among the epigenetic alterations essential for
genetic reprogramming during development. The Polycomb group (PcG) gene family
mediates chromatin modifications that contribute to developmentally regulated
transcriptional silencing. Trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 27, mediated by
a PcG protein complex consisting of Eed, Ezh2, and Suz12, is integral in
differentiation, stem cell self-renewal, and tumorigenesis. Eed and Ezh2 are also
implicated in the developmentally regulated silencing of the inactive X
chromosome, as they are transiently enriched on the inactive X chromosome when X 
chromosome silencing is initiated. Here we analyze the dynamic localization of
Suz12 during cellular differentiation and X-inactivation. Though Suz12 is a
requisite member of the Eed/Ezh2 complexes, we found that Suz12 exhibits a
notable difference from Ezh2 and Eed: while Ezh2 and Eed levels decrease during
stem cell differentiation, Suz12 levels remain constant. Despite the differential
regulation in abundance of Suz12 and Eed/Ezh2, Suz12 is also transiently enriched
on the Xi during early stages of X-inactivation, and this accumulation is Xist
RNA dependent. These results suggest that Suz12 may have a function that is not
mediated by its association with Eed and Ezh2, and that this additional function 
is not involved in the regulation of X-inactivation.

PMID: 15986205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Curr Biol. 2005 May 24;15(10):942-7.

The murine polycomb group protein Eed is required for global histone H3 lysine-27
methylation.

Montgomery ND(1), Yee D, Chen A, Kalantry S, Chamberlain SJ, Otte AP, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Call Box 
#7264, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

PcG proteins mediate heritable transcriptional silencing by generating and
recognizing covalent histone modifications. One conserved PcG complex, PRC2, is
composed of several proteins including the histone methyltransferase (HMTase)
Ezh2, the WD-repeat protein Eed, and the Zn-finger protein Suz12. Ezh2 methylates
histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27), which serves as an epigenetic mark mediating
silencing. H3K27 can be mono-, di-, or trimethylated (1mH3K27, 2mH3K27, and
3mH3K27, respectively). Hence, either PRC2 must be regulated so as to add one
methyl group to certain nucleosomes but two or three to others, or distinct
complexes must be responsible for 1m-, 2m-, and 3mH3K27. Consistent with the
latter possibility, 2mH3K27 and 3mH3K27, but not 1mH3K27, are absent in Suz12-/- 
embryos, which lack both Suz12 and Ezh2 protein. Mammalian proteins required for 
1mH3K27 have not been identified. Here, we demonstrate that unlike Suz12 and
Ezh2, Eed is required not only for 2m- and 3mH3K27 but also global 1mH3K27. These
results provide a functionally important distinction between PRC2 complex
components and implicate Eed in PRC2-independent histone methylation.

PMID: 15916951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Cell. 2005 May 6;121(3):425-36.

Polycomb group protein ezh2 controls actin polymerization and cell signaling.

Su IH(1), Dobenecker MW, Dickinson E, Oser M, Basavaraj A, Marqueron R, Viale A, 
Reinberg D, Wülfing C, Tarakhovsky A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Signaling, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA. sui@rockefeller.edu

Polycomb group protein Ezh2, one of the key regulators of development in
organisms from flies to mice, exerts its epigenetic function through regulation
of histone methylation. Here, we report the existence of the cytosolic
Ezh2-containing methyltransferase complex and tie the function of this complex to
regulation of actin polymerization in various cell types. Genetic evidence
supports the essential role of cytosolic Ezh2 in actin polymerization-dependent
processes such as antigen receptor signaling in T cells and PDGF-induced dorsal
circular ruffle formation in fibroblasts. Revealed function of Ezh2 points to a
broader usage of lysine methylation in regulation of both nuclear and
extra-nuclear signaling processes.

PMID: 15882624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 10;280(23):22437-44. Epub 2005 Apr 6.

Down-regulation of human DAB2IP gene expression mediated by polycomb Ezh2 complex
and histone deacetylase in prostate cancer.

Chen H(1), Tu SW, Hsieh JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323
Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-9110, USA.

Human DAB2IP (hDAB2IP), a novel GTPase-activating protein modulating the
Ras-mediated signaling and tumor necrosis factor-mediated apoptosis, is a potent 
growth inhibitor in human prostate cancer (PCa). Loss of hDAB2IP expression in
PCa is due to altered epigenetic regulation (i.e. DNA methylation and histone
modification) of its promoter region. The elevated polycomb Ezh2, a histone
methyltransferase, has been associated with PCa progression. In this study, we
have demonstrated that an increased Ezh2 expression in normal prostatic
epithelial cells can suppress hDAB2IP gene expression. In contrast, knocking down
the endogenous Ezh2 levels in PCa by a specific small interfering RNA can
increase hDAB2IP expression. The association of Ezh2 complex (including Eed and
Suz12) with hDAB2IP gene promoter is also detected in PCa cells but not in normal
prostatic epithelial cells. Increased Ezh2 expression in normal prostatic
epithelial cells by cDNA transfection facilitates the recruitment of other
components of Ezh2 complex to the hDAB2IP promoter region accompanied with the
increased levels of methyl histone H3 (H3) and histone deacetylase (HDAC1).
Consistently, data from PCa cells transfected with Ezh2 small interfering RNA
demonstrated that reduced Ezh2 levels resulted in the dissociation of Ezh2
complex accompanied with decreased levels of both methyl H3 and HDAC1 from
hDAB2IP gene promoter. We further unveiled that the methylation status of Lys-27 
but not Lys-9 of H3 in hDAB2IP promoter region is consistent with the hDAB2IP
levels in both normal prostatic epithelial cells and PCa cells. Together, we
conclude that hDAB2IP gene is a target gene of Ezh2 in prostatic epithelium,
which provides an underlying mechanism of the down-regulation of hDAB2IP gene in 
PCa.

PMID: 15817459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. EMBO J. 2004 Oct 13;23(20):4061-71. Epub 2004 Sep 23.

Suz12 is essential for mouse development and for EZH2 histone methyltransferase
activity.

Pasini D(1), Bracken AP, Jensen MR, Lazzerini Denchi E, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy.

SUZ12 is a recently identified Polycomb group (PcG) protein, which together with 
EZH2 and EED forms different Polycomb repressive complexes (PRC2/3). These
complexes contain histone H3 lysine (K) 27/9 and histone H1 K26 methyltransferase
activity specified by the EZH2 SET domain. Here we show that mice lacking Suz12, 
like Ezh2 and Eed mutant mice, are not viable and die during early
postimplantation stages displaying severe developmental and proliferative
defects. Consistent with this, we demonstrate that SUZ12 is required for
proliferation of cells in tissue culture. Furthermore, we demonstrate that SUZ12 
is essential for the activity and stability of the PRC2/3 complexes in mouse
embryos, in tissue culture cells and in vitro. Strikingly, Suz12-deficient
embryos show a specific loss of di- and trimethylated H3K27, demonstrating that
Suz12 is indeed essential for EZH2 activity in vivo. In conclusion, our data
demonstrate an essential role of SUZ12 in regulating the activity of the PRC2/3
complexes, which are required for regulating proliferation and embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC524339
PMID: 15385962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Genes Dev. 2004 Jul 1;18(13):1592-605.

Silencing of human polycomb target genes is associated with methylation of
histone H3 Lys 27.

Kirmizis A(1), Bartley SM, Kuzmichev A, Margueron R, Reinberg D, Green R, Farnham
PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) complexes 2 and 3 are involved in transcriptional silencing.
These complexes contain a histone lysine methyltransferase (HKMT) activity that
targets different lysine residues on histones H1 or H3 in vitro. However, it is
not known if these histones are methylation targets in vivo because the human
PRC2/3 complexes have not been studied in the context of a natural promoter
because of the lack of known target genes. Here we report the use of RNA
expression arrays and CpG-island DNA arrays to identify and characterize human
PRC2/3 target genes. Using oligonucleotide arrays, we first identified a cohort
of genes whose expression changes upon siRNA-mediated removal of Suz12, a core
component of PRC2/3, from colon cancer cells. To determine which of the putative 
target genes are directly bound by Suz12 and to precisely map the binding of
Suz12 to those promoters, we combined a high-resolution chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis with custom oligonucleotide promoter arrays. 
We next identified additional putative Suz12 target genes by using ChIP coupled
to CpG-island microarrays. We showed that HKMT-Ezh2 and Eed, two other components
of the PRC2/3 complexes, colocalize to the target promoters with Suz12.
Importantly, recruitment of Suz12, Ezh2 and Eed to target promoters coincides
with methylation of histone H3 on Lys 27.

PMCID: PMC443521
PMID: 15231737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Mol Cell. 2004 Jul 2;15(1):57-67.

SUZ12 is required for both the histone methyltransferase activity and the
silencing function of the EED-EZH2 complex.

Cao R(1), Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Recent studies have revealed the intrinsic histone methyltransferase (HMTase)
activity of the EED-EZH2 complex and its role in Hox gene silencing, X
inactivation, and cancer metastasis. In this study, we focus on the function of
individual components. We found that the HMTase activity requires a minimum of
three components-EZH2, EED, and SUZ12-while AEBP2 is required for optimal
enzymatic activity. Using a stable SUZ12 knockdown cell line, we show SUZ12
knockdown results in cell growth defects, which correlate with genome-wide
alteration on H3-K27 methylation as well as upregulation of a number of Hox
genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay identified a 500 bp region
located 4 kb upstream of the HoxA9 transcription initiation site as a SUZ12
binding site, which responds to SUZ12 knockdown and might play an important role 
in regulating HoxA9 expression. Thus, our study establishes a critical role of
SUZ12 in H3-lysine 27 methylation and Hox gene silencing.

PMID: 15225548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. EMBO J. 2003 Oct 15;22(20):5323-35.

EZH2 is downstream of the pRB-E2F pathway, essential for proliferation and
amplified in cancer.

Bracken AP(1), Pasini D, Capra M, Prosperini E, Colli E, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Department of Experimental Oncology, Via
Ripamonti 435, 20141 Milan, Italy.

Recent experiments have demonstrated that the Polycomb group (PcG) gene EZH2 is
highly expressed in metastatic prostate cancer and in lymphomas. EZH2 is a
component of the PRC2 histone methyltransferase complex, which also contains EED 
and SUZ12 and is required for the silencing of HOX gene expression during
embryonic development. Here we demonstrate that both EZH2 and EED are essential
for the proliferation of both transformed and non-transformed human cells. In
addition, the pRB-E2F pathway tightly regulates their expression and, consistent 
with this, we find that EZH2 is highly expressed in a large set of human tumors. 
These results raise the question whether EZH2 is a marker of proliferation or if 
it is actually contributing to tumor formation. Significantly, we propose that
EZH2 is a bona fide oncogene, since we find that ectopic expression of EZH2 is
capable of providing a proliferative advantage to primary cells and, in addition,
its gene locus is specifically amplified in several primary tumors.

PMCID: PMC213796
PMID: 14532106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


