
1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2016 Apr 1. [Epub ahead of print]

Complex-Mediated Synthesis of Tantalum Oxyfluoride Hierarchical Nanostructures
for Highly Efficient Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution.

Xu L(1), Gong H(1), Deng L(1), Long F(1), Gu Y(1), Guan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and
Processing, Wuhan University of Technology , 122 Luoshi Road, Wuhan, 430070,
People's Republic of China.

In this work, we have, for the first time, developed a facile wet-chemical route 
to obtain a novel photocatalytic material of tantalum oxyfluoride hierarchical
nanostructures composed of amorphous cores and single crystalline TaO2F nanorod
shells (ACHNs) by regulating the one-step hydrothermal process of TaF5 in a mixed
solution of isopropanol (i-PrOH) and H2O. In this approach, elaborately
controlling the reaction temperature and volume ratio of i-PrOH and H2O enabled
TaF5 to transform into intermediate coordination complex ions of [TaOF3·2F](2-)
and [TaF7](2-), which subsequently produced tantalum oxyfluoride ACHNs via a
secondary nucleation and growth due to a stepwise change in hydrolysis rates of
the two complex ions. Because of the unique chemical composition, crystal
structure and micromorphology, the as-prepared tantalum oxyfluoride ACHNs show a 
more negative flat band potential, an accelerated charge transfer, and a
remarkable surface area of 152.4 m(2) g(-1) contributing to increased surface
reaction sites. As a result, they exhibit a photocatalytic activity for hydrogen 
production up to 1.95 mmol h(-1) g(-1) under the illumination of a simulated
solar light without any assistance of co-catalysts, indicating that the
as-prepared tantalum oxyfluoride ACHNs are a novel promising photocatalytic
material for hydrogen production.

PMID: 27010186  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Dalton Trans. 2015 Feb 28;44(8):3829-36. doi: 10.1039/c4dt03548h.

Synthesis and spectroscopic properties of luminescent tantalum(v)-ß-diketonate
complexes and their use as optical sensors and the preparation of nanostructured 
Ta2O5.

Ramos AP(1), dos Reis DC, Pereira RR, Dias LG, Gonçalves RR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química - Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciências e Letras de
Ribeirão Preto - Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil. rrgoncalves@ffclrp.usp.br
rogeria.goncalves@gmail.com.

This work proposes a simple and inexpensive method to prepare a new series of
ß-diketonate-tantalum complexes. The method is based on the use of a [TaF7](2-)
solution, as the tantalum precursor, thenoyltrifluoroacetone (TTA),
hexafluoroacetylacetone (HFA), and benzoyltrifluoroacetylacetone (BFA) in basic
medium; basic pH is achieved by adding urea to the reaction medium. Elemental
analysis, H(1)-NMR spectroscopy, potentiometric measurements conducted with a
fluorine-selective electrode, conductivity measurements, vibrational spectroscopy
based on quantum chemistry calculations, and electronic spectroscopy helped in
determining the molecular structure of the complexes. At room temperature in the 
solid state and in solution upon irradiation with UV light, the complexes
exhibited blue emission, probably as a result of the heavy atom effect. On the
basis of the structures, luminescence properties at room temperature, and
solvent-dependent changes in the electronic properties of the complexes, these
ß-diketonates are potentially applicable as optical ethanol or humidity sensors
and are promising materials for the development of luminescent devices.

PMID: 25608498  [PubMed]


3. Nat Commun. 2015 Jan 9;6:5941. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6941.

MED26 regulates the transcription of snRNA genes through the recruitment of
little elongation complex.

Takahashi H(1), Takigawa I(2), Watanabe M(1), Anwar D(1), Shibata M(1),
Tomomori-Sato C(3), Sato S(3), Ranjan A(3), Seidel CW(3), Tsukiyama T(1),
Mizushima W(1), Hayashi M(4), Ohkawa Y(4), Conaway JW(5), Conaway RC(5),
Hatakeyama S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kita 15, Nishi 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan. (2)Creative
Research Institution, Hokkaido University, Kita 21, Nishi 10, Kita-ku, Sapporo,
Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan. (3)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 E, 50th
Street, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA. (4)Department of Advanced Medical
Initiatives, Kyushu University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 3-1-1
Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (5)1] Stowers Institute for
Medical Research, 1000 E, 50th Street, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA [2]
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City KS 66160, USA.

Regulation of transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is a key
regulatory step in gene transcription. Recently, the little elongation complex
(LEC)-which contains the transcription elongation factor ELL/EAF-was found to be 
required for the transcription of Pol II-dependent small nuclear RNA (snRNA)
genes. Here we show that the human Mediator subunit MED26 plays a role in the
recruitment of LEC to a subset of snRNA genes through direct interaction of EAF
and the N-terminal domain (NTD) of MED26. Loss of MED26 in cells decreases the
occupancy of LEC at a subset of snRNA genes and results in a reduction in their
transcription. Our results suggest that the MED26-NTD functions as a molecular
switch in the exchange of TBP-associated factor 7 (TAF7) for LEC to facilitate
the transition from initiation to elongation during transcription of a subset of 
snRNA genes.

PMCID: PMC4646223
PMID: 25575120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell Res. 2014 Dec;24(12):1433-44. doi: 10.1038/cr.2014.148. Epub 2014 Nov 21.

Crystal structure of a TAF1-TAF7 complex in human transcription factor IID
reveals a promoter binding module.

Wang H(1), Curran EC(2), Hinds TR(1), Wang EH(2), Zheng N(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pharmacology, Box 357280, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Box 357280, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Box 357280,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The general transcription factor IID (TFIID) initiates RNA polymerase II-mediated
eukaryotic transcription by nucleating pre-initiation complex formation at the
core promoter of protein-encoding genes. TAF1, the largest integral subunit of
TFIID, contains an evolutionarily conserved yet poorly characterized central core
domain, whose specific mutation disrupts cell proliferation in the
temperature-sensitive mutant hamster cell line ts13. Although the impaired TAF1
function in the ts13 mutant has been associated with defective transcriptional
regulation of cell cycle genes, the mechanism by which TAF1 mediates
transcription as part of TFIID remains unclear. Here, we present the crystal
structure of the human TAF1 central core domain in complex with another conserved
TFIID subunit, TAF7, which biochemically solubilizes TAF1. The TAF1-TAF7 complex 
displays an inter-digitated compact architecture, featuring an unexpected TAF1
winged helix (WH) domain mounted on top of a heterodimeric triple barrel. The
single TAF1 residue altered in the ts13 mutant is buried at the junction of these
two structural domains. We show that the TAF1 WH domain has intrinsic DNA-binding
activity, which depends on characteristic residues that are commonly used by WH
fold proteins for interacting with DNA. Importantly, mutations of these residues 
not only compromise DNA binding by TAF1, but also abrogate its ability to rescue 
the ts13 mutant phenotype. Together, our results resolve the structural
organization of the TAF1-TAF7 module in TFIID and unveil a critical
promoter-binding function of TAF1 in transcription regulation.

PMCID: PMC4260347
PMID: 25412659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Pathol Oncol Res. 2015 Jul;21(3):849-50. doi: 10.1007/s12253-014-9832-4. Epub
2014 Aug 7.

Frameshift mutations of TAF7L gene, a core component for transcription by RNA
polymerase II, in colorectal cancers.

Oh HR(1), An CH, Yoo NJ, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, 505 Banpo-dong, Socho-gu, Seoul, 137-701, South Korea.

PMID: 25098277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jun 24;111(25):9103-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1408293111. Epub 2014 Jun 10.

Structural and functional insight into TAF1-TAF7, a subcomplex of transcription
factor II D.

Bhattacharya S(1), Lou X(2), Hwang P(3), Rajashankar KR(4), Wang X(5), Gustafsson
JÅ(6), Fletterick RJ(3), Jacobson RH(5), Webb P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Medicine Program, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX
77030; (2)Genomic Medicine Program, Houston Methodist Research Institute,
Houston, TX 77030;Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell Signaling, University of 
Houston, Houston, TX 77204; (3)University of California Medical Center, San
Francisco, CA 94158; (4)The Northeastern Collaborative Access Team and Department
of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Argonne National
Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439; and. (5)Department of Molecular Biology and
Biochemistry, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030. (6)Center for Nuclear
Receptors and Cell Signaling, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204;
pwebb@tmhs.org. (7)Genomic Medicine Program, Houston Methodist Research
Institute, Houston, TX 77030; pwebb@tmhs.org.

Transcription factor II D (TFIID) is a multiprotein complex that nucleates
formation of the basal transcription machinery. TATA binding protein-associated
factors 1 and 7 (TAF1 and TAF7), two subunits of TFIID, are integral to the
regulation of eukaryotic transcription initiation and play key roles in
preinitiation complex (PIC) assembly. Current models suggest that TAF7 acts as a 
dissociable inhibitor of TAF1 histone acetyltransferase activity and that this
event ensures appropriate assembly of the RNA polymerase II-mediated PIC before
transcriptional initiation. Here, we report the 3D structure of a complex of
yeast TAF1 with TAF7 at 2.9 Å resolution. The structure displays novel
architecture and is characterized by a large predominantly hydrophobic
heterodimer interface and extensive cofolding of TAF subunits. There are no
obvious similarities between TAF1 and known histone acetyltransferases. Instead, 
the surface of the TAF1-TAF7 complex contains two prominent conserved surface
pockets, one of which binds selectively to an inhibitory trimethylated histone H3
mark on Lys27 in a manner that is also regulated by phosphorylation at the
neighboring H3 serine. Our findings could point toward novel roles for the
TAF1-TAF7 complex in regulation of PIC assembly via reading epigenetic histone
marks.

PMCID: PMC4078864
PMID: 24927529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 15;110(42):16886-91. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1317034110. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Taf7l cooperates with Trf2 to regulate spermiogenesis.

Zhou H(1), Grubisic I, Zheng K, He Y, Wang PJ, Kaplan T, Tjian R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 
Li Ka Shing Center for Biomedical and Health Sciences, California Institute for
Regenerative Medicine Center of Excellence, University of California, Berkeley,
CA 94720.

TATA-binding protein (TBP)-associated factor 7l (Taf7l; a paralogue of Taf7) and 
TBP-related factor 2 (Trf2) are components of the core promoter complex required 
for gene/tissue-specific transcription of protein-coding genes by RNA polymerase 
II. Previous studies reported that Taf7l knockout (KO) mice exhibit structurally 
abnormal sperm, reduced sperm count, weakened motility, and compromised
fertility. Here we find that continued backcrossing of Taf7l(-/Y) mice from N5 to
N9 produced KO males that are essentially sterile. Genome-wide expression
profiling by mRNA-sequencing analysis of wild-type (WT) and Taf7l(-/Y) (KO)
testes revealed that Taf7l ablation impairs the expression of many postmeiotic
spermatogenic-specific as well as metabolic genes. Importantly, histological
analysis of testes revealed that Taf7l(-/Y) mice develop postmeiotic arrest at
the first stage of spermiogenesis, phenotypically similar to Trf2(-/-) mice, but 
distinct from Taf4b(-/-) mice. Indeed, we find that Taf7l and Trf2 coregulate
postmeiotic genes, but none of Taf4b-regulated germ stem cell genes in testes.
Genome-wide ChIP-sequencing studies indicate that TAF7L binds to promoters of
activated postmeiotic genes in testis. Moreover, biochemical studies show that
TAF7L associates with TRF2 both in vitro and in testis, suggesting that TAF7L
likely cooperates directly with TRF2 at promoters of a subset of postmeiotic
genes to regulate spermiogenesis. Our findings thus provide a previously
undescribed mechanism for cell-type-specific transcriptional control involving an
interaction between a "nonprototypic" core promoter recognition factor (Trf2) and
an orphan TAF subunit (Taf7l) in mammalian testis-specific gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC3801064
PMID: 24082143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Nov;1829(11):1184-90. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.09.001. Epub 2013 Sep 13.

Transcriptional coactivator CIITA, a functional homolog of TAF1, has kinase
activity.

Soe KC(1), Devaiah BN, Singer DS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

The Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class II transactivator (CIITA)
mediates activated immune responses and its deficiency results in the Type II
Bare Lymphocyte Syndrome. CIITA is a transcriptional co-activator that regulates 
<U+03B3>-interferon-activated transcription of MHC class I and class II genes. It is
also a functional homolog of TAF1, a component of the general transcription
factor complex TFIID. TAF1 and CIITA both possess intrinsic acetyltransferase
(AT) activity that is required for transcription initiation. In response to
induction by <U+03B3>-interferon, CIITA and it's AT activity bypass the requirement for 
TAF1 AT activity. TAF1 also has kinase activity that is essential for its
function. However, no similar activity has been identified for CIITA thus far.
Here we report that CIITA, like TAF1, is a serine-threonine kinase. Its substrate
specificity parallels, but does not duplicate, that of TAF1 in phosphorylating
the TFIID component TAF7, the RAP74 subunit of the general transcription factor
TFIIF and histone H2B. Like TAF1, CIITA autophosphorylates, affecting its
interaction with TAF7. Additionally, CIITA phosphorylates histone H2B at Ser36, a
target of TAF1 that is required for transcription during cell cycle progression
and stress response. However, unlike TAF1, CIITA also phosphorylates all the
other histones. The identification of this novel kinase activity of CIITA further
clarifies its role as a functional homolog of TAF1 which may operate during
stress and <U+03B3>-IFN activated MHC gene transcription.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3816002
PMID: 24036077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Transcription. 2013 Jan-Feb;4(1):29-33. doi: 10.4161/trns.22842.

TAF7: traffic controller in transcription initiation.

Gegonne A(1), Devaiah BN, Singer DS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.

TAF7, a component of the TFIID complex, controls the first steps of
transcription. It interacts with and regulates the enzymatic activities of
transcription factors that regulate RNA polymerase II progression. Its diverse
functions in transcription initiation are consistent with its essential role in
cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3644039
PMID: 23340207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Elife. 2013 Jan 8;2:e00170. doi: 10.7554/eLife.00170.

Dual functions of TAF7L in adipocyte differentiation.

Zhou H(1), Kaplan T, Li Y, Grubisic I, Zhang Z, Wang PJ, Eisen MB, Tjian R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California, Berkeley , Berkeley , United States ; Li Ka Shing
Center For Biomedical and Health Sciences, CIRM Center of Excellence, University 
of California, Berkeley , Berkeley , United States.

The diverse transcriptional mechanisms governing cellular differentiation and
development of mammalian tissue remains poorly understood. Here we report that
TAF7L, a paralogue of TFIID subunit TAF7, is enriched in adipocytes and white fat
tissue (WAT) in mouse. Depletion of TAF7L reduced adipocyte-specific gene
expression, compromised adipocyte differentiation, and WAT development as well.
Ectopic expression of TAF7L in myoblasts reprograms these muscle precursors into 
adipocytes upon induction. Genome-wide mRNA-seq expression profiling and ChIP-seq
binding studies confirmed that TAF7L is required for activating
adipocyte-specific genes via a dual mechanism wherein it interacts with PPAR<U+03B3> at 
enhancers and TBP/Pol II at core promoters. In vitro binding studies confirmed
that TAF7L forms complexes with both TBP and PPAR<U+03B3>. These findings suggest that
TAF7L plays an integral role in adipocyte gene expression by targeting enhancers 
as a cofactor for PPAR<U+03B3> and promoters as a component of the core transcriptional 
machinery.DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00170.001.

PMCID: PMC3539393
PMID: 23326641  [PubMed - in process]


11. Med Oncol. 2013 Mar;30(1):368. doi: 10.1007/s12032-012-0368-8. Epub 2013 Jan 6.

Expression analysis of four testis-specific genes AURKC, OIP5, PIWIL2 and TAF7L
in acute myeloid leukemia: a gender-dependent expression pattern.

Yazarloo F(1), Shirkoohi R, Mobasheri MB, Emami A, Modarressi MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, PO Box 
14155-6447, Tehran, Iran.

Cancer testis antigens (CTAs) have normal expression restricted in the testis and
also inappropriate expression in various tumor types. Special and favorable
characteristics of these genes, as being immunogenic and therefore having the
potential to be used as tumor vaccine, have made them as one of the star
attractions of the cancer research. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a highly
heterogeneous hematological disorder with various reported changes in gene
expression. To find new CTA genes in AML, we analyzed the expression pattern of
four testis-specific genes AURKC, OIP5, PIWIL2 and TAF7L using real-time
quantitative PCR in 51 AMLs and 6 myelodysplastic syndrome cases in comparison
with 33 healthy controls. The expression of the studied genes, noticeably OIP5
and TAF7L, differed between studied groups in a gender-dependent manner.
Upregulation of OIP5 was observed only in ~41 % of the female AML patients as
compared to the healthy females. The remaining ~59 % of the male AML patients,
when compared to the healthy males, displayed downregulation of TAF7L. This
finding may affect many aspects of AML such as diagnosis, prognosis assessment
and treatment choice.

PMID: 23292864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Placenta. 2013 Feb;34(2):110-8. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2012.11.003. Epub 2012
Nov 28.

Gene expression profile of a newly established choriocarcinoma cell line, iC3-1, 
compared to existing choriocarcinoma cell lines and normal placenta.

Kobayashi Y(1), Banno K, Shimizu T, Ueki A, Tsuji K, Masuda K, Kisu I, Nomura H, 
Tominaga E, Nagano O, Saya H, Aoki D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Keio University, 
35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. kobax@a2.keio.jp

Gestational choriocarcinoma is a malignant trophoblastic tumor that usually
occurs in the uterus after pregnancy. The tumor is curable with advanced
chemotherapy, but the molecular mechanism of choriocarcinoma tumorigenesis
remains unclear. This is partly because the low incidence makes it difficult to
obtain clinical samples for investigation and because an appropriate
choriocarcinoma cell model to study the tumorigenesis has not been developed. We 
have established a new choriocarcinoma cell line, induced choriocarcinoma cell-1 
(iC(3)-1), that possesses unique characteristics compared to other
choriocarcinoma cell lines, including production of tumors that consist of the
two types of cells commonly found in choriocarcinoma and mimicking of the
clinical pathology. Existing trophoblast cell lines utilized in previous
choriocarcinoma studies have had significantly dissimilar gene expression
profiles. Therefore, it is important to choose an appropriate cell line for a
particular study based on the characteristics of the cell line. In this study, to
clarify the genetic characteristics of iC(3)-1 and to explore the tumorigenesis
mechanism, we examined the gene profile of iC(3)-1 compared to those of existing 
cell lines and normal placental tissue. Bioinformatics analysis showed that
several characteristic genes, IGF1R, CHFR, MUC3A, TAF7, PARK7, CDC123 and PSMD8, 
were significantly upregulated in iC(3)-1 compared to BeWo and JEG3 cells.
Interestingly, HAS2, CD44 and S100P were significantly upregulated in iC(3)-1
compared to parental HTR8/SVneo cells and normal third trimester placenta.
Choriocarcinoma samples also showed immunoreactivity to HAS2, CD44 and S100. In
summary, the gene expression profile of iC(3)-1 suggests that studies using this 
cell line can make an important contribution to improved understanding of
choriocarcinoma tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23199791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 9;287(46):38755-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.412015. Epub 2012
Oct 1.

Cross-talk among RNA polymerase II kinases modulates C-terminal domain
phosphorylation.

Devaiah BN(1), Singer DS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, NCI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892, USA.

The RNA polymerase II (Pol II) C-terminal domain (CTD) serves as a docking site
for numerous proteins, bridging various nuclear processes to transcription. The
recruitment of these proteins is mediated by CTD phospho-epitopes generated
during transcription. The mechanisms regulating the kinases that establish these 
phosphorylation patterns on the CTD are not known. We report that three CTD
kinases, CDK7, CDK9, and BRD4, engage in cross-talk, modulating their subsequent 
CTD phosphorylation. BRD4 phosphorylates PTEFb/CDK9 at either Thr-29 or Thr-186, 
depending on its relative abundance, which represses or activates CDK9 CTD kinase
activity, respectively. Conversely, CDK9 phosphorylates BRD4 enhancing its CTD
kinase activity. The CTD Ser-5 kinase CDK7 also interacts with and phosphorylates
BRD4, potently inhibiting BRD4 kinase activity. Additionally, the three kinases
regulate each other indirectly through the general transcription factor TAF7. An 
inhibitor of CDK9 and CDK7 CTD kinase activities, TAF7 also binds to BRD4 and
inhibits its kinase activity. Each of these kinases phosphorylates TAF7,
affecting its subsequent ability to inhibit the other two. Thus, a complex
regulatory network governs Pol II CTD kinases.

PMCID: PMC3493918
PMID: 23027873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Aug;32(16):3358-69. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00416-12. Epub 2012 Jun 
18.

Phosphorylation-dependent regulation of cyclin D1 and cyclin A gene transcription
by TFIID subunits TAF1 and TAF7.

Kloet SL(1), Whiting JL, Gafken P, Ranish J, Wang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.

The largest transcription factor IID (TFIID) subunit, TBP-associated factor 1
(TAF1), possesses protein kinase and histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activities. 
Both enzymatic activities are essential for transcription from a subset of genes 
and G(1) progression in mammalian cells. TAF7, another TFIID subunit, binds TAF1 
and inhibits TAF1 HAT activity. Here we present data demonstrating that
disruption of the TAF1/TAF7 interaction within TFIID by protein phosphorylation
leads to activation of TAF1 HAT activity and stimulation of cyclin D1 and cyclin 
A gene transcription. Overexpression and small interfering RNA knockdown
experiments confirmed that TAF7 functions as a transcriptional repressor at these
promoters. Release of TAF7 from TFIID by TAF1 phosphorylation of TAF7 increased
TAF1 HAT activity and elevated histone H3 acetylation levels at the cyclin D1 and
cyclin A promoters. Serine-264 of TAF7 was identified as a substrate for TAF1
kinase activity. Using TAF7 S264A and S264D phosphomutants, we determined that
the phosphorylation state of TAF7 at S264 influences the levels of cyclin D1 and 
cyclin A gene transcription and promoter histone H3 acetylation. Our studies have
uncovered a novel function for the TFIID subunit TAF7 as a
phosphorylation-dependent regulator of TAF1-catalyzed histone H3 acetylation at
the cyclin D1 and cyclin A promoters.

PMCID: PMC3434555
PMID: 22711989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 May;32(10):1984-97. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06305-11. Epub 2012 Mar 
12.

The general transcription factor TAF7 is essential for embryonic development but 
not essential for the survival or differentiation of mature T cells.

Gegonne A(1), Tai X, Zhang J, Wu G, Zhu J, Yoshimoto A, Hanson J, Cultraro C,
Chen QR, Guinter T, Yang Z, Hathcock K, Singer A, Rodriguez-Canales J, Tessarollo
L, Mackem S, Meerzaman D, Buetow K, Singer DS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

TAF7, a component of the TFIID complex that nucleates the assembly of
transcription preinitiation complexes, also independently interacts with and
regulates the enzymatic activities of other transcription factors, including
P-TEFb, TFIIH, and CIITA, ensuring an orderly progression in transcription
initiation. Since not all TAFs are required in terminally differentiated cells,
we examined the essentiality of TAF7 in cells at different developmental stages
in vivo. Germ line disruption of the TAF7 gene is embryonic lethal between 3.5
and 5.5 days postcoitus. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts with TAF7 deleted cease
transcription globally and stop proliferating. In contrast, whereas TAF7 is
essential for the differentiation and proliferation of immature thymocytes, it is
not required for subsequent, proliferation-independent differentiation of lineage
committed thymocytes or for their egress into the periphery. TAF7 deletion in
peripheral CD4 T cells affects only a small number of transcripts. However, T
cells with TAF7 deleted are not able to undergo activation and expansion in
response to antigenic stimuli. These findings suggest that TAF7 is essential for 
proliferation but not for proliferation-independent differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3347399
PMID: 22411629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025684. Epub 2011 Oct 17.

The simian immunodeficiency virus targets central cell cycle functions through
transcriptional repression in vivo.

Hogerkorp CM(1), Nishimura Y, Song K, Martin MA, Roederer M.

Author information: 
(1)ImmunoTechnology Section, Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America. CMGH@novonordisk.com

A massive and selective loss of CD4+ memory T cells occurs during the acute phase
of immunodeficiency virus infections. The mechanism of this depletion is poorly
understood but constitutes a key event with implications for progression. We
assessed gene expression of purified T cells in Rhesus Macaques during acute
SIVmac239 infection in order to define mechanisms of pathogenesis. We observe a
general transcriptional program of over 1,600 interferon-stimulated genes induced
in all T cells by the infection. Furthermore, we identify 113 transcriptional
changes that are specific to virally infected cells. A striking downregulation of
several key cell cycle regulator genes was observed and shared promotor-region
E2F binding sites in downregulated genes suggested a targeted transcriptional
control of an E2F regulated cell cycle program. In addition, the upregulation of 
the gene for the fundamental regulator of RNA polymerase II, TAF7, demonstrates
that viral interference with the cell cycle and transcriptional regulation
programs may be critical components during the establishment of a pathogenic
infection in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3197176
PMID: 22043290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 10;285(50):38772-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.173864. Epub
2010 Oct 11.

Novel functions for TAF7, a regulator of TAF1-independent transcription.

Devaiah BN(1), Lu H, Gegonne A, Sercan Z, Zhang H, Clifford RJ, Lee MP, Singer
DS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, NCI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892, USA.

The transcription factor TFIID components TAF7 and TAF1 regulate eukaryotic
transcription initiation. TAF7 regulates transcription initiation of
TAF1-dependent genes by binding to the acetyltransferase (AT) domain of TAF1 and 
inhibiting the enzymatic activity that is essential for transcription. TAF7 is
released from the TAF1-TFIID complex upon completion of preinitiation complex
assembly, allowing transcription to initiate. However, not all transcription is
TAF1-dependent, and the role of TAF7 in regulating TAF1-independent transcription
has not been defined. The IFN<U+03B3>-induced transcriptional co-activator CIITA
activates MHC class I and II genes, which are vital for immune responses, in a
TAF1-independent manner. Activation by CIITA depends on its intrinsic AT
activity. We now show that TAF7 binds to CIITA and inhibits its AT activity,
thereby repressing activated transcription. Consistent with this TAF7 function,
siRNA-mediated depletion of TAF7 resulted in increased CIITA-dependent
transcription. A more global role for TAF7 as a regulator of transcription was
revealed by expression profiling analysis: expression of 30-40% of genes affected
by TAF7 depletion was independent of either TAF1 or CIITA. Surprisingly, although
TAF1-dependent transcripts were largely down-regulated by TAF7 depletion,
TAF1-independent transcripts were predominantly up-regulated. We conclude that
TAF7, until now considered only a TFIID component and regulator of TAF1-dependent
transcription, also regulates TAF1-independent transcription.

PMCID: PMC2998114
PMID: 20937824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Proteome Sci. 2009 Dec 24;7:46. doi: 10.1186/1477-5956-7-46.

Quantitative mass spectrometry of TATA binding protein-containing complexes and
subunit phosphorylations during the cell cycle.

Pijnappel WP(1), Kolkman A, Baltissen MP, Heck A Jr, Timmers HM.

Author information: 
(1)Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Department of Physiological Chemistry,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, the
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Progression through the cell cycle is accompanied by tightly
controlled regulation of transcription. On one hand, a subset of genes is
expressed in a cell cycle-dependent manner. On the other hand, a general
inhibition of transcription occurs during mitosis. Genetic and genome-wide
studies suggest cell cycle regulation at the level of transcription initiation by
protein complexes containing the common DNA-binding subunit TATA binding protein 
(TBP). TBP is a key player in regulating transcription by all three nuclear RNA
polymerases. It forms at least four distinct protein complexes with
TBP-associated factors (TAFs): SL1, B-TFIID, TFIID, and TFIIIB. Some TAFs are
known to remain associated with TBP during the cell cycle. Here we analyze all
TAFs and their phosphorylation status during the cell cycle using a quantitative 
mass spectrometry approach.
RESULTS: TBP protein complexes present in human cells at the G2/M and G1/S
transitions were analyzed by combining affinity purification with quantitative
mass spectrometry using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture 
(SILAC). Phosphorylations were mapped and quantified after enrichment of tryptic 
peptides by titanium dioxide. This revealed that subunit stoichiometries of TBP
complexes remained intact, but their relative abundances in nuclear extracts
changed during the cell cycle. Several novel phosphorylations were detected on
subunits of the TBP complexes TFIID and SL1. G2/M-specific phosphorylations were 
detected on TAF1, TAF4, TAF7, and TAFI41/TAF1D, and G1/S-specific
dephosphorylations were detected on TAF3. Many phosphorylated residues were
evolutionary conserved from human to zebrafish and/or drosophila, and were
present in conserved regions suggesting important regulatory functions.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first quantitative proteomic analysis of
human TBP containing protein complexes at the G2/M and G1/S transitions, and
identifies new cell cycle-dependent phosphorylations on TAFs present in their
protein complex. We speculate that phosphorylation of complex-specific subunits
may be involved in regulating the activities of TBP protein complexes during the 
cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC2804597
PMID: 20034391  [PubMed]


19. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Apr 8;105(14):5367-72. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0801637105. Epub 2008 Apr 7.

TFIID component TAF7 functionally interacts with both TFIIH and P-TEFb.

Gegonne A(1), Weissman JD, Lu H, Zhou M, Dasgupta A, Ribble R, Brady JN, Singer
DS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch and Virus Tumor Biology Section, Basic Research
Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA.

Transcription consists of a series of highly regulated steps: assembly of the
preinitiation complex (PIC) at the promoter, initiation, elongation, and
termination. PIC assembly is nucleated by TFIID, a complex composed of the
TATA-binding protein (TBP) and a series of TBP-associated factors (TAFs). One
component, TAF7, is incorporated in the PIC through its interaction with TFIID
but is released from TFIID upon transcription initiation. We now report that TAF7
interacts with the transcription factors, TFIIH and P-TEFb, resulting in the
inhibition of their Pol II CTD kinase activities. Importantly, in in vitro
transcription reactions, TAF7 inhibits steps after PIC assembly and formation of 
the first phosphodiester bonds. Further, in vivo TAF7 coelongates with P-TEFb and
Pol II downstream of the promoter. We propose a model in which TAF7 contributes
to the regulation of the transition from PIC assembly to initiation and
elongation.

PMCID: PMC2291086
PMID: 18391197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Clin Immunol. 2007 Nov;27(6):640-6. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Contiguous X-chromosome deletion syndrome encompassing the BTK, TIMM8A, TAF7L,
and DRP2 genes.

Sedivá A(1), Smith CI, Asplund AC, Hadac J, Janda A, Zeman J, Hansíková H,
Dvoráková L, Mrázová L, Velbri S, Koehler C, Roesch K, Sullivan KE, Futatani T,
Ochs HD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University Hospital Motol, V Uvalu 84, 150 06, Prague
5, Czech Republic. anna.sediva@fnmotol.cz

X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) is characterized by low levels of B-lymphocytes
with early-onset, recurrent, microbial infections occasionally causing
neurological symptoms. We observed an atypical clinical course of XLA,
complicated since early childhood with neurological impairment, progressive
sensorineural deafness, and dystonia in six boys of four unrelated families. The 
neurologic symptoms suggested the diagnosis of Mohr-Tranebjaerg syndrome, caused 
by mutations in the TIMM8A gene, previously known as DDP1, and located
centromerically of BTK. Deafness dystonia peptide (DDP1) participates in
neurological development and is a part of the mitochondrial protein import
pathway. Mutation analysis of the BTK gene revealed gross deletions of different 
lengths in all patients, in one case extending approximately 196 kb, including
the genes TIMM8A, TAF7L, and DRP2. The most prominent clinical findings of this
contiguous deletion syndrome are the combination of immunodeficiency and
sensorineural deafness, which were present in all affected boys. The severity of 
symptoms, however, did not correlate with the extent of the deletion.

PMID: 17851739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Andrologia. 2007 Oct;39(5):190-5.

Mutation analysis of the X-chromosome linked, testis-specific TAF7L gene in
spermatogenic failure.

Akinloye O(1), Gromoll J, Callies C, Nieschlag E, Simoni M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, College of Health Sciences, Ladoke Akintola 
University of Technology, Osogbo, Osun State, Nigeria.

The precise temporal and spatial expressions of specific transcription regulation
factors (TRF) have long been considered essential for spermatogenesis. Recently, 
it has been speculated that mammals have evolved more specialised TRF genes. In
the human, the TAF7L gene may be essential for maintenance of spermatogenesis. In
this study, we investigated the possible role of the TAF7L gene located on the X 
chromosome in testicular function and spermatogenic failure. In a case-controlled
retrospective study, we recruited 16 infertile males with consistent,
nonobstructive azoospermia and with normal serum follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) levels. Twenty age-matched men with normal spermatogenesis with the same
ethnic background (Caucasian) were recruited as controls. Their genomic DNA was
screened for sequence changes in the coding regions and part of the flanking
introns of the TAF7L gene by direct sequencing. Amino acid sequence was compared 
with the NCBI standard sequence (BC043391). Semen analysis and hormone evaluation
were performed. We observed six sequence variations in four patients, consisting 
of two point mutations, one each in exon 9 and 13 and one six-basepair deletion
in exon 13 with concomitant changes in amino acid. One additional nucleotide
exchange was observed in intron 8. Most of these changes were also found in eight
controls with the exception of changes in exon 13. A meta-analysis including the 
present study and literature data suggests a possible association of the point
mutation in exon 13 with infertility. There was no association or relationship
with reproductive hormones. In conclusion, the sequence variants in the cDNA
sequence observed are common polymorphisms. The changes in intron 8 appear novel.
We report for the first time that most of the alterations are not associated with
gonadal dysfunction, while the sequence variant in exon 13 may represent a risk
factor for spermatogenic failure.

PMID: 17714218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Acta Biochim Pol. 2007;54(1):89-98. Epub 2007 Mar 9.

A common cis-element in promoters of protein synthesis and cell cycle genes.

Wyrwicz LS(1), Gaj P, Hoffmann M, Rychlewski L, Ostrowski J.

Author information: 
(1)BioInfoBank Institute, Poznan, Poland. lucjan@bioinfo.pl

Gene promoters contain several classes of functional sequence elements (cis
elements) recognized by protein agents, e.g. transcription factors and essential 
components of the transcription machinery. Here we describe a common DNA
regulatory element (tandem TCTCGCGAGA motif) of human TATA-less promoters. A
combination of bioinformatic and experimental methodology suggests that the
element can be critical for expression of genes involved in enhanced protein
synthesis and the G1/S transition in the cell cycle. The motif was identified in 
a substantial fraction of promoters of cell cycle genes, like cyclins (CCNC,
CCNG1), as well as transcription regulators (TAF7, TAF13, KLF7, NCOA2), chromatin
structure modulators (HDAC2, TAF6L), translation initiation factors (EIF5,
EIF2S1, EIF4G2, EIF3S8, EIF4) and previously reported 18 ribosomal protein genes.
Since the motif can define a subset of promoters with a distinct mechanism of
activation involved in regulation of expression of about 5% of human genes,
further investigation of this regulatory element is an emerging task.

PMID: 17351670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Apr;27(7):2582-9. Epub 2007 Jan 22.

Abnormal sperm in mice lacking the Taf7l gene.

Cheng Y(1), Buffone MG, Kouadio M, Goodheart M, Page DC, Gerton GL, Davidson I,
Wang PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

TFIID is a general transcription factor required for transcription of most
protein-coding genes by RNA polymerase II. TAF7L is an X-linked germ
cell-specific paralogue of TAF7, which is a generally expressed component of
TFIID. Here, we report the generation of Taf7l mutant mice by homologous
recombination in embryonic stem cells by using the Cre-loxP strategy. While
spermatogenesis was completed in Taf7l(-/Y) mice, the weight of Taf7l(-/Y) testis
decreased and the amount of sperm in the epididymides was sharply reduced. Mutant
epididymal sperm exhibited abnormal morphology, including folded tails. Sperm
motility was significantly reduced, and Taf7l(-/Y) males were fertile with
reduced litter size. Microarray profiling revealed that the abundance of six gene
transcripts (including Fscn1) in Taf7l(-/Y) testes decreased more than twofold.
In particular, FSCN1 is an F-action-bundling protein and thus may be critical for
normal sperm morphology and sperm motility. Although deficiency of Taf7l may be
compensated in part by Taf7, Taf7l has apparently evolved new specialized
functions in the gene-selective transcription in male germ cell differentiation. 
Our mouse studies suggest that mutations in the human TAF7L gene might be
implicated in X-linked oligozoospermia in men.

PMCID: PMC1899882
PMID: 17242199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 Apr;12(4):263-7. Epub 2006 Apr 5.

The role of the testis-specific gene hTAF7L in the aetiology of male infertility.

Stouffs K(1), Willems A, Lissens W, Tournaye H, Van Steirteghem A, Liebaers I.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Reproduction and Genetics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Belgium. katrien.stouffs@az.vub.ac.be

The X-linked TAF7L gene is homologous to the autosomal transcription factor TAF7.
Together with its testis-specific expression pattern, this might point to an
important function in spermatogenesis. In order to analyse the involvement of the
hTAF7L gene in the aetiology of male infertility, a total of 25 patients with
maturation arrest of spermatogenesis have been analysed for the presence of
mutations in this gene. Four alterations of the nucleotide sequence, with
concomitant changes in the amino acid sequence, have been observed in 12
patients. All sequence alterations were also found either in a control group
consisting of men with proven fertility or in a control group with men with
normal spermatogenesis. Therefore, these alterations are probably polymorphisms.

PMID: 16597641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2006 Feb;13(2):140-6. Epub 2006 Jan 15.

Structural basis for the methylation site specificity of SET7/9.

Couture JF(1), Collazo E, Hauk G, Trievel RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, 1301 Catherine
Road, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0606, USA.

Human SET7/9 is a protein lysine methyltransferase (PKMT) that methylates histone
H3, the tumor suppressor p53 and the TBP-associated factor TAF10. To elucidate
the determinants of its substrate specificity, we have solved the enzyme's
structure bound to a TAF10 peptide and examined its ability to methylate histone 
H3, TAF10 and p53 substrates bearing either mutations or covalent modifications
within their respective methylation sites. Collectively, our data reveal that
SET7/9 recognizes a conserved K/R-S/T/A motif preceding the lysine substrate and 
has a propensity to bind aspartates and asparagines on the C-terminal side of the
lysine target. We then used a sequence-based approach with this motif to identify
novel substrates for this PKMT. Among the putative targets is TAF7, which is
methylated at Lys5 by the enzyme in vitro. These results demonstrate the
predictive value of the consensus motif in identifying novel substrates for
SET7/9.

PMID: 16415881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jan 17;103(3):602-7. Epub 2006 Jan 9.

TAF7: a possible transcription initiation check-point regulator.

Gegonne A(1), Weissman JD, Zhou M, Brady JN, Singer DS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, Basic Research Laboratory, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Transcription consists of a series of highly regulated steps: assembly of a
preinitiation complex (PIC) at the promoter nucleated by TFIID, followed by
initiation, elongation, and termination. The present study has focused on the
role of the TFIID component, TAF7, in regulating transcription initiation. In
TFIID, TAF7 binds to TAF1 and inhibits its intrinsic acetyl transferase activity.
We now report that although TAF7 remains bound to TAF1 and associated with TFIID 
during the formation of the PIC, TAF7 dissociates from the PIC upon transcription
initiation. Entry of polymerase II into the assembling PIC is associated with
TAF1 and TAF7 phosphorylation, coincident with TAF7 release. We propose that the 
TFIID composition is dynamic and that TAF7 functions as a check-point regulator
suppressing premature transcription initiation until PIC assembly is complete.

PMCID: PMC1325967
PMID: 16407123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. BMC Genomics. 2005 Jul 23;6:100.

Prediction of the general transcription factors associated with RNA polymerase II
in Plasmodium falciparum: conserved features and differences relative to other
eukaryotes.

Callebaut I(1), Prat K, Meurice E, Mornon JP, Tomavo S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique CNRS UMR7590, Universités Paris 6
et Paris 7, Département de Biologie Structurale, IMPMC, 75252 Paris Cedex 05,
France. Isabelle.Callebaut@impmc.jussieu.fr

BACKGROUND: To date, only a few transcription factors have been identified in the
genome of the parasite Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of malaria.
Moreover, no detailed molecular analysis of its basal transcription machinery,
which is otherwise well-conserved in the crown group of eukaryotes, has yet been 
reported. In this study, we have used a combination of sensitive sequence
analysis methods to predict the existence of several parasite encoded general
transcription factors associated with RNA polymerase II.
RESULTS: Several orthologs of general transcription factors associated with RNA
polymerase II can be predicted among the hypothetical proteins of the P.
falciparum genome using the two-dimensional Hydrophobic Cluster Analysis (HCA)
together with profile-based search methods (PSI-BLAST). These predicted
orthologous genes encoding putative transcription factors include the large
subunit of TFIIA and two candidates for its small subunit, the TFIIE
beta-subunit, which would associate with the previously known TFIIE
alpha-subunit, the TFIIF beta-subunit, as well as the p62/TFB1 subunit of the
TFIIH core. Within TFIID, the putative orthologs of TAF1, TAF2, TAF7 and TAF10
were also predicted. However, no candidates for TAFs with classical histone fold 
domain (HFD) were found, suggesting an unusual architecture of TFIID complex of
RNA polymerase II in the parasite.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results suggest that more general transcription
factors may be present in the P. falciparum proteome than initially thought. The 
prediction of these orthologous general transcription factors opens the way for
further studies dealing with transcriptional regulation in P. falciparum. These
alternative and sensitive sequence analysis methods can help to identify
candidates for other transcriptional regulatory factors in P. falciparum. They
will also facilitate the prediction of biological functions for several orphan
proteins from other apicomplexan parasites such as Toxoplasma gondii,
Cryptosporidium parvum and Eimeria.

PMCID: PMC1199594
PMID: 16042788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Cell. 2005 May 13;18(4):471-81.

Functional characterization of core promoter elements: DPE-specific transcription
requires the protein kinase CK2 and the PC4 coactivator.

Lewis BA(1), Sims RJ 3rd, Lane WS, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nucleic Acids Enzymology, Department of Biochemistry, University
of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Downstream core promoter elements are an expanding class of regulatory sequences 
that add considerable diversity to the promoter architecture of RNA polymerase
II-transcribed genes. We set out to determine the factors necessary for
downstream promoter element (DPE)-dependent transcription and find that, against 
expectations, TFIID and the GTFs are not sufficient. Instead, the protein kinase 
CK2 and the coactivator PC4 establish DPE-specific transcription in an in vitro
transcription system containing TFIID, Mediator, and the GTFs. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses using the DPE-dependent IRF-1 and TAF7 promoters
demonstrated that CK2, and PC4 are present on these promoters in vivo. In
contrast, neither PC4 nor CK2 were detected on the TAF1-dependent cyclin D
promoter, which contains a DCE type of downstream element. Our findings also
demonstrate that CK2 activity alters TFIID-dependent recognition of DCE
sequences. These data establish that CK2 acts as a switch, converting the
transcriptional machinery from functioning on one type of downstream element to
another.

PMID: 15893730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Reproduction. 2004 Jul;128(1):5-12.

Testis-specific transcription mechanisms promoting male germ-cell
differentiation.

Kimmins S(1), Kotaja N, Davidson I, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS-INSERM-Université Louis Pasteur, BP 163, 67404 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

Male germ-cell differentiation requires spermatogenic stage- and cell-specific
gene expression that is achieved by unique chromatin remodeling, transcriptional 
control and the expression of testis-specific genes or isoforms. Recent findings 
have shown that the testis has specialized transcription complexes that
coordinate the differentiation program of spermatogenesis. There are male germ
cell-specific differences in the components of the general transcription
machinery. These include upregulated expression of the TATA-binding protein (TBP)
family and its associated cofactors. Importantly, a member of the TBP family,
TBP-like factor (TLF), has a distribution pattern that is dependent on the
spermatogenic cycle and is essential for spermatogenesis. Interestingly
TBP-associated factor (TAF7), a factor of the transcription factor (TF)IID
complex, is exchanged at a critical stage in germ cell development for the
testis-specific paralogue TAF7L. A compelling amount of data has established that
cAMP-response-element modulator (CREM), a transcription factor responsive to the 
cAMP signal transduction pathway, drives expression of key testis-specific genes.
In this review we summarize recent advances in the transcription machinery that
is testis-specific, gene-selective and necessary for the process of
spermatogenesis.

PMID: 15232059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 16;279(29):29921-9. Epub 2004 Apr 12.

TATA-binding protein-associated factor 7 regulates polyamine transport activity
and polyamine analog-induced apoptosis.

Fukuchi J(1), Hiipakka RA, Kokontis JM, Nishimura K, Igarashi K, Liao S.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Institute for Cancer Research and the Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Identification of the polyamine transporter gene will be useful for modulating
polyamine accumulation in cells and should be a good target for controlling cell 
proliferation. Polyamine transport activity in mammalian cells is critical for
accumulation of the polyamine analog methylglyoxal bis(guanylhydrazone) (MGBG)
that induces apoptosis, although a gene responsible for transport activity has
not been identified. Using a retroviral gene trap screen, we generated
MGBG-resistant Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells to identify genes involved in
polyamine transport activity. One gene identified by the method encodes
TATA-binding protein-associated factor 7 (TAF7), which functions not only as one 
of the TAFs, but also a coactivator for c-Jun. TAF7-deficient cells had decreased
capacity for polyamine uptake (20% of CHO cells), decreased AP-1 activation, as
well as resistance to MGBG-induced apoptosis. Stable expression of TAF7 in
TAF7-deficient cells restored transport activity (55% of CHO cells), AP-1 gene
transactivation (100% of CHO cells), and sensitivity to MGBG-induced apoptosis.
Overexpression of TAF7 in CHO cells did not increase transport activity,
suggesting that TAF7 may be involved in the maintenance of basal activity. c-Jun 
NH2-terminal kinase inhibitors blocked MGBG-induced apoptosis without alteration 
of polyamine transport. Decreased TAF7 expression, by RNA interference, in
androgen-independent human prostate cancer LN-CaP104-R1 cells resulted in lower
polyamine transport activity (25% of control) and resistance to MGBG-induced
growth arrest. Taken together, these results reveal a physiological function of
TAF7 as a basal regulator for mammalian polyamine transport activity and
MGBG-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 15078871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. EMBO J. 2004 Feb 25;23(4):719-27. Epub 2004 Feb 12.

Mapping key functional sites within yeast TFIID.

Leurent C(1), Sanders SL, Demény MA, Garbett KA, Ruhlmann C, Weil PA, Tora L,
Schultz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of transcription, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire 
et Cellulaire, CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France.

The transcription factor TFIID, composed of the TATA box-binding protein (TBP)
and 14 TBP-associated factors (TAFs), plays a key role in the regulation of gene 
expression by RNA polymerase II. The structure of yeast TFIID, as determined by
electron microscopy and digital image analysis, is formed by three lobes,
labelled A-C, connected by thin linking domains. Immunomapping revealed that
TFIID contains two copies of the WD-40 repeat-containing TAF5 and that TAF5
contributes to the linkers since its C- and N-termini were found in different
lobes. This property was confirmed by the finding that a recombinant complex
containing TAF5 complexed with six histone fold containing TAFs was able to form 
a trilobed structure. Moreover, the N-terminal domain of TAF1 was mapped in lobe 
C, whereas the histone acetyltransferase domain resides in lobe A along with
TAF7. TBP was found in the linker domain between lobes A and C in a way that the 
N-terminal 100 residues of TAF1 are spanned over it. The implications of these
data with regard to TFIID function are discussed.

PMCID: PMC381015
PMID: 14765106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 13;278(24):21510-6. Epub 2003 Apr 3.

TAF7 (TAFII55) plays a role in the transcription activation by c-Jun.

Munz C(1), Psichari E, Mandilis D, Lavigne AC, Spiliotaki M, Oehler T, Davidson
I, Tora L, Angel P, Pintzas A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Signal Transduction and Growth Control, Deutsches
Krebforschungszentrum, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

c-Jun is a member of the AP-1 family of transcription factors regulating
expression of specific target genes in a variety of cellular processes including 
proliferation, stress response, and tumorigenicity. In the present study we have 
analyzed the mechanism of c-Jun function as a transactivator with respect to
members of the basal transcription machinery, TATA-binding protein-associated
factors (TAFs). We show that one member of the family, human TAF7 (formerly
TAFII55), physically interacts with c-Jun through two independent interaction
domains, within the N- and C-terminal part of c-Jun. Interaction in vitro
correlates with enhanced transactivation function of c-Jun in HEK293 and COS
cells in the presence of increasing amounts of TAF7. TAF7 interacts
preferentially with DNA-bound phosphorylated c-Jun, suggesting that TAF7
represents a novel c-Jun co-activator mediating activation of AP-1 target genes
in response to extracellular signals.

PMID: 12676957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Cell Sci. 2003 May 1;116(Pt 9):1847-58.

The intracellular localisation of TAF7L, a paralogue of transcription factor
TFIID subunit TAF7, is developmentally regulated during male germ-cell
differentiation.

Pointud JC(1), Mengus G, Brancorsini S, Monaco L, Parvinen M, Sassone-Corsi P,
Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 1 Rue Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch Cédex, France.

Transcription regulation in male germ cells can involve specialised mechanisms
and testis-specific paralogues of the general transcription machinery. Here we
describe TAF7L, a germ-cell-specific paralogue of the TFIID subunit TAF7. TAF7L
is expressed through most of the male germ-cell differentiation programme, but
its intracellular localisation is dynamically regulated from cytoplasmic in
spermatogonia and early spermatocytes to nuclear in late pachytene spermatocytes 
and haploid round spermatids. Import of TAF7L into the nucleus coincides with
decreased TAF7 expression and a strong increase in nuclear TBP expression, which 
suggests that TAF7L replaces TAF7 as a TFIID subunit in late pachytene
spermatocytes and in haploid cells. In agreement with this, biochemical
experiments indicate that a subpopulation of TAF7L is tightly associated with TBP
in both pachytene and haploid cells and TAF7L interacts with the TFIID subunit
TAF1. We further show that TAF3, TAF4 and TAF10 are all strongly expressed in
early spermatocytes, but that in contrast to TBP and TAF7L, they are
downregulated in haploid cells. Hence, different subunits of the TFIID complex
are regulated in distinct ways during male germ-cell differentiation. These
results show for the first time how the composition of a general transcription
factor such as TFIID and other TAF-containing complexes are modulated during a
differentiation programme highlighting the unique nature of the transcription
regulatory machinery in spermatogenesis.

PMID: 12665565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Oct 1;30(19):4145-57.

Sp1 and AP2 regulate but do not constitute TATA-less human TAF(II)55 core
promoter activity.

Zhou T(1), Chiang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4935, USA.

Human TAF(II)55 (hTAF(II)55), a component of the general transcription factor
TFIID, is the only general transcription factor encoded by an intronless gene
identified thus far. Analysis of the TATA-less hTAF(II)55 promoter-proximal
sequence reveals putative binding sites for STAT-1, MEF2, E2F, Sp1, AP2, AREB6
and E47. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, DNase I footprinting and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we demonstrate that Sp1 and AP2 can bind
simultaneously to juxtaposed Sp1- and AP2-binding sites in the hTAF(II)55
promoter-proximal region and functionally modulate hTAF(II)55 promoter activity, 
as evidenced by reporter gene assays performed in transiently transfected human
C-33A and insect SL2 cell lines. Interestingly, removal of all the
promoter-proximal Sp1-binding sites does not impair the function of the
hTAF(II)55 core promoter. Moreover, a 52-bp DNA fragment containing only the
hTAF(II)55 initiator (Inr) and downstream promoter element (DPE) is able to
support Gal4-VP16-mediated activation in vivo and in vitro. Our data suggest that
Sp1, although it plays an enhancing role in hTAF(II)55 gene expression, is not
essential for hTAF(II)55 core promoter activity. Interestingly, mutations
introduced at the Inr and DPE differentially affect the selection of
transcription start sites, suggesting that these two core promoter elements play 
a non-redundant role in the function of TATA-less promoters.

PMCID: PMC140537
PMID: 12364593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):32875-82. Epub 2002 Jul 9.

TATA-binding protein-free TAF-containing complex (TFTC) and p300 are both
required for efficient transcriptional activation.

Hardy S(1), Brand M, Mittler G, Yanagisawa J, Kato S, Meisterernst M, Tora L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR 7104,
Department of Transcriptional and Post-transcriptional Control of Gene
Regulation, Communauté Urbaine de Strasbourg, France.

Initiation of transcription of protein-encoding genes by RNA polymerase II was
thought to require transcription factor TFIID, a complex comprising the
TATA-binding protein (TBP) and TBP-associated factors (TAFs). In the presence of 
TBP-free TAF complex (TFTC), initiation of polymerase II transcription can occur 
in the absence of TFIID. TFTC contains several subunits that have been shown to
play the role of transcriptional coactivators, including the GCN5 histone
acetyltransferase (HAT), which acetylates histone H3 in a nucleosomal context.
Here we analyze the coactivator function of TFTC. We show direct physical
interactions between TFTC and the two distinct activation regions (H1 and H2) of 
the VP16 activation domain, whereas the HAT-containing coactivators, p300/CBP
(CREB-binding protein), interact only with the H2 subdomain of VP16. Accordingly,
cell transfection experiments demonstrate the requirement of both p300 and TFTC
for maximal transcriptional activation by GAL-VP16. In agreement with this
finding, we show that in vitro on a chromatinized template human TFTC mediates
the transcriptional activity of the VP16 activation domain in concert with p300
and in an acetyl-CoA-dependent manner. Thus, our results suggest that these two
HAT-containing co-activators, p300 and TFTC, have complementary rather than
redundant roles during the transcriptional activation process.

PMID: 12107188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Oct 23;98(22):12432-7. Epub 2001 Oct 9.

TAFII55 binding to TAFII250 inhibits its acetyltransferase activity.

Gegonne A(1), Weissman JD, Singer DS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, Building 10, Room 4B-36, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The general transcription factor, TFIID, consists of the TATA-binding protein
(TBP) associated with a series of TBP-associated factors (TAFs) that together
participate in the assembly of the transcription preinitiation complex. One of
the TAFs, TAF(II)250, has acetyltransferase (AT) activity that is necessary for
transcription of MHC class I genes: inhibition of the AT activity represses
transcription. To identify potential cellular factors that might regulate the AT 
activity of TAF(II)250, a yeast two-hybrid library was screened with a TAF(II)250
segment (amino acids 848-1279) that spanned part of its AT domain and it's the
domain that binds to the protein, RAP74. The TFIID component, TAF(II)55, was
isolated and found to interact predominantly with the RAP74-binding domain.
TAF(II)55 binding to TAF(II)250 inhibits its AT activity. Importantly, the
addition of recombinant TAF(II)55 to in vitro transcription assays inhibits
TAF(II)250-dependent MHC class I transcription. Thus, TAF(II)55 is capable of
regulating TAF(II)250 function by modulating its AT activity.

PMCID: PMC60071
PMID: 11592977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 6;276(27):25503-11. Epub 2001 May 4.

The intronless and TATA-less human TAF(II)55 gene contains a functional initiator
and a downstream promoter element.

Zhou T(1), Chiang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, 10900 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44106-4935, USA.

Human TAF(II)55 (hTAF(II)55) is a component of the multisubunit general
transcription factor TFIID and has been shown to mediate the functions of many
transcriptional activators via direct protein-protein interactions. To uncover
the regulatory properties of the general transcription machinery, we have
isolated the hTAF(II)55 gene and dissected the regulatory elements and the core
promoter responsible for hTAF(II)55 gene expression. Surprisingly, the hTAF(II)55
gene has a single uninterrupted open reading frame and is the only intronless
general transcription factor identified so far. Its expression is driven by a
TATA-less promoter that contains a functional initiator and a downstream promoter
element, as illustrated by both transfection assays and mutational analyses.
Moreover, this core promoter can mediate the activity of a transcriptional
activator that is artificially recruited to the promoter in a heterologous
context. Interestingly, in the promoter-proximal region there are multiple
Sp1-binding sites juxtaposed to a single AP2-binding site, indicating that Sp1
and AP2 may regulate the core promoter activity of the hTAF(II)55 gene. These
findings indicate that a combinatorial regulation of a general transcription
factor-encoding gene can be conferred by both ubiquitous and cell type-specific
transcriptional regulators.

PMID: 11340078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Plant Cell. 1999 Aug;11(8):1591-602.

Specific interactions with TBP and TFIIB in vitro suggest that 14-3-3 proteins
may participate in the regulation of transcription when part of a DNA binding
complex.

Pan S(1), Sehnke PC, Ferl RJ, Gurley WB.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Plant Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Microbiology
and Cell Science, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611-0700, USA.

The 14-3-3 family of multifunctional proteins is highly conserved among animals, 
plants, and yeast. Several studies have shown that these proteins are associated 
with a G-box DNA binding complex and are present in the nucleus in several plant 
and animal species. In this study, 14-3-3 proteins are shown to bind the TATA box
binding protein (TBP), transcription factor IIB (TFIIB), and the human
TBP-associated factor hTAF(II)32 in vitro but not hTAF(II)55. The interactions
with TBP and TFIIB were highly specific, requiring amino acid residues in the box
1 domain of the 14-3-3 protein. These interactions do not require formation of
the 14-3-3 dimer and are not dependent on known 14-3-3 recognition motifs
containing phosphoserine. The 14-3-3-TFIIB interaction appears to occur within
the same domain of TFIIB that binds the human herpes simplex virus
transcriptional activator VP16, because VP16 and 14-3-3 were able to compete for 
interaction with TFIIB in vitro. In a plant transient expression system, 14-3-3
was able to activate GAL4-dependent beta-glucuronidase reporter gene expression
at low levels when translationally fused with the GAL4 DNA binding domain. The in
vitro binding with general transcription factors TBP and TFIIB together with its 
nuclear location provide evidence supporting a role for 14-3-3 proteins as
transcriptional activators or coactivators when part of a DNA binding complex.

PMCID: PMC144297
PMID: 10449590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Aug;19(8):5486-94.

Human TAF(II)55 interacts with the vitamin D(3) and thyroid hormone receptors and
with derivatives of the retinoid X receptor that have altered transactivation
properties.

Lavigne AC(1), Mengus G, Gangloff YG, Wurtz JM, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch Cédex, C.U. de Strasbourg, France.

We have identified novel interactions between the human (h)TATA-binding
protein-associated factor TAF(II)55 and the ligand-binding domains (LBDs) of the 
nuclear receptors for vitamin D(3) (VDR) and thyroid hormone (TRalpha). Following
expression in Cos cells, hTAF(II)55 interacts with the VDR and TRalpha LBDs in a 
ligand-independent manner whereas no interactions with the retinoid X receptors
(RXRs) or with other receptors were observed. Deletion mapping indicates that
hTAF(II)55 interacts with a 40-amino-acid region spanning alpha-helices H3 to H5 
of the VDR and TRalpha LBDs but not with the equivalent highly related region of 
RXRgamma. TAF(II)55 also interacts with chimeric receptors in which the H3-to-H5 
region of RXRgamma has been replaced with that of the VDR or TRalpha.
Furthermore, replacement of two single amino acids of the RXRgamma LBD with their
VDR counterparts allows the RXRgamma LBD to interact with hTAF(II)55 while the
corresponding double substitution allows a much stronger interaction. In
transfection experiments, the single mutated RXRgamma LBDs activate transcription
to fivefold higher levels than wild-type RXRgamma while the double mutation
activates transcription to a level comparable to that observed with the VDR.
There is therefore a correlation between the ability of the modified RXRs to
interact with hTAF(II)55 and transactivation. These results strongly suggest that
the TAF(II)55 interactions with the modified RXR LBDs modulate transcriptional
activation.

PMCID: PMC84390
PMID: 10409738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Genetics. 1999 Jul;152(3):869-80.

Characterization of the ptr6(+) gene in fission yeast: a possible involvement of 
a transcriptional coactivator TAF in nucleocytoplasmic transport of mRNA.

Shibuya T(1), Tsuneyoshi S, Azad AK, Urushiyama S, Ohshima Y, Tani T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka
812-8581, Japan.

Transport of mRNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm is one of the important steps
in gene expression in eukaryotic cells. To elucidate a mechanism of mRNA export, 
we identified a novel ptr [poly(A)+ RNA transport] mutation, ptr6, which causes
accumulation of mRNA in the nucleus and inhibition of growth at the nonpermissive
temperature. The ptr6(+) gene was found to encode an essential protein of 393
amino acids, which shares significant homology in amino acid sequence with
yTAFII67 of budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and human hTAFII55, a subunit 
of the general transcription factor complex TFIID. A Ptr6p-GFP fusion protein is 
localized in the nucleus, suggesting that Ptr6p functions there. Northern blot
analysis using probes for 10 distinct mRNAs showed that the amount of tbp+ mRNA
encoding the TATA-binding protein is increased five- to sixfold, whereas amounts 
of others are rapidly decreased at the nonpermissive temperature in ptr6-1. ptr6 
has no defects in nuclear import of an NLS-GFP fusion protein. These results
suggest that Ptr6p required for mRNA transport is a Schizosaccharomyces pombe
homologue of yTAFII67 and hTAFII55. This is the first report suggesting that a
TAF is involved in the nucleocytoplasmic transport of mRNA in addition to the
transcription of the protein-coding genes.

PMCID: PMC1460658
PMID: 10388808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jun 26;273(26):16199-204.

The putative cofactor TIF1alpha is a protein kinase that is hyperphosphorylated
upon interaction with liganded nuclear receptors.

Fraser RA(1), Heard DJ, Adam S, Lavigne AC, Le Douarin B, Tora L, Losson R,
Rochette-Egly C, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur/Collège de France, B. P. 163, 67404 Illkirch
Cedex, Strasbourg, France.

Ligand-induced gene activation by nuclear receptors (NRs) is a complex process
requiring dissociation of corepressors and recruitment of coactivators. The
putative transcriptional intermediary factor TIF1alpha has been previously
characterized as a nuclear protein that interacts directly with the AF-2
ligand-dependent activating domain present in the ligand-binding domain of
numerous steroid and nonsteroid receptors, including the estrogen (ERalpha) and
retinoid X (RXRalpha) receptors. We report here that TIF1alpha is both a
phosphoprotein and a protein kinase. TIF1alpha coexpressed in COS-1 cells with
RXRalpha or ERalpha is phosphorylated and becomes hyperphosphorylated upon ligand
treatment. This hyperphosphorylation requires the binding of TIF1alpha to
transcriptionally active NRs since it is prevented by mutations either in the
core (alpha-helix 12 of the ligand-binding domain) of the AF-2 activating domains
of RXRalpha and ERalpha or in the NR box of TIF1alpha that are known to prevent
TIF1alpha-NR interactions. Thus, TIF1alpha is a phosphoprotein that undergoes
ligand-dependent hyperphosphorylation as a consequence of nuclear receptor
binding. We further show that purified recombinant TIF1alpha possesses intrinsic 
kinase activity and that, in addition to autophosphorylation, TIF1alpha
selectively phosphorylates the transcription factors TFIIEalpha, TAFII28, and
TAFII55 in vitro. These latter results raise the possibility that TIF1alpha may
act, at least in part, by phosphorylating and modifying the activity of
components of the transcriptional machinery.

PMID: 9632676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Mar;18(3):1489-97.

EWS, but not EWS-FLI-1, is associated with both TFIID and RNA polymerase II:
interactions between two members of the TET family, EWS and hTAFII68, and
subunits of TFIID and RNA polymerase II complexes.

Bertolotti A(1), Melot T, Acker J, Vigneron M, Delattre O, Tora L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, C.U. de Strasbourg, France.

The t(11;22) chromosomal translocation specifically linked to Ewing sarcoma and
primitive neuroectodermal tumor results in a chimeric molecule fusing the
amino-terminus-encoding region of the EWS gene to the carboxyl-terminal
DNA-binding domain encoded by the FLI-1 gene. As the function of the protein
encoded by the EWS gene remains unknown, we investigated the putative role of EWS
in RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription by comparing its activity with that
of its structural homolog, hTAFII68. We demonstrate that a portion of EWS is able
to associate with the basal transcription factor TFIID, which is composed of the 
TATA-binding protein (TBP) and TBP-associated factors (TAFIIs). In vitro binding 
studies revealed that both EWS and hTAFII68 interact with the same TFIID
subunits, suggesting that the presence of EWS and that of hTAFII68 in the same
TFIID complex may be mutually exclusive. Moreover, EWS is not exclusively
associated with TFIID but, similarly to hTAFII68, is also associated with the Pol
II complex. The subunits of Pol II that interact with EWS and hTAFII68 have been 
identified, confirming the association with the polymerase. In contrast to EWS,
the tumorigenic EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein is not associated with either TFIID or
Pol II in Ewing cell nuclear extracts. These observations suggest that EWS and
EWS-FLI-1 may play different roles in Pol II transcription.

PMCID: PMC108863
PMID: 9488465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 17;272(3):1709-17.

Characterization of the transcriptional regulator YY1. The bipartite
transactivation domain is independent of interaction with the TATA box-binding
protein, transcription factor IIB, TAFII55, or cAMP-responsive element-binding
protein (CPB)-binding protein.

Austen M(1), Lüscher B, Lüscher-Firzlaff JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, 30623 Hannover, Federal Republic of Germany.

YY1 is a multifunctional transcription factor implicated in both positive and
negative regulation of gene expression as well as in initiation of transcription.
We show that YY1 is ubiquitously expressed in growing, differentiated, and
growth-arrested cells. The protein is phosphorylated and has a half-life of 3.5
h. To define functional domains, we have generated a large panel of YY1 mutant
proteins. These were used to define precisely the DNA-binding domain, the region 
responsible for nuclear localization, and the transactivation domain. The two
acidic domains at the N terminus each provide about half of the transcriptional
activating activity. Furthermore, the spacer region between the Gly/Ala-rich and 
zinc finger domains has accessory function in transactivation. YY1 has been shown
previously to bind to TAFII55, TATA box-binding protein, transcription factor
IIB, and p300. In addition, we identified cAMP-responsive element-binding protein
(CBP)-binding protein as a YY1 binding partner. Surprisingly, these proteins did 
not bind to the domains involved in transactivation, but rather to the zinc
finger and Gly/Ala-rich domains of YY1. Thus, these proteins do not explain the
transcriptional activating activity of YY1, but rather may be involved in
repression or in initiation.

PMID: 8999850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Biol Chem. 1996 Aug 16;271(33):19774-80.

Multiple interactions between hTAFII55 and other TFIID subunits. Requirements for
the formation of stable ternary complexes between hTAFII55 and the TATA-binding
protein.

Lavigne AC(1), Mengus G, May M, Dubrovskaya V, Tora L, Chambon P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, B. P. 163, 67404 Illkirch Cédex, France.

We have cloned and characterized the human TATA-binding protein (TBP)-associated 
factor hTAFII55. hTAFII55, which has no known Drosophila counterpart, is present 
in both of the previously described TFIIDalpha and TFIIDbeta subpopulations. We
describe the interactions of hTAFII55 with other subunits of the transcription
factor TFIID. By cotransfection in COS cells, we show that hTAFII55 interacts
with hTAFII250, hTAFII100, hTAFII28, hTAFII20, and hTAFII18, but not with
hTAFII30 or TBP. Analysis of the binding of hTAFII55 and TBP to hTAFII28 deletion
mutants indicates that distinct regions of hTAFII28 are required for these
interactions. Although hTAFII55 does not interact by itself with TBP, stable
ternary complexes containing hTAFII55 and TBP can be formed in the presence of
hTAFII250, hTAFII100, or hTAFII28. These results not only show that hTAFII100 and
hTAFII28 interact with TBP, but also that they can nucleate the formation of
partial TFIID complexes.

PMID: 8702684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Science. 1995 Jan 27;267(5197):531-6.

Cloning of an intrinsic human TFIID subunit that interacts with multiple
transcriptional activators.

Chiang CM(1), Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, NY 10021.

TFIID is a multisubunit protein complex comprised of the TATA-binding protein
(TBP) and multiple TBP-associated factors (TAFs). The TAFs in TFIID are essential
for activator-dependent transcription. The cloning of a complementary DNA
encoding a human TFIID TAF, TAFII55, that has no known homolog in Drosophila
TFIID is now described. TAFII55 is shown to interact with the largest subunit
(TAFII230) of human TFIID through its central region and with multiple
activators--including Sp1, YY1, USF, CTF, adenoviral E1A, and human
immunodeficiency virus-type 1 Tat proteins--through a distinct amino-terminal
domain. The TAFII55-interacting region of Sp1 was localized to its DNA-binding
domain, which is distinct from the glutamine-rich activation domains previously
shown to interact with Drosophila TAFII110. Thus, this human TFIID TAF may be a
co-activator that mediates a response to multiple activators through a distinct
mechanism.

PMID: 7824954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


