
1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2016 Mar 26. pii: S1357-2725(16)30067-X. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2016.03.013. [Epub ahead of print]

Erythroid activator NF-E2, TAL1 and KLF1 play roles in forming the LCR HSs in the
human adult ß-globin locus.

Kim YW(1), Yun WJ(1), Kim A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan 46241, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Molecular Biology,
College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National University, Busan 46241, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: kimaeri@pusan.ac.kr.

The ß-like globin genes are developmental stage specifically transcribed in
erythroid cells. The transcription of the ß-like globin genes requires erythroid 
specific activators such as GATA-1, NF-E2, TAL1 and KLF1. However, the roles of
these activators have not fully elucidated in transcription of the human adult
ß-globin gene. Here we employed hybrid MEL cells (MEL/ch11) where a human
chromosome containing the ß-globin locus is present and the adult ß-globin gene
is highly transcribed by induction. The roles of erythroid specific activators
were analyzed by inhibiting the expression of NF-E2, TAL1 or KLF1 in MEL/ch11
cells. The loss of each activator decreased the transcription of human ß-globin
gene, locus wide histone hyperacetylation and the binding of other erythroid
specific activators including GATA-1, even though not affecting the expression of
other activators. Notably, sensitivity to DNase I was reduced in the locus
control region (LCR) hypersensitive sites (HSs) with the depletion of activators.
These results indicate that NF-E2, TAL1 and KLF1, all activators play a primary
role in HSs formation in the LCR. It might contribute to the transcription of
human adult ß-globin gene by allowing the access of activators and cofactors. The
roles of activators in the adult ß-globin locus appear to be different from the
roles in the early fetal locus.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 27026582  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2016 Mar 4. pii: 1535370216636724. [Epub ahead of print]

Generation of non-deletional hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin ß-globin 
locus yeast artificial chromosome transgenic mouse models: -175 Black HPFH and
-195 Brazilian HPFH.

Braghini CA(1), Costa FC(2), Fedosyuk H(3), Neades RY(3), Novikova LV(3), Parker 
MP(3), Winefield RD(4), Peterson KR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, KS 66160 USA Hematology and Hemotherapy Center, University
of Campinas, Sao Paulo, SP 13083, Brazil. (2)IntelligeneDX, Olathe, KS 66061,
USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160 USA. (4)Analytical Core Laboratory,
Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. (5)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160 USA
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, KS 66160 USA kpeterson@kumc.edu.

Fetal hemoglobin is a major genetic modifier of the phenotypic heterogeneity in
patients with sickle cell disease and certain ß-thalassemias. Normal levels of
fetal hemoglobin postnatally are approximately 1% of total hemoglobin. Patients
who have hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin, characterized by elevated
synthesis of <U+03B3>-globin in adulthood, show reduced disease pathophysiology.
Hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin is caused by ß-globin locus deletions 
(deletional hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin) or <U+03B3>-globin gene promoter
point mutations (non-deletional hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin).
Current research has focused on elucidating the pathways involved in the
maintenance/reactivation of <U+03B3>-globin in adult life. To better understand these
pathways, we generated new ß-globin locus yeast artificial chromosome transgenic 
mice bearing the (A)<U+03B3>-globin -175 T<U+2009>><U+2009>C or -195 C<U+2009>><U+2009>G hereditary persistence of
fetal hemoglobin mutations to model naturally occurring hereditary persistence of
fetal hemoglobin. Adult -175 and -195 mutant ß-YAC mice displayed a hereditary
persistence of fetal hemoglobin phenotype, as measured at the mRNA and protein
levels. The molecular basis for these phenotypes was examined by chromatin
immunoprecipitation of transcription factor/co-factor binding, including YY1,
PAX1, TAL1, LMO2, and LDB1. In -175 HPFH versus wild-type samples, the occupancy 
of LMO2, TAL1 and LDB1 proteins was enriched in HPFH mice (5.8-fold, 5.2-fold and
2.7-fold, respectively), a result that concurs with a recent study in cell lines 
showing that these proteins form a complex with GATA-1 to mediate long-range
interactions between the locus control region and the (A)<U+03B3>-globin gene. Both
hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin mutations result in a gain of
(A)<U+03B3>-globin activation, in contrast to other hereditary persistence of fetal
hemoglobin mutations that result in a loss of repression. The mice provide
additional tools to study <U+03B3>-globin gene expression and may reveal new targets for
selectively activating fetal hemoglobin.

© 2016 by the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine.

PMID: 26946532  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Genes Dev. 2016 Mar 1;30(5):508-21. doi: 10.1101/gad.276790.115.

UTX inhibition as selective epigenetic therapy against TAL1-driven T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Benyoucef A(1), Palii CG(2), Wang C(3), Porter CJ(4), Chu A(5), Dai F(5),
Tremblay V(6), Rakopoulos P(5), Singh K(2), Huang S(7), Pflumio F(8), Hébert
J(9), Couture JF(6), Perkins TJ(10), Ge K(3), Dilworth FJ(1), Brand M(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative Medicine Program,
Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada; Department
of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1H
8L6, Canada; Ottawa Institute for Systems Biology, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6,
Canada; (2)The Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative Medicine
Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada;
Ottawa Institute for Systems Biology, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada;
(3)National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA; (4)Ottawa Bioinformatics
Core Facility, The Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Ottawa Hospital Research
Institute, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada; (5)The Sprott Center for Stem Cell
Research, Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,
Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada; (6)Ottawa Institute for Systems Biology, Ottawa,
Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada; Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and
Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada; (7)Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA; (8)Commissariat á l'Energie Atomique et aux
Energies Alternatives, Direction des Sciences du Vivant (DSV)-Institut de
Recherche en Radiobiologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire (IRCM)-Stem Cells and
Radiation Department (SCSR)-Laboratory of Hematopoietic Stem Cells and Leukemia
(LSHL), U967, Fontenay-aux-Roses 92265, Paris, France; Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U967, Fontenay-aux-Roses 92265, Paris, France;
Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université Paris-Sud, UMR 967,
Fontenay-aux-Roses 92265, Paris, France; (9)Institute of Research in Immunology
and Cancer, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada;
Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, Montreal, Quebec H1T 2M4, Canada. (10)The Sprott
Center for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital
Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada; Ottawa Bioinformatics Core
Facility, The Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Ottawa Hospital Research
Institute, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada; Department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5,
Canada;

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is a heterogeneous group of
hematological tumors composed of distinct subtypes that vary in their genetic
abnormalities, gene expression signatures, and prognoses. However, it remains
unclear whether T-ALL subtypes differ at the functional level, and, as such,
T-ALL treatments are uniformly applied across subtypes, leading to variable
responses between patients. Here we reveal the existence of a subtype-specific
epigenetic vulnerability in T-ALL by which a particular subgroup of T-ALL
characterized by expression of the oncogenic transcription factor TAL1 is
uniquely sensitive to variations in the dosage and activity of the histone 3
Lys27 (H3K27) demethylase UTX/KDM6A. Specifically, we identify UTX as a
coactivator of TAL1 and show that it acts as a major regulator of the TAL1
leukemic gene expression program. Furthermore, we demonstrate that UTX,
previously described as a tumor suppressor in T-ALL, is in fact a pro-oncogenic
cofactor essential for leukemia maintenance in TAL1-positive (but not
TAL1-negative) T-ALL. Exploiting this subtype-specific epigenetic vulnerability, 
we propose a novel therapeutic approach based on UTX inhibition through in vivo
administration of an H3K27 demethylase inhibitor that efficiently kills
TAL1-positive primary human leukemia. These findings provide the first
opportunity to develop personalized epigenetic therapy for T-ALL patients.

© 2016 Benyoucef et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4782046 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26944678  [PubMed - in process]


4. Int J Rheum Dis. 2016 Mar 1. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12840. [Epub ahead of print]

Bioinformatics analysis of gene expression profile in callus tissues of
osteoporotic phenotype mice induced by osteoblast-specific Krm2 overexpression.

Wang C(1), Yu T(1), Tan L(1), Cheng J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Trauma, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin
Province, China. (2)Department of Orthopaedics, The Second Hospital of Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin Province, China.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to explore the molecular mechanism of fracture
healing in osteoporotic mice.
METHODS: The gene expression profiles of callus tissues of osteoporotic mice and 
controls were obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus database. The differentially 
expressed genes (DEGs) and their related biological function and pathways were
investigated. In addition, the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was
constructed for DEG encoding proteins and the differentially expressed
transcriptional factor was screened.
RESULTS: There were 275 up-regulated genes and 347 down-regulated genes. The
collagen metabolic process biological function was significantly enriched by
down-regulated genes. Extracellular matrix (ECM)-receptor interaction was a
significant pathway that was enriched by differentially expressed genes. In PPI
(protein-protein interaction) network, Pcna was the significant node with highest
connective degrees. Other hub nodes, such as Ccnb2 and Rrm2, were closely
associated with the p53 signaling pathway. Tal1 and Smad6 were found to be
differentially expressed transcription factors.
CONCLUSION: The dysregulated collagen metabolic process, ECM-receptor interaction
and p53 signaling pathway may be responsible for impaired fracture healing of
osteoporotic mice. The hub nodes (such as Ccnb2 and Rrm2) and differentially
expressed TFs (such as Tal1 and Smad6) play a critical role in bone remodeling of
osteoporotic individuals.

© 2016 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and John Wiley & Sons
Australia, Ltd.

PMID: 26929007  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Stem Cell Reports. 2016 Mar 8;6(3):368-82. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.01.008.
Epub 2016 Feb 18.

GATA Factor-G-Protein-Coupled Receptor Circuit Suppresses Hematopoiesis.

Gao X(1), Wu T(1), Johnson KD(1), Lahvic JL(2), Ranheim EA(3), Zon LI(2),
Bresnick EH(4).

Author information: 
(1)UW-Madison Blood Research Program, Department of Cell and Regenerative
Biology, Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA. (2)Stem Cell Program and Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology Department, Harvard University, Boston, MA
02114, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA. (4)UW-Madison Blood Research 
Program, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, Carbone Cancer Center,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, 
USA. Electronic address: ehbresni@wisc.edu.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) originate from hemogenic endothelium within the
aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region of the mammalian embryo. The relationship
between genetic circuits controlling stem cell genesis and multi-potency is not
understood. A Gata2 cis element (+9.5) enhances Gata2 expression in the AGM and
induces the endothelial to HSC transition. We demonstrated that GATA-2 rescued
hematopoiesis in +9.5(-/-) AGMs. As G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the
most common targets for FDA-approved drugs, we analyzed the GPCR gene ensemble to
identify GATA-2-regulated GPCRs. Of the 20 GATA-2-activated GPCR genes, four
were GATA-1-activated, and only Gpr65 expression resembled Gata2. Contrasting
with the paradigm in which GATA-2-activated genes promote hematopoietic stem and 
progenitor cell genesis/function, our mouse and zebrafish studies indicated that 
GPR65 suppressed hematopoiesis. GPR65 established repressive chromatin at
the +9.5 site, restricted occupancy by the activator Scl/TAL1, and repressed
Gata2 transcription. Thus, a Gata2 cis element creates a GATA-2-GPCR circuit that
limits positive regulators that promote hematopoiesis.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4788764
PMID: 26905203  [PubMed - in process]


6. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 16;7(7):8268-81. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6987.

microRNAs regulate TAL1 expression in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Correia NC(1), Melão A(1), Póvoa V(1), Sarmento L(1), Gómez de Cedrón M(2),
Malumbres M(2), Enguita FJ(1), Barata JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. (2)Cell Division and Cancer Group, Spanish National
Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

The transcription factor TAL1 is a proto-oncogene whose aberrant expression in
committed T-cell precursors is associated with the development of T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). The mechanisms leading to aberrant activation of 
TAL1 in T-ALL patients who lack chromosomal rearrangements involving the TAL1
locus remain largely unknown. We hypothesized that TAL1 levels decrease during
normal T-cell development at least in part due to miRNA-dependent silencing, in
which case TAL1 over-expression in some T-ALL cases could be the consequence of
deregulated miRNA expression. By performing computational prediction of miRNAs
that bind to the human TAL1 mRNA we compiled a list of miRNAs that are candidates
to regulate TAL1. Using a luciferase reporter system and mutagenesis assays we
confirmed the miRNA-TAL1 mRNA interactions and selected candidate miRNAs:
miR-101, miR-520d-5p, miR-140-5p, miR-448 and miR-485-5p. Over-expression of
these microRNAs in different T-ALL cell lines consistently resulted in the
down-regulation of TAL1 protein. In accordance, inhibition of miR-101 and
miR-520d-5p promoted TAL1 protein expression. Importantly, we found that miR-101,
miR-140-5p, miR-448 and miR-485-5p were down-regulated in T-ALL patient specimens
and T-ALL cell lines. Our results show for the first time the existence of
epigenetic regulation of TAL1 by specific miRNAs which may contribute, at least
in part, to the ectopic expression of TAL1 in some T-ALL cases.

PMID: 26882564  [PubMed - in process]


7. Stem Cells. 2016 Feb 11. doi: 10.1002/stem.2332. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular analysis of neutrophil differentiation from human iPSCs delineates the 
kinetics of key regulators of hematopoiesis.

Sweeney CL(1), Teng R(2), Wang H(1), Merling RK(1), Lee J(1), Choi U(1), Koontz
S(1), Wright DG(2), Malech HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20817, USA. (2)The
Molecular Medicine Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20817, USA.

In vitro generation of mature neutrophils from human induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) requires hematopoietic progenitor development followed by myeloid
differentiation. The purpose of our studies was to extensively characterize this 
process, focusing on the critical window of development between hemogenic
endothelium, hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs), and myeloid commitment,
to identify associated regulators and markers that might enable the stem cell
field to improve the efficiency and efficacy of iPSC hematopoiesis. We utilized a
4-stage differentiation protocol involving: embryoid body (EB) formation
(Stage-1); EB culture with hematopoietic cytokines (Stage-2); HSPC expansion
(Stage-3); and neutrophil maturation (Stage-4). CD34(+) CD45(-) putative
hemogenic endothelial cells were observed in Stage-3 cultures, and expressed
VEGFR-2/Flk-1/KDR and VE-cadherin endothelial markers, GATA-2, AML1/RUNX1, and
SCL/TAL1 transcription factors, and endothelial/HSPC-associated microRNAs miR-24,
miR-125a-3p, miR-126/126*, and miR-155. Upon further culture, CD34(+) CD45(-)
cells generated CD34(+) CD45(+) HSPCs that produced hematopoietic CFUs.
Mid-Stage-3 CD34(+) CD45(+) HSPCs exhibited increased expression of GATA-2,
AML1/RUNX1, SCL/TAL1, C/EBPa, and PU.1 transcription factors, but exhibited
decreased expression of HSPC-associated microRNAs, and failed to engraft in
immune-deficient mice. Mid-stage-3 CD34(-) CD45(+) cells maintained PU.1
expression and exhibited increased expression of hematopoiesis-associated
miR-142-3p/5p and a trend towards increased miR-223 expression, indicating
myeloid commitment. By late Stage-4, increased CD15, CD16b, and C/EBPe expression
were observed, with 25-65% of cells exhibiting morphology and functions of mature
neutrophils. These studies demonstrate that hematopoiesis and neutrophil
differentiation from human iPSCs recapitulates many features of embryonic
hematopoiesis and neutrophil production in marrow, but reveals unexpected
molecular signatures that may serve as a guide for enhancing iPSC hematopoiesis. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26866427  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2016 Mar;57:74-80. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2015.12.003. Epub
2015 Dec 2.

Immunophenotyping with CD135 and CD117 predicts the FLT3, IL-7R and TLX3 gene
mutations in childhood T-cell acute leukemia.

Noronha EP(1), Andrade FG(1), Zampier C(1), de Andrade CF(1), Terra-Granado E(1),
Pombo-de-Oliveira MS(2); Brazilian Study Group for Childhood Leukaemia.

Collaborators: Melaragno R(1), Aranciba AM(1), de Oliveira CT(2), Ikoma MR(1),
Nóbrega AG(3), Fialho EC(1), Neves GR(4), Magalhães IM(5), Cordoba JC(1), de
Brito PC(6), Dias AC(1), Costa JT(7), Souza LN(1), Santos M(8), Basegio RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Haematology-Oncology Program, Research Centre, Instituto Nacional
de Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. (2)Paediatric
Haematology-Oncology Program, Research Centre, Instituto Nacional de Câncer, Rio 
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Electronic address: mpombo@inca.gov.br.

With the combination of immunophenotyping and molecular tests, it is still a
challenge to identify the characteristics of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
(T-ALL) associated with distinct outcomes. This study tests the possible
correlation of cellular expression of CD135 and CD117 with somatic gene mutations
in T-ALL. One hundred sixty-two samples were tested, including 143 at diagnosis, 
15 from T-lymphoblastic lymphoma at relapse, and four relapse samples from
sequential follow-up of T-ALL. CD135 and CD117 monoclonal antibodies were
included in the T-ALL panel of flow cytometry. The percentage of cells positivity
and the median fluorescence intensity were correlated with gene mutational
status. STIL-TAL1, TLX3, FLT3 and IL7R mutations were tested using standard
techniques. STIL-TAL1 was found in 24.8%, TLX3 in 12%, IL7R in 10% and FLT3-ITD
in 5% of cases. FLT3 and IL7R mutations were mutually exclusive, as were FLT3-ITD
and STIL-TAL1. Associations of CD135(high) (p<0.01), CD117(intermediate/high)
(p=0.02) and FLT3-ITD, CD117(low) with IL7R(mutated) (p<0.01) and CD135(high)
with TLX3(pos) were observed. We conclude that the addition of CD135 and CD117 to
the diagnosis can predict molecular aberrations in T-ALL settings, mainly
segregating patients with FLT3-ITD, who would benefit from treatment with
inhibitors of tyrosine.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26852660  [PubMed - in process]


9. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2016 Jan;36(1):78-82.

[Tal1 promotes proliferation of acute lymphoblastic leukemia Jurkat cells in
vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Y(1), Shu Y, Yuan J, Chen H, Zou L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Molecular Medicine, Children's Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University/Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and 
Disorders/Key Laboratory of Pediatrics in Chongqing/Chongqing International
Science and Technology Cooperation Center for Child Development and Disorders,
Chongqing 400014, China.E-mail: 641807153@qq.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of Tal1 gene, which is aberrantly expressed in
40%-60% of patients with T lymphocytic leukemia (T-ALL), in the proliferation of 
T-ALL cells.
METHODS: We established stable Jurkat-siTal1 and Jurkat-T1 cell lines by
trasnfecting T-ALL Jurkat cells with lentiviral vectors to knock-down or
overexpress Tal1. Jurkat cells transfected with negative control siRNAs for Tal1 
knock-down (Jurkat-mock1) and over-expression(Jurkat-mock2) served as the control
cells. The proliferation of the cells lines was assessed using CCK-8 assay, and
the cell cycle distribution was determined by flow cytometry. The mRNA and
protein expressions of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2 (CDKN2A) and
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1 (CDKN2B) were measured by real-time RT-PCR
and Western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: Jurkat-T1 cells showed more active proliferation in vitro than
Jurkat-mock2 cells, while Jurkat-siTal1 cells showed slower growth than
Jurkat-mock1 cells. In Jurkat-T1 cells, G0/G1 phase cells were decreased and S
phase cells increased compared with Jurkat-mock2 cells, and Jurkat-siTal1 cells
showed increased G0/G1 phase cells and decreased S phase cells compared with
Jurkat-mock1 cells. Real-time RT-PCR and Western blotting showed that Tal1
inhibited the cellular expression of CDKN2A and CDKN2B at both mRNA and protein
levels.
CONCLUSION: Tal1 promotes the growth and the transition from G0/G1 phase to S
phase in T-ALL cells Jurkat by inhibiting the expressions of G0/G1 and S phase
negative regulatory proteins CDKN2A and CDKN2B.

PMID: 26806743  [PubMed - in process]


10. AMB Express. 2016 Dec;6(1):4. doi: 10.1186/s13568-015-0175-7. Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Disruption of PHO13 improves ethanol production via the xylose isomerase pathway.

Bamba T(1), Hasunuma T(2), Kondo A(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Science and Engineering, Graduate School of
Engineering, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai, Nada, Kobe, 657-8501, Japan.
121t454t@stu.kobe-u.ac.jp. (2)Organization of Advanced Science and Technology,
Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai, Nada, Kobe, 657-8501, Japan.
hasunuma@port.kobe-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Chemical Science and Engineering,
Graduate School of Engineering, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai, Nada, Kobe,
657-8501, Japan. akondo@kobe-u.ac.jp. (4)Biomass Engineering Program, RIKEN,
1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan.
akondo@kobe-u.ac.jp.

Xylose is the second most abundant sugar in lignocellulosic materials and can be 
converted to ethanol by recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast strains
expressing heterologous genes involved in xylose assimilation pathways. Recent
research demonstrated that disruption of the alkaline phosphatase gene, PHO13,
enhances ethanol production from xylose by a strain expressing the xylose
reductase (XR) and xylitol dehydrogenase (XDH) genes; however, the yield of
ethanol is poor. In this study, PHO13 was disrupted in a recombinant strain
harboring multiple copies of the xylose isomerase (XI) gene derived from
Orpinomyces sp., coupled with overexpression of the endogenous xylulokinase (XK) 
gene and disruption of GRE3, which encodes aldose reductase. The resulting
Y<U+0394>GP/XK/XI strain consumed 2.08 g/L/h of xylose and produced 0.88 g/L/h of
volumetric ethanol, for an 86.8 % theoretical ethanol yield, and only Y<U+0394>GP/XK/XI 
demonstrated increase in cell concentration. Transcriptome analysis indicated
that expression of genes involved in the pentose phosphate pathway (GND1, SOL3,
TAL1, RKI1, and TKL1) and TCA cycle and respiratory chain (NDE1, ACO1, ACO2,
SDH2, IDH1, IDH2, ATP7, ATP19, SDH4, SDH3, CMC2, and ATP15) was upregulated in
the Y<U+0394>GP/XK/XI strain. And the expression levels of 125 cell cycle genes were
changed by deletion of PHO13.

PMCID: PMC4713403
PMID: 26769491  [PubMed]


11. Protein Sci. 2016 Apr;25(4):804-14. doi: 10.1002/pro.2873. Epub 2016 Jan 20.

Analysis of amino acid substitutions in AraC variants that respond to triacetic
acid lactone.

Frei CS(1), Wang Z(1), Qian S(1), Deutsch S(2), Sutter M(2), Cirino PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Houston,
Houston, Texas, 77204. (2)Joint Genome Institute, 2800 Mitchell Drive Walnut
Creek, California, 94598.

The Escherichia coli regulatory protein AraC regulates expression of ara genes in
response to l-arabinose. In efforts to develop genetically encoded molecular
reporters, we previously engineered an AraC variant that responds to the compound
triacetic acid lactone (TAL). This variant (named "AraC-TAL1") was isolated by
screening a library of AraC variants, in which five amino acid positions in the
ligand-binding pocket were simultaneously randomized. Screening was carried out
through multiple rounds of alternating positive and negative
fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Here we show that changing the screening
protocol results in the identification of different TAL-responsive variants (nine
new variants). Individual substituted residues within these variants were found
to primarily act cooperatively toward the gene expression response. Finally,
X-ray diffraction was used to solve the crystal structure of the apo AraC-TAL1
ligand-binding domain. The resolved crystal structure confirms that this variant 
takes on a structure nearly identical to the apo wild-type AraC ligand-binding
domain (root-mean-square deviation 0.93 Å), suggesting that AraC-TAL1 behaves
similar to wild-type with regard to ligand recognition and gene regulation. Our
results provide amino acid sequence-function data sets for training and
validating AraC modeling studies, and contribute to our understanding of how to
design new biosensors based on AraC.

© 2016 The Protein Society.

PMID: 26749125  [PubMed - in process]


12. Metab Eng. 2016 Mar;34:88-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2015.12.007. Epub 2015 Dec 25.

PHO13 deletion-induced transcriptional activation prevents sedoheptulose
accumulation during xylose metabolism in engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Xu H(1), Kim S(2), Sorek H(3), Lee Y(4), Jeong D(4), Kim J(2), Oh EJ(1), Yun
EJ(2), Wemmer DE(3), Kim KH(2), Kim SR(5), Jin YS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA. (2)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate
School, Korea University, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Chemistry, University of
California, Berkeley, USA. (4)School of Food Science and Biotechnology, Kyungpook
National University, Daegu, Korea. (5)School of Food Science and Biotechnology,
Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea. Electronic address:
soorinkim@knu.ac.kr. (6)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA. Electronic
address: ysjin@illinois.edu.

The deletion of PHO13 (pho13<U+0394>) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, encoding a
phosphatase enzyme of unknown specificity, results in the transcriptional
activation of genes related to the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) such as TAL1
encoding transaldolase. It has been also reported that the pho13<U+0394> mutant of S.
cerevisiae expressing a heterologous xylose pathway can metabolize xylose
efficiently compared to its parental strain. However, the interaction between the
pho13<U+0394>-induced transcriptional changes and the phenotypes of xylose fermentation 
was not understood. Thus we investigated the global metabolic changes in response
to pho13<U+0394> when cells were exponentially growing on xylose. Among the 134
intracellular metabolites that we identified, the 98% reduction of sedoheptulose 
was found to be the most significant change in the pho13<U+0394> mutant as compared to
its parental strain. Because sedoheptulose-7-phosphate (S7P), a substrate of
transaldolase, reduced significantly in the pho13<U+0394> mutant as well, we
hypothesized that limited transaldolase activity in the parental strain might
cause dephosphorylation of S7P, leading to carbon loss and inefficient xylose
metabolism. Mutants overexpressing TAL1 at different degrees were constructed,
and their TAL1 expression levels and xylose consumption rates were positively
correlated. Moreover, as TAL1 expression levels increased, intracellular
sedoheptulose concentration dropped significantly. Therefore, we concluded that
TAL1 upregulation, preventing the accumulation of sedoheptulose, is the most
critical mechanism for the improved xylose metabolism by the pho13<U+0394> mutant of
engineered S. cerevisiae.

Copyright © 2015 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26724864  [PubMed - in process]


13. Development. 2016 Feb 1;143(3):516-29. doi: 10.1242/dev.129957. Epub 2015 Dec 30.

Differentiation and molecular heterogeneity of inhibitory and excitatory neurons 
associated with midbrain dopaminergic nuclei.

Lahti L(1), Haugas M(1), Tikker L(1), Airavaara M(2), Voutilainen MH(2), Anttila 
J(2), Kumar S(1), Inkinen C(1), Salminen M(3), Partanen J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, P.O. Box 56, Viikinkaari 9, FIN-00014 University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (2)Institute of Biotechnology, P.O. Box 56,
Viikinkaari 9, FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (3)Department
of Veterinary Biosciences, P.O. Box 66, Agnes Sjöbergin katu 2, FIN-00014
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (4)Department of Biosciences, P.O.
Box 56, Viikinkaari 9, FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
juha.m.partanen@helsinki.fi.

Local inhibitory GABAergic and excitatory glutamatergic neurons are important for
midbrain dopaminergic and hindbrain serotonergic pathways controlling motivation,
mood, and voluntary movements. Such neurons reside both within the dopaminergic
nuclei, and in adjacent brain structures, including the rostromedial and
laterodorsal tegmental nuclei. Compared with the monoaminergic neurons, the
development, heterogeneity, and molecular characteristics of these regulatory
neurons are poorly understood. We show here that different GABAergic and
glutamatergic subgroups associated with the monoaminergic nuclei express specific
transcription factors. These neurons share common origins in the ventrolateral
rhombomere 1, where the postmitotic selector genes Tal1, Gata2 and Gata3 control 
the balance between the generation of inhibitory and excitatory neurons. In the
absence of Tal1, or both Gata2 and Gata3, the GABAergic precursors adopt
glutamatergic fates and populate the glutamatergic nuclei in excessive numbers.
Together, our results uncover developmental regulatory mechanisms, molecular
characteristics, and heterogeneity of central regulators of monoaminergic
circuits.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26718003  [PubMed - in process]


14. J Clin Psychiatry. 2015 Dec;76(12):e1611-8. doi: 10.4088/JCP.14m09720.

Obesity genes and risk of major depressive disorder in a multiethnic population: 
a cross-sectional study.

Samaan Z(1,)(2,)(3), Lee YK, Gerstein HC, Engert JC, Bosch J, Mohan V, Diaz R,
Yusuf S, Anand SS, Meyre D; EpiDREAM Genetics Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Institute, McMaster University and Hamilton Health 
Sciences, Hamilton General Hospital, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada. (2)Departments of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics. (3)Psychiatry 
and Behavioural Neurosciences.

OBJECTIVE: Observational studies have shown a positive association between
obesity (body mass index [BMI] = 30 kg/m(2)) and depression. Around 120
obesity-associated loci have been identified, but genetic variants associated
with depression remain elusive. Recently, our team reported that the fat mass and
obesity-associated (FTO) gene rs9939609 obesity-risk variant is paradoxically
inversely associated with the risk of depression. This finding raises the
question as to whether other obesity-associated genetic variants are also
associated with depression.
METHOD: Twenty-one obesity gene variants other than FTO were selected from a
custom ~50,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) genotyping array
(ITMAT-Broad-CARe array). Associations of these 21 SNPs and an unweighted
genotype score with BMI and major depressive disorder (determined using the
DSM-IV diagnostic criteria) were tested in 3,209 cases and 14,195 noncases, using
baseline data collected from July 2001 to August 2003 from the multiethnic
EpiDREAM study.
RESULTS: Body mass index was positively associated with depression status (odds
ratio [OR] = 1.02; 95% CI, 1.02-1.03 per BMI unit; P = 2.9 × 10(-12), adjusted
for age, sex, and ethnicity). Six of 21 genetic variants (rs1514176 [TNN13K],
rs2206734 [CDKAL1], rs11671664 [GIPR], rs2984618 [TAL1], rs3824755 [NT5C2], and
rs7903146 [TCF7L2]) and the genotype score were significantly associated with BMI
(1.47 × 10(-14) = P = .04). Of the 21 SNPs, TAL1 rs2984618 obesity-risk allele
was associated with a higher risk of major depressive disorder (P = 1.79 ×
10(-4), adjusted for age, sex, BMI, and ethnicity), and BDNF rs1401635
demonstrated significant ethnic-dependent association with major depressive
disorder (OR = 0.88; 95% CI, 0.80-0.97; P = .01 in non-Europeans and OR = 1.11;
95% CI, 1.02-1.20; P = .02 in Europeans; Pinteraction = 2.73 × 10(-4)). The
genotype score, calculated with or without FTO rs9939609, and adjusted for the
same covariates, was not associated with depression status.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support the view that the association between obesity and
major depressive disorder at the observational level may be explained, at least
in part, by shared genetic factors.

© Copyright 2015 Physicians Postgraduate Press, Inc.

PMID: 26717541  [PubMed - in process]


15. J Vis Exp. 2015 Dec 3;(106). doi: 10.3791/52910.

Direct Induction of Hemogenic Endothelium and Blood by Overexpression of
Transcription Factors in Human Pluripotent Stem Cells.

Elcheva I(1), Brok-Volchanskaya V(1), Slukvin I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison. (2)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health; islukvin@wisc.edu.

During development, hematopoietic cells arise from a specialized subset of
endothelial cells, hemogenic endothelium (HE). Modeling HE development in vitro
is essential for mechanistic studies of the endothelial-hematopoietic transition 
and hematopoietic specification. Here, we describe a method for the efficient
induction of HE from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) by way of
overexpression of different sets of transcription factors. The combination of
ETV2 and GATA1 or GATA2 TFs is used to induce HE with pan-myeloid potential,
while a combination of GATA2 and TAL1 transcription factors allows for the
production of HE with erythroid and megakaryocytic potential. The addition of
LMO2 to GATA2 and TAL1 combination substantially accelerates differentiation and 
increases erythroid and megakaryocytic cells production. This method provides an 
efficient and rapid means of HE induction from hPSCs and allows for the
observation of the endothelial-hematopoietic transition in a culture dish. The
protocol includes hPSCs transduction procedures and post-transduction analysis of
HE and blood progenitors.

PMID: 26710184  [PubMed - in process]


16. Oncogene. 2015 Dec 21. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.481. [Epub ahead of print]

FOXP3 can modulate TAL1 transcriptional activity through interaction with LMO2.

Fleskens V(1), Mokry M(2), van der Leun AM(1), Huppelschoten S(1), Pals CE(1),
Peeters J(1), Coenen S(1), Cardoso BA(3), Barata JT(3), van Loosdregt J(1,)(2),
Coffer PJ(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Centre of Molecular Medicine, University Medical
Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (2)Division of Pediatrics, Wilhelmina
Children's Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (3)Instituto de Medicina
Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) frequently involves aberrant
expression of TAL1 (T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1) and LMO2, oncogenic
members of the TAL1 transcriptional complex. Transcriptional activity of the
TAL1-complex is thought to have a pivotal role in the transformation of
thymocytes and is associated with a differentiation block and self-renewal. The
transcription factor Forkhead Box P3 (FOXP3) was recently described to be
expressed in a variety of malignancies including T-ALL. Here we show that
increased FOXP3 levels negatively correlate with expression of genes regulated by
the oncogenic TAL1-complex in human T-ALL patient samples as well as a T-ALL cell
line ectopically expressing FOXP3. In these cells, FOXP3 expression results in
altered regulation of cell cycle progression and reduced cell viability. Finally,
we demonstrate that FOXP3 binds LMO2 in vitro, resulting in decreased interaction
between LMO2 and TAL1, providing a molecular mechanism for FOXP3-mediated
transcriptional modulation in T-ALL. Collectively, our findings provide initial
evidence for a novel role of FOXP3 as a tumor suppressor in T-ALL through
modulation of TAL1 transcriptional activity.Oncogene advance online publication, 
21 December 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.481.

PMID: 26686090  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Elife. 2015 Nov 17;4. pii: e07938. doi: 10.7554/eLife.07938.

Cross-talk between PRMT1-mediated methylation and ubiquitylation on RBM15
controls RNA splicing.

Zhang L(1), Tran NT(1), Su H(1), Wang R(2), Lu Y(3), Tang H(4), Aoyagi S(5), Guo 
A(5), Khodadadi-Jamayran A(1), Zhou D(1), Qian K(6), Hricik T(7), Côté J(8), Han 
X(9), Zhou W(10), Laha S(11), Abdel-Wahab O(7), Levine RL(7), Raffel G(11), Liu
Y(10), Chen D(12), Li H(4), Townes T(1), Wang H(1), Deng H(4), Zheng YG(6),
Leslie C(3), Luo M(2), Zhao X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, UAB Stem Cell Institute,
The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, United States. (2)Program of
Molecular Pharmacology, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, United States. (3)Computational Biology Program, Sloan
Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, United
States. (4)School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. (5)Cell 
Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, United States. (6)Department of
Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, The University of Georgia, Athens, United
States. (7)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Sloan Kettering Institute,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, United States. (8)Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.
(9)Department of Neurology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, United States. (10)Department of Internal
Medicine, Zhengzhou - Henan Cancer Hospital, Zhengzhou, China. (11)Division of
Hematology and Oncology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
United States. (12)Division of Preventive Medicine, The University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, United States.

RBM15, an RNA binding protein, determines cell-fate specification of many tissues
including blood. We demonstrate that RBM15 is methylated by protein arginine
methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) at residue R578, leading to its degradation via
ubiquitylation by an E3 ligase (CNOT4). Overexpression of PRMT1 in acute
megakaryocytic leukemia cell lines blocks megakaryocyte terminal differentiation 
by downregulation of RBM15 protein level. Restoring RBM15 protein level rescues
megakaryocyte terminal differentiation blocked by PRMT1 overexpression. At the
molecular level, RBM15 binds to pre-messenger RNA intronic regions of genes
important for megakaryopoiesis such as GATA1, RUNX1, TAL1 and c-MPL. Furthermore,
preferential binding of RBM15 to specific intronic regions recruits the splicing 
factor SF3B1 to the same sites for alternative splicing. Therefore, PRMT1
regulates alternative RNA splicing via reducing RBM15 protein concentration.
Targeting PRMT1 may be a curative therapy to restore megakaryocyte
differentiation for acute megakaryocytic leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4775220
PMID: 26575292  [PubMed - in process]


18. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Nov 12;11(11):e1004590. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004590.
eCollection 2015.

Identification of High-Impact cis-Regulatory Mutations Using Transcription Factor
Specific Random Forest Models.

Svetlichnyy D(1), Imrichova H(1), Fiers M(2), Kalender Atak Z(1), Aerts S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Computational Biology, KU Leuven Center for Human Genetics,
Leuven, Belgium. (2)VIB Center for the Biology of Disease, Leuven, Belgium.

Cancer genomes contain vast amounts of somatic mutations, many of which are
passenger mutations not involved in oncogenesis. Whereas driver mutations in
protein-coding genes can be distinguished from passenger mutations based on their
recurrence, non-coding mutations are usually not recurrent at the same position. 
Therefore, it is still unclear how to identify cis-regulatory driver mutations,
particularly when chromatin data from the same patient is not available, thus
relying only on sequence and expression information. Here we use machine-learning
methods to predict functional regulatory regions using sequence information
alone, and compare the predicted activity of the mutated region with the
reference sequence. This way we define the Predicted Regulatory Impact of a
Mutation in an Enhancer (PRIME). We find that the recently identified driver
mutation in the TAL1 enhancer has a high PRIME score, representing a
"gain-of-target" for MYB, whereas the highly recurrent TERT promoter mutation has
a surprisingly low PRIME score. We trained Random Forest models for 45
cancer-related transcription factors, and used these to score variations in the
HeLa genome and somatic mutations across more than five hundred cancer genomes.
Each model predicts only a small fraction of non-coding mutations with a
potential impact on the function of the encompassing regulatory region.
Nevertheless, as these few candidate driver mutations are often linked to gains
in chromatin activity and gene expression, they may contribute to the oncogenic
program by altering the expression levels of specific oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes.

PMCID: PMC4642938
PMID: 26562774  [PubMed - in process]


19. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 9;5:16513. doi: 10.1038/srep16513.

A novel function of the human oncogene Stil: Regulation of PC12 cell toxic
susceptibility through the Shh pathway.

Li L(1), Carr AL(1), Sun L(2), Drewing A(1), Lee J(1), Rao Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN
46556. (2)Tianjin International Joint Academy of Biotechnology and Medicine,
Tianjin, China 300457.

The human oncogene SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus (Stil) is highly conserved in
vertebrate species. Here, we report new findings of Stil in the regulation of
toxic susceptibility in mammalian dopaminergic (DA)-like PC12 cells.
RNAi-mediated knockdown of Stil expression did not affect the survival of
proliferating PC12 cells but caused a significant amount of cell death in
differentiated neurons after toxic drug treatment. In contrast, overexpression of
Stil increased toxic susceptibility only in proliferating cells but produced no
effect in mature neurons. Exogenetic inactivation or activation of the Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) signaling transduction mimicked the effect of Stil knockdown or
overexpression in regulation of PC12 cell toxic susceptibility, suggesting that
Stil exerts its role through the Shh pathway. Together, the data provide evidence
for novel functions of the human oncogene Stil in neural toxic susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4637888
PMID: 26549353  [PubMed - in process]


20. Front Microbiol. 2015 Oct 21;6:1165. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01165. eCollection
2015.

Heterologous xylose isomerase pathway and evolutionary engineering improve xylose
utilization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Qi X(1), Zha J(1), Liu GG(1), Zhang W(1), Li BZ(1), Yuan YJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Systems Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Tianjin
University Tianjin, China ; SynBio Research Platform, Collaborative Innovation
Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), School of Chemical
Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University Tianjin, China.

Xylose utilization is one key issue for the bioconversion of lignocelluloses. It 
is a promising approach to engineering heterologous pathway for xylose
utilization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Here, we constructed a xylose-fermenting
yeast SyBE001 through combinatorial fine-tuning the expression of XylA and
endogenous XKS1. Additional overexpression of genes RKI1, RPE1, TKL1, and TAL1 in
the non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) in SyBE001 increased the xylose
consumption rate by 1.19-fold. By repetitive adaptation, the xylose utilization
rate was further increased by ~10-fold in the resultant strain SyBE003. Gene
expression analysis identified a variety of genes with significantly changed
expression in the PPP, glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid cycle in SyBE003.

PMCID: PMC4612707
PMID: 26539187  [PubMed]


21. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Nov 3. pii: ASN.2015060610. [Epub ahead of print]

Hemovascular Progenitors in the Kidney Require Sphingosine-1-Phosphate Receptor 1
for Vascular Development.

Hu Y(1), Li M(2), Göthert JR(3), Gomez RA(2), Sequeira-Lopez ML(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Department of Biology, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia; and. (2)Department of Pediatrics and. (3)Department of
Hematology, West German Cancer Center, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and msl7u@virginia.edu.

The close relationship between endothelial and hematopoietic precursors during
early development of the vascular system suggested the possibility of a common
yet elusive precursor for both cell types. Whether similar or related progenitors
for endothelial and hematopoietic cells are present during organogenesis is
unclear. Using inducible transgenic mice that specifically label endothelial and 
hematopoietic precursors, we performed fate-tracing studies combined with
colony-forming assays and crosstransplantation studies. We identified a
progenitor, marked by the expression of helix-loop-helix transcription factor
stem cell leukemia (SCL/Tal1). During organogenesis of the kidney, SCL/Tal1(+)
progenitors gave rise to endothelium and blood precursors with multipotential
colony-forming capacity. Furthermore, appropriate morphogenesis of the kidney
vasculature, including glomerular capillary development, arterial mural cell
coating, and lymphatic vessel development, required sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P)
signaling via the G protein-coupled S1P receptor 1 in these progenitors. Overall,
these results show that SCL/Tal1(+) progenitors with hemogenic capacity originate
and differentiate within the early embryonic kidney by hemovasculogenesis (the
concomitant formation of blood and vessels) and underscore the importance of the 
S1P pathway in vascular development.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMID: 26534925  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct 26;36(1):157-72. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00806-15.

Genome-Wide Organization of GATA1 and TAL1 Determined at High Resolution.

Han GC(1), Vinayachandran V(1), Bataille AR(1), Park B(1), Chan-Salis KY(1),
Keller CA(1), Long M(1), Mahony S(1), Hardison RC(1), Pugh BF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Eukaryotic Gene Regulation, Center for Comparative Genomics and
Bioinformatics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA. (2)Center for 
Eukaryotic Gene Regulation, Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA bfp2@psu.edu.

Erythroid development and differentiation from multiprogenitor cells into red
blood cells requires precise transcriptional regulation. Key erythroid
transcription factors, GATA1 and TAL1, cooperate, along with other proteins, to
regulate many aspects of this process. How GATA1 and TAL1 are juxtaposed along
the DNA and their cognate DNA binding site across the mouse genome remains
unclear. We applied high-resolution ChIP-exo (chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by 5'-to-3' exonuclease treatment and then massively parallel DNA
sequencing) to GATA1 and TAL1 to study their positional organization across the
mouse genome during GATA1-dependent maturation. Two complementary methods,
MultiGPS and peak pairing, were used to determine high-confidence binding
locations by ChIP-exo. We identified ~10,000 GATA1 and ~15,000 TAL1 locations,
which were essentially confirmed by ChIP-seq (chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by massively parallel DNA sequencing). Of these, ~4,000 locations were
bound by both GATA1 and TAL1. About three-quarters of them were tightly linked to
a partial E-box located 7 or 8 bp upstream of a WGATAA motif. Both TAL1 and GATA1
generated distinct characteristic ChIP-exo peaks around WGATAA motifs that
reflect their positional arrangement within a complex. We show that TAL1 and
GATA1 form a precisely organized complex at a compound motif consisting of a TG 7
or 8 bp upstream of a WGATAA motif across thousands of genomic locations.

Copyright © 2015 Han et al.

PMCID: PMC4702602
PMID: 26503782  [PubMed - in process]


23. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):32509-25. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5085.

The search for cis-regulatory driver mutations in cancer genomes.

Poulos RC(1), Sloane MA(1), Hesson LB(1), Wong JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Prince of Wales Clinical School and Lowy Cancer Research Centre, UNSW
Australia, Sydney, Australia.

With the advent of high-throughput and relatively inexpensive whole-genome
sequencing technology, the focus of cancer research has begun to shift toward
analyses of somatic mutations in non-coding cis-regulatory elements of the cancer
genome. Cis-regulatory elements play an important role in gene regulation, with
mutations in these elements potentially resulting in changes to the expression of
linked genes. The recent discoveries of recurrent TERT promoter mutations in
melanoma, and recurrent mutations that create a super-enhancer regulating TAL1
expression in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL), have sparked
significant interest in the search for other somatic cis-regulatory mutations
driving cancer development. In this review, we look more closely at the TERT
promoter and TAL1 enhancer alterations and use these examples to ask whether
other cis-regulatory mutations may play a role in cancer susceptibility. In doing
so, we make observations from the data emerging from recent research in this
field, and describe the experimental and analytical approaches which could be
adopted in the hope of better uncovering the true functional significance of
somatic cis-regulatory mutations in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4741709
PMID: 26356674  [PubMed - in process]


24. Microvasc Res. 2015 Nov;102:54-69. doi: 10.1016/j.mvr.2015.08.007. Epub 2015 Aug 
12.

3-D reconstruction and multiple marker analysis of mouse proepicardial
endothelial cell population.

Niderla-Bielinska J(1), Gula G(2), Flaht-Zabost A(3), Jankowska-Steifer E(1),
Czarnowska E(4), Radomska-Lesniewska DM(1), Ciszek B(5), Ratajska A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland. 
(2)Student Scientific Group at the Department of Pathology, Medical University of
Warsaw, Poland. (3)Department of Pathology, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Pathology, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw,
Poland. (5)Department of Clinical Anatomy, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland. 
(6)Department of Pathology, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland. Electronic
address: anna.ratajska@wum.edu.pl.

BACKGROUND: The proepicardium (PE), a transient embryonic structure crucial for
the development of the epicardium and heart, contains its own population of
endothelial cells (ECs). The aim of our study was to determine the pattern,
anatomical orientation and phenotypic marker expression of the endothelial cell
network within the PE.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical findings revealed that proepicardial ECs express
both early and late EC-specific markers such as CD31, Flk-1, Lyve-1 and Tie-2 but
not SCL/Tal1, vWF, Dll4 or Notch1. Proepicardial ECs are present in the vicinity 
of the sinus venosus (SV) and form a continuous network of vascular
sprouts/tubules connected with the SV endothelium, with Ter-119-positive
erythroblasts in the vascular lumina.
CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of our results, we postulate the existence of a
continuous network of ECs in the PE, exhibiting connection and/or patency with
the SV and forming vessels/tubules/strands. Marker expression suggests that ECs
are immature and undifferentiated, which was also confirmed with a transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) analysis. Our results deliver new data for a better
understanding of the nature of proepicardial ECs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26277230  [PubMed - in process]


25. Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 2015 Dec;11(4):293-8. doi: 10.1111/ajco.12400. Epub 2015
Aug 12.

Prevalence of common fusion transcripts in acute lymphoblastic leukemia: A report
of 304 cases.

Chopra A(1), Soni S(1), Verma D(1), Kumar D(1), Dwivedi R(1), Vishwanathan A(1), 
Vishwakama G(1), Bakhshi S(2), Seth R(3), Gogia A(2), Kumar L(2), Kumar R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Oncology, IRCH, New Delhi, India. (2)Department of
Medical Oncology, IRCH, New Delhi, India. (3)Department of Pediatric Oncology,
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

AIM: Information about fusion transcripts in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
is used to risk-stratify patients, decide on the treatment and to detect minimal 
residual disease. This study was conducted to determine the frequency of common
fusion transcripts BCR-ABL, TEL-AML1, MLL-AF4 and E2A-PBX1 for B-ALL and SIL-TAL1
for T-ALL as seen at a tertiary care center in India.
METHODS: Up to 304 new cases of ALL (271 B-ALL and 33 T-ALL) diagnosed on
morphology, cytochemistry and immunophenotyping were studied. All were screened
for the common fusion transcripts by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Both our B- (218/271; 80.4%) and T-ALL (26/33; 78.8%) patients were
largely children. In the B-ALL children, BCR-ABL was detected in 26/218 (11.9%), 
E2A-PBX1 in 13/218 (5.9%), TEL-AML1 in 16/218 (7.3%) and MLL-AF4 in 3/218 (1.4%) 
patients. Adult B-ALL cases had BCR-ABL in 15/53 (28.3%) and E2A-PBX in 2/53
(3.8%); however, no other fusion transcript was detected. SIL-TAL1 was found in
four of 26 pediatric (15%) and zero of 7 adult T-ALL cases.
CONCLUSION: The higher incidence of BCR-ABL and lower incidence of TEL-AML1 in
our ALL patients, both in children and adults as compared with the West, suggests
that patients in India may be biologically different. This difference may explain
at least in part the higher relapse rate and poorer outcome in our B-ALL cases.

© 2015 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 26264145  [PubMed - in process]


26. Leukemia. 2015 Jul 23. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.195. [Epub ahead of print]

TRIB2 reinforces the oncogenic transcriptional program controlled by the TAL1
complex in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Tan SH(1), Yam AW(1), Lawton LN(2), Wong RW(1), Young RA(3), Look AT(4), Sanda
T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore,
Singapore. (2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)1] Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA [2]
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)1] Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA [2] Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (5)1] Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore [2] Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

PMCID: PMC4724340 [Available on 2017-01-23]
PMID: 26202930  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. Elife. 2015 Jul 18;4. doi: 10.7554/eLife.07888.

STIL binding to Polo-box 3 of PLK4 regulates centriole duplication.

Arquint C(1), Gabryjonczyk AM(1), Imseng S(1), Böhm R(1), Sauer E(1), Hiller
S(1), Nigg EA(1), Maier T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Polo-like kinases (PLK) are eukaryotic regulators of cell cycle progression,
mitosis and cytokinesis; PLK4 is a master regulator of centriole duplication.
Here, we demonstrate that the SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus (STIL) protein
interacts via its coiled-coil region (STIL-CC) with PLK4 in vivo. STIL-CC is the 
first identified interaction partner of Polo-box 3 (PB3) of PLK4 and also uses a 
secondary interaction site in the PLK4 L1 region. Structure determination of free
PLK4-PB3 and its STIL-CC complex via NMR and crystallography reveals a novel mode
of Polo-box-peptide interaction mimicking coiled-coil formation. In vivo analysis
of structure-guided STIL mutants reveals distinct binding modes to PLK4-PB3 and
L1, as well as interplay of STIL oligomerization with PLK4 binding. We suggest
that the STIL-CC/PLK4 interaction mediates PLK4 activation as well as
stabilization of centriolar PLK4 and plays a key role in centriole duplication.

PMCID: PMC4530586
PMID: 26188084  [PubMed - in process]


28. Oncogene. 2015 Jul 6. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.261. [Epub ahead of print]

The oncofusion protein FUS-ERG targets key hematopoietic regulators and modulates
the all-trans retinoic acid signaling pathway in t(16;21) acute myeloid leukemia.

Sotoca AM(1), Prange KH(1), Reijnders B(1), Mandoli A(1), Nguyen LN(1),
Stunnenberg HG(1), Martens JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The ETS transcription factor ERG has been implicated as a major regulator of both
normal and aberrant hematopoiesis. In acute myeloid leukemias harboring t(16;21),
ERG function is deregulated due to a fusion with FUS/TLS resulting in the
expression of a FUS-ERG oncofusion protein. How this oncofusion protein
deregulates the normal ERG transcription program is unclear. Here, we show that
FUS-ERG acts in the context of a heptad of proteins (ERG, FLI1, GATA2, LYL1,
LMO2, RUNX1 and TAL1) central to proper expression of genes involved in
maintaining a stem cell hematopoietic phenotype. Moreover, in t(16;21) FUS-ERG
co-occupies genomic regions bound by the nuclear receptor heterodimer RXR:RARA
inhibiting target gene expression and interfering with hematopoietic
differentiation. All-trans retinoic acid treatment of t(16;21) cells as well as
FUS-ERG knockdown alleviate the myeloid-differentiation block. Together, the
results suggest that FUS-ERG acts as a transcriptional repressor of the retinoic 
acid signaling pathway.Oncogene advance online publication, 6 July 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.261.

PMID: 26148230  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Jun 19;9:3153-62. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S81911. eCollection
2015.

Histone demethylase LSD1-mediated repression of GATA-2 is critical for erythroid 
differentiation.

Guo Y(1), Fu X(2), Jin Y(1), Sun J(1), Liu Y(1), Huo B(1), Li X(1), Hu X(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of
China. (2)School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic
of China ; Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering of Ministry of
Education, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of China. (3)School of 
Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of China ; Key
Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering of Ministry of Education,
Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of China ; National Engineering
Laboratory of AIDS Vaccine, School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun,
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor GATA-2 is predominantly expressed in
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells and counteracts the erythroid-specific
transcription factor GATA-1, to modulate the proliferation and differentiation of
hematopoietic cells. During hematopoietic cell differentiation, GATA-2 exhibits
dynamic expression patterns, which are regulated by multiple transcription
factors.
METHODS: Stable LSD1-knockdown cell lines were established by growing murine
erythroleukemia (MEL) or mouse embryonic stem cells together with virus
particles, in the presence of Polybrene(®) at 4 µg/mL, for 24-48 hours followed
by puromycin selection (1 µg/mL) for 2 weeks. Real-time polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)-based quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis was used
to test whether the TAL1 transcription factor is bound to 1S promoter in the
GATA-2 locus or whether LSD1 colocalizes with TAL1 at the 1S promoter. The
sequential ChIP assay was utilized to confirm the role of LSD1 in the regulation 
of H3K4me2 at the GATA-2 locus during erythroid differentiation. Western blot
analysis was employed to detect the protein expression. The alamarBlue(®) assay
was used to examine the proliferation of the cells, and the absorbance was
monitored at optical density (OD) 570 nm and OD 600 nm.
RESULTS: In this study, we showed that LSD1 regulates the expression of GATA-2
during erythroid differentiation. Knockdown of LSD1 results in increased GATA-2
expression and inhibits the differentiation of MEL and embryonic stem cells.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that LSD1 binds to the 1S promoter of the GATA-2
locus and suppresses GATA-2 expression, via histone demethylation.
CONCLUSION: Our data revealed that LSD1 mediates erythroid differentiation, via
epigenetic modification of the GATA-2 locus.

PMCID: PMC4482369
PMID: 26124638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 23;10(6):e0130441. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130441.
eCollection 2015.

Loss of IKKß but Not NF-<U+03BA>B p65 Skews Differentiation towards Myeloid over
Erythroid Commitment and Increases Myeloid Progenitor Self-Renewal and Functional
Long-Term Hematopoietic Stem Cells.

Zhang J(1), Li L(1), Baldwin AS Jr(2), Friedman AD(1), Paz-Priel I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America. (2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center and Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, United States of America.

NF-<U+03BA>B is an important regulator of both differentiation and function of
lineage-committed hematopoietic cells. Targeted deletion of I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK) ß
results in altered cytokine signaling and marked neutrophilia. To investigate the
role of IKKß in regulation of hematopoiesis, we employed Mx1-Cre mediated IKKß
conditional knockout mice. As previously reported, deletion of IKKß in
hematopoietic cells results in neutrophilia, and we now also noted decreased
monocytes and modest anemia. Granulocyte-macrophage progenitors (GMPs)
accumulated markedly in bone marrow of IKKß deleted mice whereas the proportion
and number of megakaryocyte-erythrocyte progenitors (MEP) decreased. Accordingly,
we found a significantly reduced frequency of proerythroblasts and basophilic and
polychromatic erythroblasts, and IKKß-deficient bone marrow cells yielded a
significantly decreased number of BFU-E compared to wild type. These changes are 
associated with elevated expression of C/EBPa, Gfi1, and PU.1 and diminished
Gata1, Klf1, and SCL/Tal1 in IKKß deficient Lineage-Sca1+c-Kit+ (LSK) cells. In
contrast, no effect on erythropoiesis or expression of lineage-related
transcription factors was found in marrow lacking NF-<U+03BA>B p65. Bone marrow from
IKKß knockout mice has elevated numbers of phenotypic long and short term
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC). A similar increase was observed when IKKß was
deleted after marrow transplantation into a wild type host, indicating cell
autonomous expansion. Myeloid progenitors from IKKß- but not p65-deleted mice
demonstrate increased serial replating in colony-forming assays, indicating
increased cell autonomous self-renewal capacity. In addition, in a competitive
repopulation assay deletion of IKKß resulted in a stable advantage of bone marrow
derived from IKKß knockout mice. In summary, loss of IKKß resulted in significant
effects on hematopoiesis not seen upon NF-<U+03BA>B p65 deletion. These include
increased myeloid and reduced erythroid transcription factors, skewing
differentiation towards myeloid over erythroid differentiation, increased
progenitor self-renewal, and increased number of functional long term HSCs. These
data inform ongoing efforts to develop IKK inhibitors for clinical use.

PMCID: PMC4477978
PMID: 26102347  [PubMed - in process]


31. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 8;10(6):e0129431. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129431.
eCollection 2015.

Variation in Gamma-Globin Expression before and after Induction with Hydroxyurea 
Associated with BCL11A, KLF1 and TAL1.

Grieco AJ(1), Billett HH(2), Green NS(3), Driscoll MC(4), Bouhassira EE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York, United States of America. (2)Division of Hematology, Department of
Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center/Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx,
New York, United States of America. (3)Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology/Stem Cell Transplantation, Department of Pediatrics, Columbia
University, New York, New York, United States of America. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, Division of Hematology-Oncology, AECOM, Bronx, New York, United
States of America.

The molecular mechanisms governing <U+03B3>-globin expression in a subset of fetal
hemoglobin (a2<U+03B3>2: HbF) expressing red blood cells (F-cells) and the mechanisms
underlying the variability of response to hydroxyurea induced <U+03B3>-globin expression
in the treatment of sickle cell disease are not completely understood. Here we
analyzed intra-person clonal populations of basophilic erythroblasts (baso-Es)
derived from bone marrow common myeloid progenitors in serum free cultures and
report the level of fetal hemoglobin production in F-cells negatively correlates 
with expression of BCL11A, KLF1 and TAL1. We then examined the effects of
hydroxyurea on these three transcription factors and conclude that a successful
induction of <U+03B3>-globin includes a reduction in BCL11A, KLF1 and TAL1 expression.
These data suggests that expression changes in this transcription factor network 
modulate <U+03B3>-globin expression in F-cells during steady state erythropoiesis and
after induction with hydroxyurea.

PMCID: PMC4459969
PMID: 26053062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nature. 2015 Jul 2;523(7558):88-91. doi: 10.1038/nature14429. Epub 2015 May 25.

Cell-intrinsic adaptation of lipid composition to local crowding drives social
behaviour.

Frechin M(1), Stoeger T(2), Daetwyler S(1), Gehin C(3), Battich N(2), Damm EM(4),
Stergiou L(4), Riezman H(3), Pelkmans L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Sciences, Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of
Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. (2)1] Faculty of Sciences, Institute of
Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland [2] Life 
Science Zurich Graduate School, Ph.D. program in Systems Biology. ETH Zurich and 
University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Biochemistry,
University of Geneva, 1205 Geneva, Switzerland. (4)Institute of Molecular Systems
Biology, ETH Zurich, 8057, Zurich, Switzerland.

Cells sense the context in which they grow to adapt their phenotype and allow
multicellular patterning by mechanisms of autocrine and paracrine signalling.
However, patterns also form in cell populations exposed to the same signalling
molecules and substratum, which often correlate with specific features of the
population context of single cells, such as local cell crowding. Here we reveal a
cell-intrinsic molecular mechanism that allows multicellular patterning without
requiring specific communication between cells. It acts by sensing the local
crowding of a single cell through its ability to spread and activate focal
adhesion kinase (FAK, also known as PTK2), resulting in adaptation of genes
controlling membrane homeostasis. In cells experiencing low crowding, FAK
suppresses transcription of the ABC transporter A1 (ABCA1) by inhibiting FOXO3
and TAL1. Agent-based computational modelling and experimental confirmation
identified membrane-based signalling and feedback control as crucial for the
emergence of population patterns of ABCA1 expression, which adapts membrane lipid
composition to cell crowding and affects multiple signalling activities,
including the suppression of ABCA1 expression itself. The simple design of this
cell-intrinsic system and its broad impact on the signalling state of mammalian
single cells suggests a fundamental role for a tunable membrane lipid composition
in collective cell behaviour.

PMID: 26009010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 Aug;36(8):2443.e9-2443.e20. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.04.008. Epub 2015 Apr 25.

Microglia recapitulate a hematopoietic master regulator network in the aging
human frontal cortex.

Wehrspaun CC(1), Haerty W(2), Ponting CP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK; Section on Neuropathology, Clinical Brain Disorders Branch, Genes, Cognition 
and Psychosis Program, IRP, NIMH, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address:
claudia.wehrspaun@dpag.ox.ac.uk. (2)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; Department of Physiology, Anatomy and
Genetics, MRC Functional Genomics Unit, University of Oxford, UK.

Microglia form the immune system of the brain. Previous studies in cell cultures 
and animal models suggest altered activation states and cellular senescence in
the aged brain. Instead, we analyzed 3 transcriptome data sets from the
postmortem frontal cortex of 381 control individuals to show that microglia gene 
markers assemble into a transcriptional module in a gene coexpression network.
These markers predominantly represented M1 and M1/M2b activation phenotypes.
Expression of genes in this module generally declines over the adult life span.
This decrease was more pronounced in microglia surface receptors for microglia
and/or neuron crosstalk than in markers for activation state phenotypes. In
addition to these receptors for exogenous signals, microglia are controlled by
brain-expressed regulatory factors. We identified a subnetwork of transcription
factors, including RUNX1, IRF8, PU.1, and TAL1, which are master regulators (MRs)
for the age-dependent microglia module. The causal contributions of these MRs on 
the microglia module were verified using publicly available ChIP-Seq data.
Interactions of these key MRs were preserved in a protein-protein interaction
network. Importantly, these MRs appear to be essential for regulating microglia
homeostasis in the adult human frontal cortex in addition to their crucial roles 
in hematopoiesis and myeloid cell-fate decisions during embryogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4503803
PMID: 26002684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2015 Apr 23;8:16. doi: 10.1186/s13072-015-0009-5.
eCollection 2015.

Occupancy by key transcription factors is a more accurate predictor of enhancer
activity than histone modifications or chromatin accessibility.

Dogan N(1), Wu W(2), Morrissey CS(1), Chen KB(1), Stonestrom A(3), Long M(1),
Keller CA(1), Cheng Y(4), Jain D(1), Visel A(5), Pennacchio LA(5), Weiss MJ(6),
Blobel GA(3), Hardison RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, 304 Wartik Laboratory, 
University Park, PA 16802 USA. (2)Center for Comparative Genomics and
Bioinformatics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The
Pennsylvania State University, 304 Wartik Laboratory, University Park, PA 16802
USA ; Bioinformatics Core, Department of Computational Medicine and
Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2218 USA. (3)Division
of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 3401 Civic Center
Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA ; Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, Mail Stop-5120, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305 USA. (5)Genomics Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1
Cyclotron Road, Mailstop 84-171, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA ; DOE Joint Genome
Institute, 2800 Mitchell Drive, Walnut Creek, CA 94598 USA. (6)Department of
Hematology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place,
Memphis, TN 38105 USA.

BACKGROUND: Regulated gene expression controls organismal development, and
variation in regulatory patterns has been implicated in complex traits. Thus
accurate prediction of enhancers is important for further understanding of these 
processes. Genome-wide measurement of epigenetic features, such as histone
modifications and occupancy by transcription factors, is improving enhancer
predictions, but the contribution of these features to prediction accuracy is not
known. Given the importance of the hematopoietic transcription factor TAL1 for
erythroid gene activation, we predicted candidate enhancers based on genomic
occupancy by TAL1 and measured their activity. Contributions of multiple features
to enhancer prediction were evaluated based on the results of these and other
studies.
RESULTS: TAL1-bound DNA segments were active enhancers at a high rate both in
transient transfections of cultured cells (39 of 79, or 56%) and transgenic mice 
(43 of 66, or 65%). The level of binding signal for TAL1 or GATA1 did not help
distinguish TAL1-bound DNA segments as active versus inactive enhancers, nor did 
the density of regulation-related histone modifications. A meta-analysis of
results from this and other studies (273 tested predicted enhancers) showed that 
the presence of TAL1, GATA1, EP300, SMAD1, H3K4 methylation, H3K27ac, and CAGE
tags at DNase hypersensitive sites gave the most accurate predictors of enhancer 
activity, with a success rate over 80% and a median threefold increase in
activity. Chromatin accessibility assays and the histone modifications H3K4me1
and H3K27ac were sensitive for finding enhancers, but they have high false
positive rates unless transcription factor occupancy is also included.
CONCLUSIONS: Occupancy by key transcription factors such as TAL1, GATA1, SMAD1,
and EP300, along with evidence of transcription, improves the accuracy of
enhancer predictions based on epigenetic features.

PMCID: PMC4432502
PMID: 25984238  [PubMed]


35. Blood. 2015 Jul 30;126(5):665-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-02-629972. Epub 2015
May 15.

Inhibition of G9a methyltransferase stimulates fetal hemoglobin production by
facilitating LCR/<U+03B3>-globin looping.

Krivega I(1), Byrnes C(2), de Vasconcellos JF(2), Lee YT(2), Kaushal M(2), Dean
A(1), Miller JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, and. (2)Molecular Genomics
and Therapeutics Section, Molecular Medicine Branch, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Jul 30;126(5):569-70.

Induction of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) production in adult erythrocytes can reduce
the severity of sickle cell disease and ß-thalassemia. Transcription of ß-globin 
genes is regulated by the distant locus control region (LCR), which is brought
into direct gene contact by the LDB1/GATA-1/TAL1/LMO2-containing complex.
Inhibition of G9a H3K9 methyltransferase by the chemical compound UNC0638
activates fetal and represses adult ß-globin gene expression in adult human
hematopoietic precursor cells, but the underlying mechanisms are unclear. Here we
studied UNC0638 effects on ß-globin gene expression using ex vivo differentiation
of CD34(+) erythroid progenitor cells from peripheral blood of healthy adult
donors. UNC0638 inhibition of G9a caused dosed accumulation of HbF up to 30% of
total hemoglobin in differentiated cells. Elevation of HbF was associated with
significant activation of fetal <U+03B3>-globin and repression of adult ß-globin
transcription. Changes in gene expression were associated with widespread loss of
H3K9me2 in the locus and gain of LDB1 complex occupancy at the <U+03B3>-globin promoters
as well as de novo formation of LCR/<U+03B3>-globin contacts. Our findings demonstrate
that G9a establishes epigenetic conditions preventing activation of <U+03B3>-globin
genes during differentiation of adult erythroid progenitor cells. In this view,
manipulation of G9a represents a promising epigenetic approach for treatment of
ß-hemoglobinopathies.

PMCID: PMC4520881 [Available on 2016-07-30]
PMID: 25979948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Nat Commun. 2015 May 14;6:7085. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8085.

Editing the genome to introduce a beneficial naturally occurring mutation
associated with increased fetal globin.

Wienert B(1), Funnell AP(1), Norton LJ(1), Pearson RC(1), Wilkinson-White LE(2), 
Lester K(2), Vadolas J(3), Porteus MH(4), Matthews JM(2), Quinlan KG(1), Crossley
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia. (2)School of Molecular
Bioscience, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia.
(3)1] Cell and Gene Therapy Research Group, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute,
Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia [2] Department of 
Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94304,
USA.

Genetic disorders resulting from defects in the adult globin genes are among the 
most common inherited diseases. Symptoms worsen from birth as fetal <U+03B3>-globin
expression is silenced. Genome editing could permit the introduction of
beneficial single-nucleotide variants to ameliorate symptoms. Here, as proof of
concept, we introduce the naturally occurring Hereditary Persistance of Fetal
Haemoglobin (HPFH) -175T>C point mutation associated with elevated fetal <U+03B3>-globin
into erythroid cell lines. We show that this mutation increases fetal globin
expression through de novo recruitment of the activator TAL1 to promote chromatin
looping of distal enhancers to the modified <U+03B3>-globin promoter.

PMID: 25971621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Genesis. 2015 Jun;53(6):356-65. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22857. Epub 2015 May 25.

Conditional cell ablation via diphtheria toxin reveals distinct requirements for 
the basal plate in the regional identity of diencephalic subpopulations.

Lee B(1), Lam DT(1), Baek K(1), Yoon J(1), Jeong Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, College of Life Sciences and Graduate
School of Biotechnology, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-Si, Republic of Korea.

The mammalian diencephalon is the caudal derivative of the embryonic forebrain.
Early events in diencephalic regionalization include its subdivision along the
dorsoventral and anteroposterior axes. The prosomeric model by Puelles and
Rubenstein (1993) suggests that the alar plate of the posterior diencephalon is
partitioned into three different prosomeres (designated p1-p3), which develop
into the pretectum, thalamus, and prethalamus, respectively. Here, we report the 
developmental consequences of genetic ablation of cell populations from the
diencephalic basal plate. The strategy for conditionally regulated cell ablation 
is based on the targeted expression of the diphtheria toxin gene (DTA) to the
diencephalic basal plate via tamoxifen- induced, Cre-mediated recombination of
the ROSA(DTA) allele. We show that activation of DTA leads to specific cell loss 
in the basal plate of the posterior diencephalon, and disrupted early
regionalization of distinct alar territories. In the basal plate-deficient
embryos, the p1 alar plate exhibited reduced expression of subtype-specific
markers in the pretectum, whereas p2 alar plate failed to further subdivide into 
two discrete thalamic subpopulations. We also show that these defects lead to
abnormal nuclear organization at later developmental stages. Our data have
implications for increased understanding of the interactive roles between
discrete diencephalic compartments.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25950659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Apr;23(2):345-9. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2015.02.010.

[Effects of Down-regulating PPP2R5C Expression on Expression Profile of
TAL1-related Regulating Genes in Jurkat Cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen Y(1,)(2,)(3), Liu SC(2), Yang LJ(2), Chen SH(2), Zhang T(2), Luo GX(2), Li
YQ(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou 510080, Guangdong Province, China.
(2)Institute of Hematology, Medical collage, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, 
Guangdong Province, China. (3)Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine,
Department of Education, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, Guangdong Province, 
China. (4)Institute of Hematology, Medical collage, Jinan University, Guangzhou
510632, Guangdong Province, China. E-mail: jnyangqiuli@163.com. (5)Key Laboratory
for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Education, Jinan University, Guangzhou
510632, Guangdong Province, China. E-mail: jnyangqiuli@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: Based on our previous study showing the inhibition of lenkemia T cell 
proliferation by down-regulating PPP2R5C expression, this study was aimed to
analyze the influence of down-regulating PPP2R5 expression via RNA interference
on genes relatied with TAL1 signaling pathway by using gene chip technique.
METHODS: The PPP2R5C-siRNA799 was transduced into Jurkat cells by nucleofection, 
the total RNA was isolated from treated Jurkat cells after culture for 48 hours; 
the target sequences were prepared by revevse transcription after mRNA
purification, and were hybridized with affymetrix gene expression profile chip 3'
IVT. The original image data were collected using affymetrix gene chip scanner 3 
000, and the gene expression profile was analyzed using gene spring GX 11.0
soflware.
RESULTS: The expression of all 26 genes related with TAL1 signaling pathway was
changed, out of which the expression of 15 genes were up-regulated and the
expression of 11 genes was down-regulated in PPP2R5C-siRNA 799-transfected Jurkat
cells. The genes with significantly up-regulated expression were GATA1, TCF4,
XRCC6 and TCF3, while the genes with significantly down-regulated expression were
SIN3A and RUNX1.
CONCLUSION: The down-regulation of PPP2R5C gene expression in Jurkat cells via
RNA interference to a certain degree can inhibit TAL1 signaling pathway genes,
thereby suppresses the proliferation of Jurkat cells.

PMID: 25948183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Blood. 2015 Jun 4;125(23):3570-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-11-610519. Epub 2015
Apr 24.

RUNX1 represses the erythroid gene expression program during megakaryocytic
differentiation.

Kuvardina ON(1), Herglotz J(2), Kolodziej S(1), Kohrs N(1), Herkt S(1), Wojcik
B(3), Oellerich T(4), Corso J(5), Behrens K(2), Kumar A(1), Hussong H(1), Urlaub 
H(5), Koch J(1), Serve H(4), Bonig H(6), Stocking C(2), Rieger MA(7), Lausen
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany; (2)Heinrich-Pette-Institute, Leibniz Institute for
Experimental Virology, Hamburg, Germany; (3)Department of Medicine,
Hematology/Oncology, Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany; (4)Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology, Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe
University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; German Cancer Consortium, Heidelberg,
Germany; German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany; (5)Bioanalytical
Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry,
Göttingen, Germany; (6)German Red Cross Blood Service and Institute for
Transfusion Medicine and Immunohematology, Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany; and. (7)Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology, 
Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; German Cancer
Consortium, Heidelberg, Germany; German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany; LOEWE Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Frankfurt, Germany.

The activity of antagonizing transcription factors represents a mechanistic
paradigm of bidirectional lineage-fate control during hematopoiesis. At the
megakaryocytic/erythroid bifurcation, the cross-antagonism of krueppel-like
factor 1 (KLF1) and friend leukemia integration 1 (FLI1) has such a decisive
role. However, how this antagonism is resolved during lineage specification is
poorly understood. We found that runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1)
inhibits erythroid differentiation of murine megakaryocytic/erythroid progenitors
and primary human CD34(+) progenitor cells. We show that RUNX1 represses the
erythroid gene expression program during megakaryocytic differentiation by
epigenetic repression of the erythroid master regulator KLF1. RUNX1 binding to
the KLF1 locus is increased during megakaryocytic differentiation and
counterbalances the activating role of T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1
(TAL1). We found that corepressor recruitment by RUNX1 contributes to a block of 
the KLF1-dependent erythroid gene expression program. Our data indicate that the 
repressive function of RUNX1 influences the balance between erythroid and
megakaryocytic differentiation by shifting the balance between KLF1 and FLI1 in
the direction of FLI1. Taken together, we show that RUNX1 is a key player within 
a network of transcription factors that represses the erythroid gene expression
program.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4463808
PMID: 25911237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. BMC Genet. 2015 Feb 11;16:13. doi: 10.1186/s12863-015-0171-6.

A haploproficient interaction of the transaldolase paralogue NQM1 with the
transcription factor VHR1 affects stationary phase survival and oxidative stress 
resistance.

Michel S(1), Keller MA(2), Wamelink MM(3), Ralser M(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestr 73, Berlin, 14195,
Germany. michel@molgen.mpg.de. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Cambridge
Systems Biology Center, University of Cambridge, 80, Tennis, Court Road,
Cambridge, CB2 1GA, UK. mk747@cam.ac.uk. (3)Metabolic Unit, Department of
Clinical Chemistry, VU University Medical Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. m.wamelink@vumc.nl. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Cambridge
Systems Biology Center, University of Cambridge, 80, Tennis, Court Road,
Cambridge, CB2 1GA, UK. mr559@cam.ac.uk. (5)MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, UK. mr559@cam.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Studying the survival of yeast in stationary phase, known as
chronological lifespan, led to the identification of molecular ageing factors
conserved from yeast to higher organisms. To identify functional interactions
among yeast chronological ageing genes, we conducted a haploproficiency screen on
the basis of previously identified long-living mutants. For this, we created a
library of heterozygous Saccharomyces cerevisiae double deletion strains and aged
them in a competitive manner.
RESULTS: Stationary phase survival was prolonged in a double heterozygous mutant 
of the metabolic enzyme non-quiescent mutant 1 (NQM1), a paralogue to the pentose
phosphate pathway enzyme transaldolase (TAL1), and the transcription factor
vitamin H response transcription factor 1 (VHR1). We find that cells deleted for 
the two genes possess increased clonogenicity at late stages of stationary phase 
survival, but find no indication that the mutations delay initial mortality upon 
reaching stationary phase, canonically defined as an extension of chronological
lifespan. We show that both genes influence the concentration of metabolites of
glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway, central metabolic players in the
ageing process, and affect osmolality of growth media in stationary phase
cultures. Moreover, NQM1 is glucose repressed and induced in a VHR1 dependent
manner upon caloric restriction, on non-fermentable carbon sources, as well as
under osmotic and oxidative stress. Finally, deletion of NQM1 is shown to confer 
resistance to oxidizing substances.
CONCLUSIONS: The transaldolase paralogue NQM1 and the transcription factor VHR1
interact haploproficiently and affect yeast stationary phase survival. The
glucose repressed NQM1 gene is induced under various stress conditions, affects
stress resistance and this process is dependent on VHR1. While NQM1 appears not
to function in the pentose phosphate pathway, the interplay of NQM1 with VHR1
influences the yeast metabolic homeostasis and stress tolerance during stationary
phase, processes associated with yeast ageing.

PMCID: PMC4331311
PMID: 25887987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Stem Cells. 2015 Jul;33(7):2268-79. doi: 10.1002/stem.2028. Epub 2015 May 25.

The SCL/TAL1 Transcription Factor Represses the Stress Protein DDiT4/REDD1 in
Human Hematopoietic Stem/Progenitor Cells.

Benyoucef A(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Calvo J(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Renou L(1,)(2,)(3,)(4),
Arcangeli ML(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), van den Heuvel A(5), Amsellem S(6), Mehrpour M(7),
Larghero J(8), Soler E(2,)(5,)(9), Naguibneva I(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Pflumio
F(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)CEA, DSV-IRCM-SCSR-LSHL, UMR 967, équipe labellisée Ligue Nationale contre le 
Cancer, Fontenay-aux-Roses, Paris, France. (2)INSERM, U967, Fontenay-aux-Roses,
Paris, France. (3)Université Paris Diderot, UMR 967, Fontenay-aux-Roses, Paris,
France. (4)Université Paris-Sud, UMR 967, Fontenay-aux-Roses, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (6)Centre 
d'Investigation Clinique-BioThérapie, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, Paris, 
France. (7)INSERM U1151-CNRS UMR 8253 Institut Necker Enfants-Malades (INEM),
Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France. (8)Cell Therapy Unit and Clinical
Investigation Center in Biotherapies, AP-HP, Saint-Louis Hospital, Paris, France.
(9)CEA, DSV-IRCM-SCSR-LHM, UMR967, Fontenay-aux-Roses, Paris, France.

Hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) are regulated through numerous
molecular mechanisms that have not been interconnected. The transcription factor 
stem cell leukemia/T-cell acute leukemia 1 (TAL1) controls human HSPC but its
mechanism of action is not clarified. In this study, we show that knockdown (KD) 
or short-term conditional over-expression (OE) of TAL1 in human HSPC ex vivo,
respectively, blocks and maintains hematopoietic potentials, affecting
proliferation of human HSPC. Comparative gene expression analyses of TAL1/KD and 
TAL1/OE human HSPC revealed modifications of cell cycle regulators as well as
previously described TAL1 target genes. Interestingly an inverse correlation
between TAL1 and DNA damage-induced transcript 4 (DDiT4/REDD1), an inhibitor of
the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, is uncovered. Low
phosphorylation levels of mTOR target proteins in TAL1/KD HSPC confirmed an
interplay between mTOR pathway and TAL1 in correlation with TAL1-mediated effects
of HSPC proliferation. Finally chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
performed in human HSPC showed that DDiT4 is a direct TAL1 target gene.
Functional analyses showed that TAL1 represses DDiT4 expression in HSPCs. These
results pinpoint DDiT4/REDD1 as a novel target gene regulated by TAL1 in human
HSPC and establish for the first time a link between TAL1 and the mTOR pathway in
human early hematopoietic cells. Stem Cells 2015;33:2268-2279.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25858676  [PubMed - in process]


42. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jun;35(12):2073-87. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01422-14. Epub 2015 Apr 
8.

Epigenetic Determinants of Erythropoiesis: Role of the Histone Methyltransferase 
SetD8 in Promoting Erythroid Cell Maturation and Survival.

DeVilbiss AW(1), Sanalkumar R(1), Hall BD(1), Katsumura KR(1), de Andrade IF(1), 
Bresnick EH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, UW-Madison Blood Research
Program, Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. (2)Department of Cell and Regenerative
Biology, UW-Madison Blood Research Program, Carbone Cancer Center, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
ehbresni@wisc.edu.

Erythropoiesis, in which committed progenitor cells generate millions of
erythrocytes daily, involves dramatic changes in the chromatin structure and
transcriptome of erythroblasts, prior to their enucleation. While the involvement
of the master-regulatory transcription factors GATA binding protein 1 (GATA-1)
and GATA-2 in this process is established, the mechanistic contributions of many 
chromatin-modifying/remodeling enzymes in red cell biology remain enigmatic. We
demonstrated that SetD8, a histone methyltransferase that catalyzes
monomethylation of histone H4 at lysine 20 (H4K20me1), is a context-dependent
GATA-1 corepressor in erythroid cells. To determine whether SetD8 controls
erythroid maturation and/or function, we used a small hairpin RNA (shRNA)-based
loss-of-function strategy in a primary murine erythroblast culture system. In
this system, SetD8 promoted erythroblast maturation and survival, and this did
not involve upregulation of the established regulator of erythroblast survival
Bcl-x(L). SetD8 catalyzed H4K20me1 at a critical Gata2 cis element and restricted
occupancy by an enhancer of Gata2 transcription, Scl/TAL1, thereby repressing
Gata2 transcription. Elevating GATA-2 levels in erythroid precursors yielded a
maturation block comparable to that induced by SetD8 downregulation. As lowering 
GATA-2 expression in the context of SetD8 knockdown did not rescue erythroid
maturation, we propose that SetD8 regulation of erythroid maturation involves
multiple target genes. These results establish SetD8 as a determinant of
erythroid cell maturation and provide a framework for understanding how a broadly
expressed histone-modifying enzyme mediates cell-type-specific GATA factor
function.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4438249
PMID: 25855754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. AMB Express. 2015 Feb 26;5:16. doi: 10.1186/s13568-015-0102-y. eCollection 2015.

Enhanced xylose fermentation and ethanol production by engineered Saccharomyces
cerevisiae strain.

Vilela Lde F(1), de Araujo VP(1), Paredes Rde S(1), Bon EP(1), Torres FA(2),
Neves BC(1), Eleutherio EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Federal University of Rio 
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. (2)Department of Cellular Biology, Institute 
of Biology, University of Brasília, Brasília, DF Brazil.

We have recently demonstrated that heterologous expression of a bacterial xylose 
isomerase gene (xylA) of Burkholderia cenocepacia enabled a laboratorial
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain to ferment xylose anaerobically, without xylitol 
accumulation. However, the recombinant yeast fermented xylose slowly. In this
study, an evolutionary engineering strategy was applied to improve xylose
fermentation by the xylA-expressing yeast strain, which involved sequential batch
cultivation on xylose. The resulting yeast strain co-fermented glucose and xylose
rapidly and almost simultaneously, exhibiting improved ethanol production and
productivity. It was also observed that when cells were grown in a medium
containing higher glucose concentrations before being transferred to fermentation
medium, higher rates of xylose consumption and ethanol production were obtained, 
demonstrating that xylose utilization was not regulated by catabolic repression. 
Results obtained by qPCR demonstrate that the efficiency in xylose fermentation
showed by the evolved strain is associated, to the increase in the expression of 
genes HXT2 and TAL1, which code for a low-affinity hexose transporter and
transaldolase, respectively. The ethanol productivity obtained after the
introduction of only one genetic modification and the submission to a one-stage
process of evolutionary engineering was equivalent to those of strains submitted 
to extensive metabolic and evolutionary engineering, providing solid basis for
future applications of this strategy in industrial strains.

PMCID: PMC4385029
PMID: 25852993  [PubMed]


44. Blood Res. 2015 Mar;50(1):26-32. doi: 10.5045/br.2015.50.1.26. Epub 2015 Mar 24.

Promoter methylation and expression levels of selected hematopoietic genes in
pediatric B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Musialik E(1), Bujko M(1), Kober P(1), Wypych A(2), Gawle-Krawczyk K(2), Matysiak
M(2), Siedlecki JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Medical University of Warsaw,
Warsaw, Poland. (2)Department of Pediatric Haematology & Oncology, Medical
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Precursor B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-cell ALL) is the
most common neoplasm in children and is characterized by genetic and epigenetic
aberrations in hematopoietic transcription factor (TF) genes. This study
evaluated promoter DNA methylation and aberrant expression levels of early- and
late-acting hematopoietic TF genes homeobox A4 and A5 (HOXA4 and HOXA5), Meis
homeobox 1 (MEIS1), T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1 (TAL1), and interferon
regulatory factors 4 and 8 (IRF4 and IRF8) in pediatric B-cell ALL.
METHODS: Blood samples of 38 ALL patients and 20 controls were obtained. DNA was 
treated with sodium bisulfite and DNA methylation level of HOXA4, HOXA5, MEIS1,
TAL1, IRF4, and IRF8 was assessed using quantitative methylation-specific
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Relative gene expression was measured using
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR.
RESULTS: Aberrant methylation of TAL1, IRF8, MEIS1, and IRF4 was observed in
26.3%, 7.9%, 5.3%, and 2.6% patients, respectively, but not in controls. HOXA4
and HOXA5 were methylated in some controls and hypermethylated in 16% and 5%
patients, respectively. IRF8, MEIS1, and TAL1 expression was lower in patients
than in controls. MEIS1 expression was inversely correlated with white blood cell
(WBC) count. HOXA4 expression was down-regulated in patients with high risk
according to the National Cancer Institute (NCI) classification. TAL1 methylation
was slightly elevated in patients aged >9 years and in patients showing relapse, 
suggesting its potential prognostic value.
CONCLUSION: Aberrant methylation and expression of the selected hematopoietic
genes were correlated with demographic/clinical prognostic factors of pediatric
ALL, such as age, WBC count, and NCI risk classification.

PMCID: PMC4377334
PMID: 25830127  [PubMed]


45. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 2;5:8635. doi: 10.1038/srep08635.

Important biological information uncovered in previously unaligned reads from
chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments (ChIP-Seq).

Ouma WZ(1), Mejia-Guerra MK(1), Yilmaz A(2), Pareja-Tobes P(3), Li W(4), Doseff
AI(4), Grotewold E(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology (MCDB) Graduate Program, The 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA [2] Center for Applied Plant Sciences
(CAPS), The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (2)Department of
Bioengineering, Yildiz Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey. (3)Oh no
sequences! Research group, Era7 Information Technologies SLU, Granada, Spain.
(4)1] Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 
USA [2] Department Physiology and Cell Biology, Heart and Lung Research
Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (5)1] Center for Applied
Plant Sciences (CAPS), The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA [2]
Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Establishing the architecture of gene regulatory networks (GRNs) relies on
chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by massively parallel sequencing
(ChIP-Seq) methods that provide genome-wide transcription factor binding sites
(TFBSs). ChIP-Seq furnishes millions of short reads that, after alignment,
describe the genome-wide binding sites of a particular TF. However, in all
organisms investigated an average of 40% of reads fail to align to the
corresponding genome, with some datasets having as much as 80% of reads failing
to align. We describe here the provenance of previously unaligned reads in
ChIP-Seq experiments from animals and plants. We show that a substantial portion 
corresponds to sequences of bacterial and metazoan origin, irrespective of the
ChIP-Seq chromatin source. Unforeseen was the finding that 30%-40% of unaligned
reads were actually alignable. To validate these observations, we investigated
the characteristics of the previously unaligned reads corresponding to TAL1, a
human TF involved in lineage specification of hemopoietic cells. We show that,
while unmapped ChIP-Seq read datasets contain foreign DNA sequences, additional
TFBSs can be identified from the previously unaligned ChIP-Seq reads. Our results
indicate that the re-evaluation of previously unaligned reads from ChIP-Seq
experiments will significantly contribute to TF target identification and
determination of emerging properties of GRNs.

PMCID: PMC4345404
PMID: 25727450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biol Open. 2015 Feb 20;4(3):370-7. doi: 10.1242/bio.201411023.

Plk4-dependent phosphorylation of STIL is required for centriole duplication.

Kratz AS(1), Bärenz F(1), Richter KT(1), Hoffmann I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Cycle Control and Carcinogenesis, F045, German Cancer Research Center,
DKFZ, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Cell Cycle Control and Carcinogenesis, F045, 
German Cancer Research Center, DKFZ, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
Ingrid.Hoffmann@dkfz.de.

Duplication of centrioles, namely the formation of a procentriole next to the
parental centriole, is regulated by the polo-like kinase Plk4. Only a few other
proteins, including STIL (SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus, SIL) and Sas-6, are
required for the early step of centriole biogenesis. Following Plk4 activation,
STIL and Sas-6 accumulate at the cartwheel structure at the initial stage of the 
centriole assembly process. Here, we show that STIL interacts with Plk4 in vivo. 
A STIL fragment harboring both the coiled-coil domain and the STAN motif shows
the strongest binding affinity to Plk4. Furthermore, we find that STIL is
phosphorylated by Plk4. We identified Plk4-specific phosphorylation sites within 
the C-terminal domain of STIL and show that phosphorylation of STIL by Plk4 is
required to trigger centriole duplication.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4359743
PMID: 25701666  [PubMed]


47. Cancer Cell Int. 2015 Feb 4;15:10. doi: 10.1186/s12935-015-0158-4. eCollection
2015.

The effect of nilotinib plus arsenic trioxide on the proliferation and
differentiation of primary leukemic cells from patients with chronic myoloid
leukemia in blast crisis.

Wang W(1), Lv FF(1), Du Y(1), Li N(1), Chen Y(1), Chen L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Southeast Hospital Affiliated to Xiamen University
(the 175th Hospital of Chinese PLA), NO.269, Zhanghua Middle Road, Zhangzhou,
Fujian 363000 China.

AIM: To determine the effects of arsenic trioxide (ATO) and nilotinib (AMN107,
Tasigna) alone or in combination on the proliferation and differentiation of
primary leukemic cells from patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in the blast
crisis phase (CML-BC).
METHODS: Cells were isolated from the bone marrow of CML-BC patients and were
treated with 1 µM ATO and 5 nM nilotinib, either alone or in combination. Cell
proliferation was evaluated using a MTT assay. Cell morphology and the content of
hemoglobin were examined with Wright-Giemsa staining and benzidine staining,
respectively. The expression of cell surface markers was determined using flow
cytometric analysis. The levels of mRNA and protein were analyzed using RT-PCR
and Western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: ATO and nilotinib alone or in combination suppressed cell proliferation 
in a dose- and time-dependent pattern (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01 vs. control). Drug treatments
promoted erythroid differentiation of CML-BC cells, with a decreased
nuclei/cytoplasm ratio but increased hemoglobin content and glycophorin A (GPA)
expression (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01 compared with control). In addition, macrophage and
granulocyte lineage differentiation was also induced after drug treatment. The
mRNA and protein levels of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia protein 1 (TAL1) and B cell translocation gene 
1 (BTG1) were both upregulated after 3 days of ATO and Nilotinib treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicated that ATO and nilotinib treatment alone or in 
combination greatly suppressed cell proliferation but promoted the
differentiation of CML-BC cells towards multiple-lineages. Nilotinib alone
preferentially induced erythroid differentiation while combined treatment with
ATO preferentially induced macrophage and granulocyte lineage differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4334604
PMID: 25698901  [PubMed]


48. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Feb;23(1):106-10. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2015.01.020.

[Effect of arsenic trioxide on differentiation induction of chronic myeloid
leukemia k562 cells and its potential mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Lyu FF(1), Du Y(1), Li NN(1), Wang W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Southeast Hospital Affiliated to Xiamen University
(175th Hospital of Chinese PLA), Zhangzhou 363000, Fujian Province, China.
(2)Department of Hematology, Southeast Hospital Affiliated to Xiamen University
(175th Hospital of Chinese PLA), Zhangzhou 363000, Fujian Province, China.
E-mail: wangwei220012@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: This study was to explore the effect of arsenic trioxide (ATO;
As(2)O(3)) on differentiation of chronic myeloid leukemia K562 cells and its
potential mechanism.
METHODS: ATO with different concentration (0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0 µmol/L) were
used to treat K562 cells, and MTT assay was used to detect the growth level of
K562 cells; Benzidine staining was applied to measure the change of hemoglobin
content; flow cytometry (FCM) was conducted to detect the expression of CD41 and 
GPA on K562 cells; RT-PCR and Western blot were used to measure the mRNA
expression of BTG1 and TAL1 and the protein expression of BTG1 and TAL1,
respectively.
RESULTS: ATO significantly inhibited the growth of K562 with dose- and time-
dependent manners by benzidine staining, the positive rate of K562 cells induced 
by ATO reached to 17.63% ± 1.18%, which was significantly higher than that of
control (2.87% ± 0.63%) (P < 0.01), and GPA, as the specific marker of erythroid 
cell differentiation, achieved 68.46% ± 3.67%, while it in control was 3.39% ±
0.84% (P < 0.01), besides, the CD41 expression of megakaryocyte increased but not
so obvious as GPA. Meanwhile, the differentiation-related transcriptional factors
TAL1 and BTG1 mRNA and the corresponding proteins were expressed more highly.
CONCLUSION: ATO can induce the differentiation of K562 cells into erythroid cells
and megakaryocyte, which is associated with up-regulation of the related
transcription factors TAL1 and BTG1.

PMID: 25687055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. EMBO J. 2015 Mar 12;34(6):691-3. doi: 10.15252/embj.201591017. Epub 2015 Feb 13.

Creating cellular diversity through transcription factor competition.

Göttgens B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research & Wellcome Trust and MRC Stem Cell
Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2015 Mar 12;34(6):759-77.

PMCID: PMC4359907
PMID: 25680687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. PLoS Genet. 2015 Jan 29;11(1):e1004959. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004959.
eCollection 2015.

MiR-24 is required for hematopoietic differentiation of mouse embryonic stem
cells.

Roy L(1), Bikorimana E(1), Lapid D(2), Choi H(2), Nguyen T(1), Dahl R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Harper Cancer Research Institute, South Bend, Indiana, United States of
America; Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
South Bend, Indiana, United States of America. (2)Dept. of Biological Sciences,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, United States of America.
(3)Harper Cancer Research Institute, South Bend, Indiana, United States of
America; Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
South Bend, Indiana, United States of America; Dept. of Biological Sciences,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, United States of America.

Overexpression of miRNA, miR-24, in mouse hematopoietic progenitors increases
monocytic/ granulocytic differentiation and inhibits B cell development. To
determine if endogenous miR-24 is required for hematopoiesis, we antagonized
miR-24 in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and performed in vitro
differentiations. Suppression of miR-24 resulted in an inability to produce blood
and hematopoietic progenitors (HPCs) from ESCs. The phenotype is not a general
defect in mesoderm production since we observe production of nascent mesoderm as 
well as mesoderm derived cardiac muscle and endothelial cells. Results from blast
colony forming cell (BL-CFC) assays demonstrate that miR-24 is not required for
generation of the hemangioblast, the mesoderm progenitor that gives rise to blood
and endothelial cells. However, expression of the transcription factors Runx1 and
Scl is greatly reduced, suggesting an impaired ability of the hemangioblast to
differentiate. Lastly, we observed that known miR-24 target, Trib3, is
upregulated in the miR-24 antagonized embryoid bodies (EBs). Overexpression of
Trib3 alone in ESCs was able to decrease HPC production, though not as great as
seen with miR-24 knockdown. These results demonstrate an essential role for
miR-24 in the hematopoietic differentiation of ESCs. Although many miRNAs have
been implicated in regulation of hematopoiesis, this is the first miRNA observed 
to be required for the specification of mammalian blood progenitors from early
mesoderm.

PMCID: PMC4310609
PMID: 25634354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nat Commun. 2015 Jan 23;6:6094. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7094.

Site- and allele-specific polycomb dysregulation in T-cell leukaemia.

Navarro JM(1), Touzart A(2), Pradel LC(1), Loosveld M(3), Koubi M(4), Fenouil
R(1), Le Noir S(2), Maqbool MA(1), Morgado E(1), Gregoire C(1), Jaeger S(1),
Mamessier E(1), Pignon C(1), Hacein-Bey-Abina S(5), Malissen B(1), Gut M(6), Gut 
IG(6), Dombret H(7), Macintyre EA(2), Howe SJ(8), Gaspar HB(8), Thrasher AJ(8),
Ifrah N(9), Payet-Bornet D(1), Duprez E(10), Andrau JC(1), Asnafi V(2), Nadel
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Center of Immunology of Marseille Luminy, Aix-Marseille University, Parc
Scientifique de Luminy case 906, 13288 Marseille, France [2] INSERM U1104, 13288 
Marseille, France [3] CNRS UMR7280, 13288 Marseille, France. (2)Université Paris 
Descartes Sorbonne Cité, Institut Necker-Enfants Malades (INEM), Institut
national de recherche médicale (INSERM) U1151, and Laboratory of Onco-Hematology,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades,
75015 Paris, France. (3)1] Center of Immunology of Marseille Luminy,
Aix-Marseille University, Parc Scientifique de Luminy case 906, 13288 Marseille, 
France [2] INSERM U1104, 13288 Marseille, France [3] CNRS UMR7280, 13288
Marseille, France [4] Laboratoire Hématologie, APHM, 13385 Marseille, France.
(4)CRCM Inserm U1068, Institut Paoli Calmettes; Aix-Marseille Université, UM 105;
CNRS UMR7258, 13009 Marseille, France. (5)Biotherapy Department, INSERM U429,
Hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades, 149 rue de Sèvres, 75015 Paris, France. (6)Centro
Nacional de Análisis Genómico, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. (7)Department of
Hematology, AP-HP Hôpital St-Louis, 75010 Paris, France. (8)Centre for
Immunodeficiency, Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Institute of Child Health,
University College London, London WC1N 1EH, UK. (9)Services des Maladies du sang 
CHU and UMR Inserm U 892/CNRS 6299, 49933 Angers, France. (10)Laboratoire
Hématologie, APHM, 13385 Marseille, France.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemias (T-ALL) are aggressive malignant
proliferations characterized by high relapse rates and great genetic
heterogeneity. TAL1 is amongst the most frequently deregulated oncogenes. Yet,
over half of the TAL1(+) cases lack TAL1 lesions, suggesting unrecognized
(epi)genetic deregulation mechanisms. Here we show that TAL1 is normally silenced
in the T-cell lineage, and that the polycomb H3K27me3-repressive mark is focally 
diminished in TAL1(+) T-ALLs. Sequencing reveals that >20% of monoallelic TAL1(+)
patients without previously known alterations display microinsertions or
RAG1/2-mediated episomal reintegration in a single site 5' to TAL1. Using
'allelic-ChIP' and CrispR assays, we demonstrate that such insertions induce a
selective switch from H3K27me3 to H3K27ac at the inserted but not the germline
allele. We also show that, despite a considerable mechanistic diversity, the mode
of oncogenic TAL1 activation, rather than expression levels, impact on clinical
outcome. Altogether, these studies establish site-specific epigenetic desilencing
as a mechanism of oncogenic activation.

PMCID: PMC4317503
PMID: 25615415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. EMBO J. 2015 Mar 12;34(6):759-77. doi: 10.15252/embj.201490542. Epub 2015 Jan 6.

Scl binds to primed enhancers in mesoderm to regulate hematopoietic and cardiac
fate divergence.

Org T(1), Duan D(1), Ferrari R(2), Montel-Hagen A(1), Van Handel B(1), Kerényi
MA(3), Sasidharan R(1), Rubbi L(1), Fujiwara Y(3), Pellegrini M(1), Orkin SH(3), 
Kurdistani SK(2), Mikkola HK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA Eli and Edythe Broad Stem Cell
Research Center, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
Harvard Stem Cell Institute Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA Eli and Edythe Broad Stem Cell Research Center, 
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA hmikkola@mcdb.ucla.edu.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2015 Mar 12;34(6):691-3.

Scl/Tal1 confers hemogenic competence and prevents ectopic cardiomyogenesis in
embryonic endothelium by unknown mechanisms. We discovered that Scl binds to
hematopoietic and cardiac enhancers that become epigenetically primed in
multipotent cardiovascular mesoderm, to regulate the divergence of hematopoietic 
and cardiac lineages. Scl does not act as a pioneer factor but rather exploits a 
pre-established epigenetic landscape. As the blood lineage emerges, Scl binding
and active epigenetic modifications are sustained in hematopoietic enhancers,
whereas cardiac enhancers are decommissioned by removal of active epigenetic
marks. Our data suggest that, rather than recruiting corepressors to enhancers,
Scl prevents ectopic cardiogenesis by occupying enhancers that cardiac factors,
such as Gata4 and Hand1, use for gene activation. Although hematopoietic Gata
factors bind with Scl to both activated and repressed genes, they are dispensable
for cardiac repression, but necessary for activating genes that enable
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell development. These results suggest that a
unique subset of enhancers in lineage-specific genes that are accessible for
regulators of opposing fates during the time of the fate decision provide a
platform where the divergence of mutually exclusive fates is orchestrated.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4369313
PMID: 25564442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Dec;22(6):1508-13. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2014.06.002.

[Correlation between expression of SIL-TAL1 fusion gene and deletion of 6q in
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Q(1), Wu LL(1), Dai HP(1), Ping NN(1), Wu CX(1), Pan JL(1), Cen JN(1), Qiu
HY(1), Chen SN(2).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Jiangsu Institute of
Hematology, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis of the Ministry of
Health, Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, Suzhou 215006, Jiangsu
Province, China. (2)The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Jiangsu 
Institute of Hematology, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis of the
Ministry of Health, Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, Suzhou 215006,
Jiangsu Province, China. E-mail: chensuning@sina.com.

The present study was designed to investigate the prevalence and clinical
significance of SIL-TAL1 rearrangements in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL). The incidence of SIL-TAL1 rearrangements was analyzed by nest real-time 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 68 patients with T-ALL.
Karyotypic analysis was performed by conventional R-banding assay and array-based
comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH). The results showed that SIL-TAL1
rearrangements were identified in 10/26 (38.5%) pediatric and 2/42 (4.8%) adult
T-ALL cases, which indicate a pediatric preference for SIL-TAL1 rearrangements in
T-ALL. Two different transcripts were detected in 6/12(50%) T-ALL samples.
Abnormal karyotypes were detected in 6 out of 11 cases (54.5%) and a deletion of 
the long arm of chromosome 6 was observed in 4 cases. Array-CGH results of 2
T-ALL cases with SIL-TAL1 rearrangement revealed that this fusion gene was
resulted from a cryptic deletion of 1p32, and the overlap region of 6q deletion
was 6q14.1-16.3. These cases with SIL-TAL1 fusion had a higher white blood cell
(WBC) count and higher serum levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) than cases
without SIL-TAL1 fusion. It is concluded that SIL-TAL1 rearrangements are
associated with loss of heterozygosity of chromosomal 6q, and SIL-TAL1-positive
patients are younger than SIL-TAL1-negative patients. In contrast to the cases
without SIL-TAL1 fusion, there are many adverse prognostic factors in the cases
with SIL-TAL1 fusion, such as higher WBC count and higher LDH levels.

PMID: 25543465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jan 6;112(1):160-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1413234112. 
Epub 2014 Dec 24.

ETS transcription factor ETV2 directly converts human fibroblasts into functional
endothelial cells.

Morita R(1), Suzuki M(2), Kasahara H(2), Shimizu N(2), Shichita T(3), Sekiya
T(2), Kimura A(2), Sasaki K(4), Yasukawa H(4), Yoshimura A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology
Program, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan;
rimpeim@a7.keio.jp yoshimura@a6.keio.jp. (2)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; Core
Research for Evolutional Science and Technology Program, Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan; (3)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; Core
Research for Evolutional Science and Technology Program, Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan; PRESTO (Precursory Research for
Embryonic Science and Technology), Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0075, Japan; and.
(4)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Kurume
University School of Medicine, Kurume 830-0011, Japan.

Transplantation of endothelial cells (ECs) is a promising therapeutic approach
for ischemic disorders. In addition, the generation of ECs has become
increasingly important for providing vascular plexus to regenerated organs, such 
as the liver. Although many attempts have been made to generate ECs from
pluripotent stem cells and nonvascular cells, the minimum number of transcription
factors that specialize in directly inducing vascular ECs remains undefined.
Here, by screening 18 transcription factors that are important for both
endothelial and hematopoietic development, we demonstrate that ets variant 2
(ETV2) alone directly converts primary human adult skin fibroblasts into
functional vascular endothelial cells (ETVECs). In coordination with endogenous
FOXC2 in fibroblasts, transduced ETV2 elicits expression of multiple key
endothelial development factors, including FLI1, ERG, and TAL1, and induces
expression of endothelial functional molecules, including EGFL7 and von
Willebrand factor. Consequently, ETVECs exhibits EC characteristics in vitro and 
forms mature functional vasculature in Matrigel plugs transplanted in NOD SCID
mice. Furthermore, ETVECs significantly improve blood flow recovery in a hind
limb ischemic model using BALB/c-nu mice. Our study indicates that the creation
of ETVECs provides further understanding of human EC development induced by ETV2.

PMCID: PMC4291653
PMID: 25540418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Dev Biol. 2015 Mar 1;399(1):80-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.12.015. Epub 2014
Dec 19.

A diffusible signal derived from hematopoietic cells supports the survival and
proliferation of regenerative cells during zebrafish fin fold regeneration.

Hasegawa T(1), Nakajima T(1), Ishida T(1), Kudo A(1), Kawakami A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Information, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259
Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. (2)Department of Biological
Information, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama
226-8501, Japan. Electronic address: atkawaka@bio.titech.ac.jp.

Multicellular organisms maintain body integrity by constantly regenerating
tissues throughout their lives; however, the overall mechanism for regulating
regeneration remains an open question. Studies of limb and fin regeneration in
teleost fish and urodeles have shown the involvement of a number of locally
activated signals at the wounded site during regeneration. Here, we demonstrate
that a diffusible signal from a distance also play an essential role for
regeneration. Among a number of zebrafish mutants, we found that the zebrafish
cloche (clo) and tal1 mutants, which lack most hematopoietic tissues, displayed a
unique regeneration defect accompanying apoptosis in primed regenerative tissue. 
Our analyses of the mutants showed that the cells in the primed regenerative
tissue are susceptible to apoptosis, but their survival is normally supported by 
the presence of hematopoietic tissues, mainly the myeloid cells. We further
showed that a diffusible factor in the wild-type body fluid mediates this signal.
Thus, our study revealed a novel mechanism that the hematopoietic tissues
regulate tissue regeneration through a diffusible signal.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25533245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Mar;1849(3):282-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.12.010. 
Epub 2014 Dec 17.

KLF1 stabilizes GATA-1 and TAL1 occupancy in the human ß-globin locus.

Kang Y(1), Kim YW(1), Yun J(1), Shin J(1), Kim A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Molecular Biology,
College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735, Republic
of Korea. Electronic address: kimaeri@pusan.ac.kr.

KLF1 is an erythroid specific transcription factor that binds to regulatory
regions of erythroid genes. Binding sites of KLF1 are often found near binding
sites of GATA-1 and TAL1. In the ß-globin locus, KLF1 is required for forming
active chromatin structure, although its role is unclear. To explore the role of 
KLF1 in transcribing the human <U+03B3>-globin genes, we stably reduced the expression
of KLF1 in erythroid K562 cells, compromising its association in the ß-globin
locus. The <U+03B3>-globin transcription was reduced with disappearance of active
chromatin structure of the locus in the KLF1 knockdown cells. Interestingly,
GATA-1 and TAL1 binding was reduced in the ß-globin locus, even though their
expressions were not affected by KLF1 knockdown. The KLF1-dependent GATA-1 and
TAL1 binding was observed in the adult locus transcribing the ß-globin gene and
in several erythroid genes, where GATA-1 occupancy is independent from TAL1.
These results indicate that KLF1 plays a role in facilitating and/or stabilizing 
GATA-1 and TAL1 occupancy in the erythroid genes, contributing to the generation 
of active chromatin structure such as histone acetylation and chromatin looping.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25528728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. PLoS Genet. 2014 Dec 18;10(12):e1004768. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004768.
eCollection 2014.

SCL, LMO1 and Notch1 reprogram thymocytes into self-renewing cells.

Gerby B(1), Tremblay CS(1), Tremblay M(1), Rojas-Sutterlin S(1), Herblot S(2),
Hébert J(3), Sauvageau G(3), Lemieux S(1), Lécuyer E(4), Veiga DF(1), Hoang T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Research in Immunology and Cancer - University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Molecular Biology Program, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (2)Institute of Research in
Immunology and Cancer - University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Institute of Research in Immunology and Cancer - University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Molecular Biology Program, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital. 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (4)Clinical Research Institute of Montreal (IRCM),
Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (5)Institute of Research in
Immunology and Cancer - University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada;
Molecular Biology Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada; Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The molecular determinants that render specific populations of normal cells
susceptible to oncogenic reprogramming into self-renewing cancer stem cells are
poorly understood. Here, we exploit T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL)
as a model to define the critical initiating events in this disease. First,
thymocytes that are reprogrammed by the SCL and LMO1 oncogenic transcription
factors into self-renewing pre-leukemic stem cells (pre-LSCs) remain
non-malignant, as evidenced by their capacities to generate functional T cells.
Second, we provide strong genetic evidence that SCL directly interacts with LMO1 
to activate the transcription of a self-renewal program coordinated by LYL1.
Moreover, LYL1 can substitute for SCL to reprogram thymocytes in concert with
LMO1. In contrast, inhibition of E2A was not sufficient to substitute for SCL,
indicating that thymocyte reprogramming requires transcription activation by
SCL-LMO1. Third, only a specific subset of normal thymic cells, known as DN3
thymocytes, is susceptible to reprogramming. This is because physiological NOTCH1
signals are highest in DN3 cells compared to other thymocyte subsets. Consistent 
with this, overexpression of a ligand-independent hyperactive NOTCH1 allele in
all immature thymocytes is sufficient to sensitize them to SCL-LMO1, thereby
increasing the pool of self-renewing cells. Surprisingly, hyperactive NOTCH1
cannot reprogram thymocytes on its own, despite the fact that NOTCH1 is activated
by gain of function mutations in more than 55% of T-ALL cases. Rather, elevating 
NOTCH1 triggers a parallel pathway involving Hes1 and Myc that dramatically
enhances the activity of SCL-LMO1 We conclude that the acquisition of
self-renewal and the genesis of pre-LSCs from thymocytes with a finite lifespan
represent a critical first event in T-ALL. Finally, LYL1 and LMO1 or LMO2 are
co-expressed in most human T-ALL samples, except the cortical T subtype. We
therefore anticipate that the self-renewal network described here may be relevant
to a majority of human T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC4270438
PMID: 25522233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. BMC Genomics. 2014;15 Suppl 9:S12. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-S9-S12. Epub 2014
Dec 8.

dCaP: detecting differential binding events in multiple conditions and proteins.

Chen KB, Hardison R, Zhang Y.

BACKGROUND: Current ChIP-seq studies are interested in comparing multiple
epigenetic profiles across several cell types and tissues simultaneously for
studying constitutive and differential regulation. Simultaneous analysis of
multiple epigenetic features in many samples can gain substantial power and
specificity than analyzing individual features and/or samples separately. Yet
there are currently few tools can perform joint inference of constitutive and
differential regulation in multi-feature-multi-condition contexts with
statistical testing. Existing tools either test regulatory variation for one
factor in multiple samples at a time, or for multiple factors in one or two
samples. Many of them only identify binary rather than quantitative variation,
which are sensitive to threshold choices.
RESULTS: We propose a novel and powerful method called dCaP for simultaneously
detecting constitutive and differential regulation of multiple epigenetic factors
in multiple samples. Using simulation, we demonstrate the superior power of dCaP 
compared to existing methods. We then apply dCaP to two datasets from human and
mouse ENCODE projects to demonstrate its utility. We show in the human dataset
that the cell-type specific regulatory loci detected by dCaP are significantly
enriched near genes with cell-type specific functions and disease relevance. We
further show in the mouse dataset that dCaP captures genomic regions showing
significant signal variations for TAL1 occupancy between two mouse erythroid cell
lines. The novel TAL1 occupancy loci detected only by dCaP are highly enriched
with GATA1 occupancy and differential gene expression, while those detected only 
by other methods are not.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we developed a novel approach to utilize the cooperative
property of proteins to detect differential binding given multivariate ChIP-seq
samples to provide better power, aiming for complementing existing approaches and
providing new insights in the method development in this field.

PMCID: PMC4290593
PMID: 25522020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS Genet. 2014 Dec 18;10(12):e1004890. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004890.
eCollection 2014.

Altered chromatin occupancy of master regulators underlies evolutionary
divergence in the transcriptional landscape of erythroid differentiation.

Ulirsch JC(1), Lacy JN(1), An X(2), Mohandas N(2), Mikkelsen TS(3), Sankaran
VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, The Manton Center for Orphan Disease
Research, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of Pediatric Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)New York Blood Center, New York, New 
York, United States of America. (3)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Erythropoiesis is one of the best understood examples of cellular
differentiation. Morphologically, erythroid differentiation proceeds in a nearly 
identical fashion between humans and mice, but recent evidence has shown that
networks of gene expression governing this process are divergent between species.
We undertook a systematic comparative analysis of six histone modifications and
four transcriptional master regulators in primary proerythroblasts and erythroid 
cell lines to better understand the underlying basis of these transcriptional
differences. Our analyses suggest that while chromatin structure across
orthologous promoters is strongly conserved, subtle differences are associated
with transcriptional divergence between species. Many transcription factor (TF)
occupancy sites were poorly conserved across species (~25% for GATA1, TAL1, and
NFE2) but were more conserved between proerythroblasts and cell lines derived
from the same species. We found that certain cis-regulatory modules co-occupied
by GATA1, TAL1, and KLF1 are under strict evolutionary constraint and localize to
genes necessary for erythroid cell identity. More generally, we show that
conserved TF occupancy sites are indicative of active regulatory regions and
strong gene expression that is sustained during maturation. Our results suggest
that evolutionary turnover of TF binding sites associates with changes in the
underlying chromatin structure, driving transcriptional divergence. We provide
examples of how this framework can be applied to understand epigenomic variation 
in specific regulatory regions, such as the ß-globin gene locus. Our findings
have important implications for understanding epigenomic changes that mediate
variation in cellular differentiation across species, while also providing a
valuable resource for studies of hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC4270484
PMID: 25521328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Science. 2014 Dec 12;346(6215):1291-2. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa3247.

Cancer. Cancer by super-enhancer.

Vähärautio A(1), Taipale J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genome-Scale Biology Program, University of Helsinki, Finland. (2)Genome-Scale
Biology Program, University of Helsinki, Finland. Science for Life Laboratory,
Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. jussi.taipale@ki.se.

Comment on
    Science. 2014 Dec 12;346(6215):1373-7.

PMID: 25504702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Leuk Res. 2015 Jan;39(1):100-9. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2014.11.016. Epub 2014 Nov
29.

Enforced expression of E47 has differential effects on Lmo2-induced T-cell
leukemias.

Goodings C(1), Tripathi R(1), Cleveland SM(1), Elliott N(1), Guo Y(2), Shyr Y(2),
Davé UP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cancer Biology and Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN, USA. (2)Department of Biostatistics and Center for
Quantitative Sciences, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA. 
(3)Departments of Cancer Biology and Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN, USA. Electronic address: utpal.dave@vanderbilt.edu.

LIM domain only-2 (LMO2) overexpression in T cells induces leukemia but the
molecular mechanism remains to be elucidated. In hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells, Lmo2 is part of a protein complex comprised of class II basic
helix loop helix proteins, Tal1and Lyl1. The latter transcription factors
heterodimerize with E2A proteins like E47 and Heb to bind E boxes. LMO2 and TAL1 
or LYL1 cooperate to induce T-ALL in mouse models, and are concordantly expressed
in human T-ALL. Furthermore, LMO2 cooperates with the loss of E2A suggesting that
LMO2 functions by creating a deficiency of E2A. In this study, we tested this
hypothesis in Lmo2-induced T-ALL cell lines. We transduced these lines with an
E47/estrogen receptor fusion construct that could be forced to homodimerize with 
4-hydroxytamoxifen. We discovered that forced homodimerization induced growth
arrest in 2 of the 4 lines tested. The lines sensitive to E47 homodimerization
accumulated in G1 and had reduced S phase entry. We analyzed the transcriptome of
a resistant and a sensitive line to discern the E47 targets responsible for the
cellular effects. Our results suggest that E47 has diverse effects in T-ALL but
that functional deficiency of E47 is not a universal feature of Lmo2-induced
T-ALL.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4277943
PMID: 25499232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(18):2859-68. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.946830.

Lack of centrioles and primary cilia in STIL(-/-) mouse embryos.

David A(1), Liu F, Tibelius A, Vulprecht J, Wald D, Rothermel U, Ohana R, Seitel 
A, Metzger J, Ashery-Padan R, Meinzer HP, Gröne HJ, Izraeli S, Krämer A.

Author information: 
(1)a Sheba Cancer Research Center and the Edmond and Lily Safra Children's
Hospital; Sheba Medical Center ; Tel-Hashomer, Ramat Gan , Israel.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2014;13(18):2809.

Although most animal cells contain centrosomes, consisting of a pair of
centrioles, their precise contribution to cell division and embryonic development
is unclear. Genetic ablation of STIL, an essential component of the centriole
replication machinery in mammalian cells, causes embryonic lethality in mice
around mid gestation associated with defective Hedgehog signaling. Here, we
describe, by focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy, that STIL(-/-) mouse 
embryos do not contain centrioles or primary cilia, suggesting that these
organelles are not essential for mammalian development until mid gestation. We
further show that the lack of primary cilia explains the absence of Hedgehog
signaling in STIL(-/-) cells. Exogenous re-expression of STIL or STIL
microcephaly mutants compatible with human survival, induced non-templated, de
novo generation of centrioles in STIL(-/-) cells. Thus, while the abscence of
centrioles is compatible with mammalian gastrulation, lack of centrioles and
primary cilia impairs Hedgehog signaling and further embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC4615128
PMID: 25486474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Stem Cell Res. 2015 Jan;14(1):30-8. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.11.002. Epub 2014 Nov
25.

CD71(high) population represents primitive erythroblasts derived from mouse
embryonic stem cells.

Chao R(1), Gong X(1), Wang L(1), Wang P(1), Wang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai
200241, China. (2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University,
Shanghai 200241, China. Electronic address: ywang@bio.ecnu.edu.cn.

The CD71/Ter119 combination has been widely used to reflect dynamic maturation of
erythrocytes in vivo. However, because CD71 is expressed on all proliferating
cells, it is unclear whether it can be utilized as an erythrocyte-specific marker
during differentiation of embryonic stem cells (ESCs). In this study, we revealed
that a population expressing high level of CD71 (CD71(high)) during mouse ESC
differentiation represented an in vitro counterpart of yolk sac-derived primitive
erythroblasts (EryPs) isolated at 8.5days post coitum. In addition, these
CD71(high) cells went through "maturational globin switching" and enucleated
during terminal differentiation in vitro that were similar to the yolk
sac-derived EryPs in vivo. We further demonstrated that the formation of
CD71(high) population was regulated differentially by key factors including Scl, 
HoxB4, Eaf1, and Klf1. Taken together, our study provides a technical advance
that allows efficient segregation of EryPs from differentiated ESCs in vitro for 
further understanding molecular regulation during primitive erythropoiesis.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25485690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Dec 9;3(6):1043-57. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.10.003.
Epub 2014 Nov 13.

An expandable, inducible hemangioblast state regulated by fibroblast growth
factor.

Vereide DT(1), Vickerman V(2), Swanson SA(2), Chu LF(2), McIntosh BE(2), Thomson 
JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715, USA; Biotechnology
Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic
address: dvereide@morgridge.org. (2)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI
53715, USA. (3)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715, USA;
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA; Department of Molecular,
Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of California, Santa Barbara,
Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA. Electronic address: jthomson@morgridge.org.

During development, the hematopoietic and vascular lineages are thought to
descend from common mesodermal progenitors called hemangioblasts. Here we
identify six transcription factors, Gata2, Lmo2, Mycn, Pitx2, Sox17, and Tal1,
that "trap" murine cells in a proliferative state and endow them with a
hemangioblast potential. These "expandable" hemangioblasts (eHBs) are capable,
once released from the control of the ectopic factors, to give rise to functional
endothelial cells, multilineage hematopoietic cells, and smooth muscle cells. The
eHBs can be derived from embryonic stem cells, from fetal liver cells, or poorly 
from fibroblasts. The eHBs reveal a central role for fibroblast growth factor,
which not only promotes their expansion, but also facilitates their ability to
give rise to endothelial cells and leukocytes, but not erythrocytes. This study
serves as a demonstration that ephemeral progenitor states can be harnessed in
vitro, enabling the creation of tractable progenitor cell lines.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4264065
PMID: 25458896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Science. 2014 Dec 12;346(6215):1373-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1259037. Epub 2014
Nov 13.

Oncogene regulation. An oncogenic super-enhancer formed through somatic mutation 
of a noncoding intergenic element.

Mansour MR(1), Abraham BJ(2), Anders L(2), Berezovskaya A(3), Gutierrez A(4),
Durbin AD(3), Etchin J(3), Lawton L(2), Sallan SE(4), Silverman LB(4), Loh ML(5),
Hunger SP(6), Sanda T(7), Young RA(8), Look AT(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Department of Haematology, UCL Cancer
Institute, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK. (2)Whitehead Institute
for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (3)Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215,
USA. (4)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology,
Boston Children's Hospital, MA 02115, USA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Benioff
Children's Hospital, University of California San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(6)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology/BMT, University of Colorado School of Medicine
and Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (7)Cancer Science
Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, and Department of
Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, 117599, Singapore. (8)Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Department of
Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
thomas_look@dfci.harvard.edu young@wi.mit.edu. (9)Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215,
USA. Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, MA
02115, USA. thomas_look@dfci.harvard.edu young@wi.mit.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2014 Dec 12;346(6215):1291-2.

In certain human cancers, the expression of critical oncogenes is driven from
large regulatory elements, called super-enhancers, that recruit much of the
cell's transcriptional apparatus and are defined by extensive acetylation of
histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27ac). In a subset of T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL) cases, we found that heterozygous somatic mutations are acquired
that introduce binding motifs for the MYB transcription factor in a precise
noncoding site, which creates a super-enhancer upstream of the TAL1 oncogene. MYB
binds to this new site and recruits its H3K27 acetylase-binding partner CBP, as
well as core components of a major leukemogenic transcriptional complex that
contains RUNX1, GATA-3, and TAL1 itself. Additionally, most endogenous
super-enhancers found in T-ALL cells are occupied by MYB and CBP, which suggests 
a general role for MYB in super-enhancer initiation. Thus, this study identifies 
a genetic mechanism responsible for the generation of oncogenic super-enhancers
in malignant cells.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4720521
PMID: 25394790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Leukemia. 2015 Apr;29(4):977-80. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.317. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

Rapid childhood T-ALL growth in xenograft models correlates with mature phenotype
and NF-<U+03BA>B pathway activation but not with poor prognosis.

Poglio S(1), Cahu X(1), Uzan B(1), Besnard-Guérin C(2), Lapillonne H(3), Leblanc 
T(4), Baruchel A(4), Landman-Parker J(3), Petit A(3), Baleydier F(5), Amsellem
S(6), Baud V(2), Ballerini P(7), Pflumio F(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives (CEA),
DSV-IRCM-SCSR-LSHL, Equipe labellisée Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer,
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France [2] INSERM UMR967, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France [3]
Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France [4]
Université Paris-Sud, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France. (2)1] CNRS UMR8104, Paris,
France [2] Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France [3]
INSERM U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France. (3)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Service d'hématologie pédiatrique, Hôpital A. Trousseau et Université
Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France. (4)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Service d'hématologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France.
(5)Institut d'Hématologie et Oncologie Pédiatrique, Hospices Civils de Lyon et
Université Claude Bernard, Lyon 1, France. (6)Service d'Hématologie, Institut
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (7)1] Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique et aux
Energies Alternatives (CEA), DSV-IRCM-SCSR-LSHL, Equipe labellisée Ligue
Nationale contre le Cancer, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France [2] INSERM UMR967,
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France [3] Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France [4] Université Paris-Sud, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France
[5] Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Service d'hématologie pédiatrique,
Hôpital A. Trousseau et Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France.

PMID: 25371179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cell Death Differ. 2015 May;22(5):790-800. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.172. Epub 2014
Oct 17.

Kit transduced signals counteract erythroid maturation by MAPK-dependent
modulation of erythropoietin signaling and apoptosis induction in mouse fetal
liver.

Haas N(1), Riedt T(2), Labbaf Z(1), Baßler K(1), Gergis D(3), Fröhlich H(3),
Gütgemann I(1), Janzen V(2), Schorle H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn Medical School, Bonn, Germany. (2)Department of Internal Medicine III,
Hematology and Oncology, University of Bonn Medical School, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Bonn-Aachen International Center for IT (B-IT) Algorithmic Bioinformatics,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Signaling by the stem cell factor receptor Kit in hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells is functionally associated with the regulation of cellular
proliferation, differentiation and survival. Expression of the receptor is
downregulated upon terminal differentiation in most lineages, including red blood
cell terminal maturation, suggesting that omission of Kit transduced signals is a
prerequisite for the differentiation process to occur. However, the molecular
mechanisms by which Kit signaling preserves the undifferentiated state of
progenitor cells are not yet characterized in detail. In this study, we generated
a mouse model for inducible expression of a Kit receptor carrying an activating
mutation and studied its effects on fetal liver hematopoiesis. We found that
sustained Kit signaling leads to expansion of erythroid precursors and interferes
with terminal maturation beyond the erythroblast stage. Primary KIT(D816V)
erythroblasts stimulated to differentiate fail to exit cell cycle and show
elevated rates of apoptosis because of insufficient induction of survival
factors. They further retain expression of progenitor cell associated factors
c-Myc, c-Myb and GATA-2 and inefficiently upregulate erythroid transcription
factors GATA-1, Klf1 and Tal1. In KIT(D816V) erythroblasts we found constitutive 
activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, elevated
expression of the src kinase family member Lyn and impaired Akt activation in
response to erythropoietin. We demonstrate that the block in differentiation is
partially rescued by MAPK inhibition, and completely rescued by the multikinase
inhibitor Dasatinib. These results show that a crosstalk between Kit and
erythropoietin receptor signaling cascades exists and that continuous Kit
signaling, partly mediated by the MAPK pathway, interferes with this crosstalk.

PMCID: PMC4392076
PMID: 25323585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Genome Res. 2014 Dec;24(12):1932-44. doi: 10.1101/gr.164178.113. Epub 2014 Oct
15.

Divergent functions of hematopoietic transcription factors in lineage priming and
differentiation during erythro-megakaryopoiesis.

Pimkin M(1), Kossenkov AV(2), Mishra T(3), Morrissey CS(3), Wu W(3), Keller
CA(3), Blobel GA(4), Lee D(5), Beer MA(5), Hardison RC(3), Weiss MJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA; Pediatric Residency Program, Department of Pediatrics,
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15224, USA; (2)Center for Systems and
Computational Biology, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia 19019, Pennsylvania,
USA; (3)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA; Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA; (4)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA;
(5)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine and Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
21205, USA. (6)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; weissmi@email.chop.edu rch8@psu.edu.

Combinatorial actions of relatively few transcription factors control
hematopoietic differentiation. To investigate this process in
erythro-megakaryopoiesis, we correlated the genome-wide chromatin occupancy
signatures of four master hematopoietic transcription factors (GATA1, GATA2,
TAL1, and FLI1) and three diagnostic histone modification marks with the gene
expression changes that occur during development of primary cultured
megakaryocytes (MEG) and primary erythroblasts (ERY) from murine fetal liver
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. We identified a robust, genome-wide
mechanism of MEG-specific lineage priming by a previously described
stem/progenitor cell-expressed transcription factor heptad (GATA2, LYL1, TAL1,
FLI1, ERG, RUNX1, LMO2) binding to MEG-associated cis-regulatory modules (CRMs)
in multipotential progenitors. This is followed by genome-wide GATA factor
switching that mediates further induction of MEG-specific genes following lineage
commitment. Interaction between GATA and ETS factors appears to be a key
determinant of these processes. In contrast, ERY-specific lineage priming is
biased toward GATA2-independent mechanisms. In addition to its role in MEG
lineage priming, GATA2 plays an extensive role in late megakaryopoiesis as a
transcriptional repressor at loci defined by a specific DNA signature. Our
findings reveal important new insights into how ERY and MEG lineages arise from a
common bipotential progenitor via overlapping and divergent functions of shared
hematopoietic transcription factors.

© 2014 Pimkin et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4248311
PMID: 25319996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Genome Res. 2014 Dec;24(12):1945-62. doi: 10.1101/gr.164830.113. Epub 2014 Oct
15.

Dynamic shifts in occupancy by TAL1 are guided by GATA factors and drive
large-scale reprogramming of gene expression during hematopoiesis.

Wu W(1), Morrissey CS(1), Keller CA(1), Mishra T(1), Pimkin M(2), Blobel GA(3),
Weiss MJ(3), Hardison RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA; (2)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; (3)Division of Hematology,
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA;
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

We used mouse ENCODE data along with complementary data from other laboratories
to study the dynamics of occupancy and the role in gene regulation of the
transcription factor TAL1, a critical regulator of hematopoiesis, at multiple
stages of hematopoietic differentiation. We combined ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data in
six mouse cell types representing a progression from multilineage precursors to
differentiated erythroblasts and megakaryocytes. We found that sites of occupancy
shift dramatically during commitment to the erythroid lineage, vary further
during terminal maturation, and are strongly associated with changes in gene
expression. In multilineage progenitors, the likely target genes are enriched for
hematopoietic growth and functions associated with the mature cells of specific
daughter lineages (such as megakaryocytes). In contrast, target genes in
erythroblasts are specifically enriched for red cell functions. Furthermore,
shifts in TAL1 occupancy during erythroid differentiation are associated with
gene repression (dissociation) and induction (co-occupancy with GATA1). Based on 
both enrichment for transcription factor binding site motifs and co-occupancy
determined by ChIP-seq, recruitment by GATA transcription factors appears to be a
stronger determinant of TAL1 binding to chromatin than the canonical E-box
binding site motif. Studies of additional proteins lead to the model that TAL1
regulates expression after being directed to a distinct subset of genomic binding
sites in each cell type via its association with different complexes containing
master regulators such as GATA2, ERG, and RUNX1 in multilineage cells and the
lineage-specific master regulator GATA1 in erythroblasts.

© 2014 Wu et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4248312
PMID: 25319994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Microb Cell Fact. 2014 Oct 12;13:145. doi: 10.1186/s12934-014-0145-9.

Development of a GIN11/FRT-based multiple-gene integration technique affording
inhibitor-tolerant, hemicellulolytic, xylose-utilizing abilities to industrial
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains for ethanol production from undetoxified
lignocellulosic hemicelluloses.

Hasunuma T(1), Hori Y(2), Sakamoto T(3), Ochiai M(4), Hatanaka H(5), Kondo
A(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Organization of Advanced Science and Technology, Kobe University, 1-1
Rokkodai, Nada, Kobe, 657-8501, Japan. hasunuma@port.kobe-u.ac.jp. (2)Department 
of Chemical Science and Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Kobe
University, 1-1 Rokkodai, Nada, Kobe, 657-8501, Japan.
yoshimi.h@dolphin.kobe-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Chemical Science and
Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai, Nada,
Kobe, 657-8501, Japan. 103t901t@stu.kobe-u.ac.jp. (4)Suntory Research Center,
1-1-1 Wakayamadai, Shimamoto-cho, Osaka, Mishima-gun, 618-8503, Japan.
Misa_Ochiai@suntory.co.jp. (5)Suntory Research Center, 1-1-1 Wakayamadai,
Shimamoto-cho, Osaka, Mishima-gun, 618-8503, Japan.
Haruyo_Hatanaka@suntory.co.jp. (6)Department of Chemical Science and Engineering,
Graduate School of Engineering, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai, Nada, Kobe,
657-8501, Japan. akondo@kobe-u.ac.jp. (7)Biomass Engineering Program, RIKEN,
1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan.
akondo@kobe-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Bioethanol produced by the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is
currently one of the most promising alternatives to conventional transport fuels.
Lignocellulosic hemicelluloses obtained after hydrothermal pretreatment are
important feedstock for bioethanol production. However, hemicellulosic materials 
cannot be directly fermented by yeast: xylan backbone of hemicelluloses must
first be hydrolyzed by heterologous hemicellulases to release xylose, and the
yeast must then ferment xylose in the presence of fermentation inhibitors
generated during the pretreatment.
RESULTS: A GIN11/FRT-based multiple-gene integration system was developed for
introducing multiple functions into the recombinant S. cerevisiae strains
engineered with the xylose metabolic pathway. Antibiotic markers were efficiently
recycled by a novel counter selection strategy using galactose-induced expression
of both FLP recombinase gene and GIN11 flanked by FLP recombinase recognition
target (FRT) sequences. Nine genes were functionally expressed in an industrial
diploid strain of S. cerevisiae: endoxylanase gene from Trichoderma reesei,
xylosidase gene from Aspergillus oryzae, ß-glucosidase gene from Aspergillus
aculeatus, xylose reductase and xylitol dehydrogenase genes from Scheffersomyces 
stipitis, and XKS1, TAL1, FDH1 and ADH1 variant from S. cerevisiae. The genes
were introduced using the homozygous integration system and afforded
hemicellulolytic, xylose-assimilating and inhibitor-tolerant abilities to the
strain. The engineered yeast strain demonstrated 2.7-fold higher ethanol titer
from hemicellulosic material than a xylose-assimilating yeast strain.
Furthermore, hemicellulolytic enzymes displayed on the yeast cell surface
hydrolyzed hemicelluloses that were not hydrolyzed by a commercial enzyme,
leading to increased sugar utilization for improved ethanol production.
CONCLUSIONS: The multifunctional yeast strain, developed using a GIN11/FRT-based 
marker recycling system, achieved direct conversion of hemicellulosic biomass to 
ethanol without the addition of exogenous hemicellulolytic enzymes. No
detoxification processes were required. The multiple-gene integration technique
is a powerful approach for introducing and improving the biomass fermentation
ability of industrial diploid S. cerevisiae strains.

PMCID: PMC4198627
PMID: 25306430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Haematologica. 2015 Jan;100(1):e10-3. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.112151. Epub
2014 Oct 10.

Clinical features and outcome of SIL/TAL1-positive T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia in children and adolescents: a 10-year experience of the AIEOP group.

D'Angiò M(1), Valsecchi MG(2), Testi AM(3), Conter V(4), Nunes V(1), Parasole
R(5), Colombini A(4), Santoro N(6), Varotto S(7), Caniglia M(8), Silvestri D(9), 
Consarino C(10), Levati L(11), Magrin E(7), Locatelli F(12), Basso G(7), Foà
R(1), Biondi A(4), Cazzaniga G(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology, University Sapienza,
Roma. (2)Center of Biostatistics for Clinical Epidemiology, Department of Health 
Sciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano. (3)Department of Cellular
Biotechnologies and Hematology, University Sapienza, Roma testi@bce.uniroma1.it. 
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Milano-Bicocca, Ospedale S. Gerardo / 
Fondazione MBBM, Monza. (5)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Ospedale
Pausilipon, Napoli. (6)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, University of
Bari. (7)Department of Woman and Child Health, Hemato-Oncology Division,
University of Padova, Azienda Ospedale Padova. (8)Department of Pediatric
Hemato-Oncology, Ospedale S.M. della Misericordia, Perugia. (9)Center of
Biostatistics for Clinical Epidemiology, Department of Health Sciences,
University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano Department of Pediatrics, University of
Milano-Bicocca, Ospedale S. Gerardo / Fondazione MBBM, Monza. (10)Department of
Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Ospedale Pugliese-Ciaccio, Catanzaro. (11)Centro
Ricerca Tettamanti, Department of Pediatrics, Department of Health Sciences,
University of Milano-Bicocca, Ospedale S. Gerardo / Fondazione MBBM, Monza.
(12)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, IRCCS Ospedale Bambino Gesù, Roma.

PMCID: PMC4281327
PMID: 25304610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Blood. 2014 Dec 11;124(25):3738-47. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-05-574566. Epub 2014 
Oct 9.

ABT-199 mediated inhibition of BCL-2 as a novel therapeutic strategy in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Peirs S(1), Matthijssens F(1), Goossens S(2), Van de Walle I(3), Ruggero K(4), de
Bock CE(5), Degryse S(5), Canté-Barrett K(6), Briot D(7), Clappier E(7), Lammens 
T(8), De Moerloose B(8), Benoit Y(8), Poppe B(1), Meijerink JP(6), Cools J(5),
Soulier J(7), Rabbitts TH(4), Taghon T(3), Speleman F(1), Van Vlierberghe P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics. (2)Flanders Institute for Biotechnology
Inflammation Research Center, and. (3)Department of Clinical Chemistry,
Microbiology and Immunology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium; (4)Medical
Research Council Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular
Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, England, United 
Kingdom; (5)Laboratory for the Molecular Biology of Leukemia, Center for Human
Genetics, University of Leuven and Center for the Biology of Disease, Vlaams
Instituut voor Biotechnologie, Leuven, Belgium; (6)Department of Pediatric
Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;
(7)Genome Rearrangements and Cancer Laboratory, U462 INSERM, Laboratoire Central 
d'Hématologie and Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Hopital Saint-Louis,
Paris, France; and. (8)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology and Stem Cell 
Transplantation, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is a high-risk subtype of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with gradually improved survival through
introduction of intensified chemotherapy. However, therapy-resistant or
refractory T-ALL remains a major clinical challenge. Here, we evaluated B-cell
lymphoma (BCL)-2 inhibition by the BH3 mimetic ABT-199 as a new therapeutic
strategy in human T-ALL. The T-ALL cell line LOUCY, which shows a transcriptional
program related to immature T-ALL, exhibited high in vitro and in vivo
sensitivity for ABT-199 in correspondence with high levels of BCL-2. In addition,
ABT-199 showed synergistic therapeutic effects with different chemotherapeutic
agents including doxorubicin, l-asparaginase, and dexamethasone. Furthermore, in 
vitro analysis of primary patient samples indicated that some immature, TLX3- or 
HOXA-positive primary T-ALLs are highly sensitive to BCL-2 inhibition, whereas
TAL1 driven tumors mostly showed poor ABT-199 responses. Because BCL-2 shows high
expression in early T-cell precursors and gradually decreases during normal
T-cell differentiation, differences in ABT-199 sensitivity could partially be
mediated by distinct stages of differentiation arrest between different molecular
genetic subtypes of human T-ALL. In conclusion, our study highlights BCL-2 as an 
attractive molecular target in specific subtypes of human T-ALL that could be
exploited by ABT-199.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25301704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Ther. 2015 Jan;23(1):158-70. doi: 10.1038/mt.2014.196. Epub 2014 Oct 8.

SCL/TAL1-mediated transcriptional network enhances megakaryocytic specification
of human embryonic stem cells.

Toscano MG(1), Navarro-Montero O(2), Ayllon V(2), Ramos-Mejia V(2),
Guerrero-Carreno X(2), Bueno C(3), Romero T(2), Lamolda M(2), Cobo M(4), Martin
F(4), Menendez P(5), Real PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Genomic Medicine Department, GENYO, Centre for Genomics and Oncological
Research, Pfizer-University of Granada-Andalusian Regional Government, PTS
Granada, Granada, Spain [2] Current address: Amarna Therapeutics SL. Seville,
Spain. (2)Genomic Oncology Department, GENYO, Centre for Genomics and Oncological
Research, Pfizer-University of Granada-Andalusian Regional Government, PTS
Granada, Granada, Spain. (3)1] Genomic Oncology Department, GENYO, Centre for
Genomics and Oncological Research, Pfizer-University of Granada-Andalusian
Regional Government, PTS Granada, Granada, Spain [2] Josep Carreras Leukemia
Research Institute and Cell Therapy Program, Facultat de Medicina, University of 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Genomic Medicine Department, GENYO, Centre for
Genomics and Oncological Research, Pfizer-University of Granada-Andalusian
Regional Government, PTS Granada, Granada, Spain. (5)1] Genomic Oncology
Department, GENYO, Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research,
Pfizer-University of Granada-Andalusian Regional Government, PTS Granada,
Granada, Spain [2] Josep Carreras Leukemia Research Institute and Cell Therapy
Program, Facultat de Medicina, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain [3]
Instituciò Catalana de Reserca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are a unique in vitro model for studying human
developmental biology and represent a potential source for cell replacement
strategies. Platelets can be generated from cord blood progenitors and hESCs;
however, the molecular mechanisms and determinants controlling the in vitro
megakaryocytic specification of hESCs remain elusive. We have recently shown that
stem cell leukemia (SCL) overexpression accelerates the emergence of
hemato-endothelial progenitors from hESCs and promotes their subsequent
differentiation into blood cells with higher clonogenic potential. Given that SCL
participates in megakaryocytic commitment, we hypothesized that it may potentiate
megakaryopoiesis from hESCs. We show that ectopic SCL expression enhances the
emergence of megakaryocytic precursors, mature megakaryocytes (MKs), and
platelets in vitro. SCL-overexpressing MKs and platelets respond to different
activating stimuli similar to their control counterparts. Gene expression
profiling of megakaryocytic precursors shows that SCL overexpression renders a
megakaryopoietic molecular signature. Connectivity Map analysis reveals that
trichostatin A (TSA) and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), both histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, functionally mimic SCL-induced effects. Finally,
we confirm that both TSA and SAHA treatment promote the emergence of CD34(+)
progenitors, whereas valproic acid, another HDAC inhibitor, potentiates MK and
platelet production. We demonstrate that SCL and HDAC inhibitors are
megakaryopoiesis regulators in hESCs.

PMCID: PMC4426806
PMID: 25292191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Development. 2014 Oct;141(20):4018-30. doi: 10.1242/dev.115709. Epub 2014 Sep 24.

Single-cell analyses of regulatory network perturbations using enhancer-targeting
TALEs suggest novel roles for PU.1 during haematopoietic specification.

Wilkinson AC(1), Kawata VK(2), Schütte J(1), Gao X(3), Antoniou S(4), Baumann
C(4), Woodhouse S(1), Hannah R(1), Tanaka Y(1), Swiers G(4), Moignard V(1),
Fisher J(5), Hidetoshi S(6), Tijssen MR(7), de Bruijn MF(4), Liu P(3), Göttgens
B(8).

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and Wellcome Trust-MRC Cambridge Stem
Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.
(2)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and Wellcome Trust-MRC Cambridge Stem
Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK
Division of Periodontology and Endodontology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Dentistry, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. (3)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. (4)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute
of Molecular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital,
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK. (5)Microsoft Research Cambridge, 21
Station Road, Cambridge CB1 2FB, UK Department of Biochemistry, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QW, UK. (6)Division of Periodontology and
Endodontology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Dentistry, Sendai 980-8575,
Japan. (7)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge and National Health 
Service Blood and Transplant, Cambridge CB2 0PT, UK. (8)Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research and Wellcome Trust-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University
of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK bg200@cam.ac.uk.

Transcription factors (TFs) act within wider regulatory networks to control cell 
identity and fate. Numerous TFs, including Scl (Tal1) and PU.1 (Spi1), are known 
regulators of developmental and adult haematopoiesis, but how they act within
wider TF networks is still poorly understood. Transcription activator-like
effectors (TALEs) are a novel class of genetic tool based on the modular
DNA-binding domains of Xanthomonas TAL proteins, which enable DNA
sequence-specific targeting and the manipulation of endogenous gene expression.
Here, we report TALEs engineered to target the PU.1-14kb and Scl+40kb
transcriptional enhancers as efficient new tools to perturb the expression of
these key haematopoietic TFs. We confirmed the efficiency of these TALEs at the
single-cell level using high-throughput RT-qPCR, which also allowed us to assess 
the consequences of both PU.1 activation and repression on wider TF networks
during developmental haematopoiesis. Combined with comprehensive cellular assays,
these experiments uncovered novel roles for PU.1 during early haematopoietic
specification. Finally, transgenic mouse studies confirmed that the PU.1-14kb
element is active at sites of definitive haematopoiesis in vivo and PU.1 is
detectable in haemogenic endothelium and early committing blood cells. We
therefore establish TALEs as powerful new tools to study the functionality of
transcriptional networks that control developmental processes such as early
haematopoiesis.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197694
PMID: 25252941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Leukemia. 2015 Apr;29(4):798-806. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.276. Epub 2014 Sep 18.

MicroRNA-193b-3p acts as a tumor suppressor by targeting the MYB oncogene in
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Mets E(1), Van der Meulen J(1), Van Peer G(1), Boice M(2), Mestdagh P(1), Van de 
Walle I(3), Lammens T(4), Goossens S(5), De Moerloose B(4), Benoit Y(4), Van Roy 
N(1), Clappier E(6), Poppe B(1), Vandesompele J(1), Wendel HG(2), Taghon T(3),
Rondou P(1), Soulier J(6), Van Vlierberghe P(1), Speleman F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. (2)Cancer
Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. 
(3)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. (4)Department of Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Ghent University Hospital,
Ghent, Belgium. (5)VIB/Department for Molecular Biomedical Research, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium. (6)Genome Rearrangements and Cancer Laboratory, U462 
INSERM, Laboratoire Central d'Hématologie and Institut Universitaire
d'Hématologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France.

The MYB oncogene is a leucine zipper transcription factor essential for normal
and malignant hematopoiesis. In T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL),
elevated MYB levels can arise directly through T-cell receptor-mediated MYB
translocations, genomic MYB duplications or enhanced TAL1 complex binding at the 
MYB locus or indirectly through the TAL1/miR-223/FBXW7 regulatory axis. In this
study, we used an unbiased MYB 3'untranslated region-microRNA (miRNA) library
screen and identified 33 putative MYB-targeting miRNAs. Subsequently,
transcriptome data from two independent T-ALL cohorts and different subsets of
normal T-cells were used to select miRNAs with relevance in the context of normal
and malignant T-cell transformation. Hereby, miR-193b-3p was identified as a
novel bona fide tumor-suppressor miRNA that targets MYB during malignant T-cell
transformation thereby offering an entry point for efficient MYB
targeting-oriented therapies for human T-ALL.

PMID: 25231743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Dev Cell. 2014 Sep 29;30(6):660-72. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.07.008. Epub 2014 
Sep 11.

Cpeb4-mediated translational regulatory circuitry controls terminal erythroid
differentiation.

Hu W(1), Yuan B(2), Lodish HF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
Electronic address: whu@wi.mit.edu. (2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of Biology and Department of
Bioengineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

While we have considerable understanding of the transcriptional networks
controlling mammalian cell differentiation, our knowledge of posttranscriptional 
regulatory events is very limited. Using differentiation of primary erythroid
cells as a model, we show that the sequence-specific mRNA-binding protein Cpeb4
is strongly induced by the erythroid-important transcription factors Gata1 and
Tal1 and is essential for terminal erythropoiesis. By interacting with the
translation initiation factor eIF3, Cpeb4 represses the translation of a large
set of mRNAs, including its own mRNA. Thus, transcriptional induction and
translational repression combine to form a negative feedback loop to control
Cpeb4 protein levels within a specific range that is required for terminal
erythropoiesis. Our study provides an example of how translational control is
integrated with transcriptional regulation to precisely control gene expression
during mammalian cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4182162
PMID: 25220394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Circulation. 2014 Sep 30;130(14):1168-78. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.007727.
Epub 2014 Sep 3.

Direct conversion of adult skin fibroblasts to endothelial cells by defined
factors.

Han JK(1), Chang SH(1), Cho HJ(1), Choi SB(1), Ahn HS(1), Lee J(1), Jeong H(1),
Youn SW(1), Lee HJ(1), Kwon YW(1), Cho HJ(1), Oh BH(1), Oettgen P(1), Park YB(1),
Kim HS(2).

Author information: 
(1)From National Research Laboratory for Cardiovascular Stem Cell, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea (J-K.H., S-H.C, Hyun-Ju 
C., S-B.C., H-S.A., J.L., H.J., S-W.Y., H-J.L., Y-W.K., Hyun-Jai C., B-H.O.,
Y-B.P., H-S.K.); Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea (J-K.H., Hyun-Jai C., B-H.O.,
Y-B.P., H-S.K.); Center for Vascular Biology Research, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (P.O.); and Molecular Medicine
& Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
(H-S.K.). (2)From National Research Laboratory for Cardiovascular Stem Cell,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea (J-K.H., 
S-H.C, Hyun-Ju C., S-B.C., H-S.A., J.L., H.J., S-W.Y., H-J.L., Y-W.K., Hyun-Jai
C., B-H.O., Y-B.P., H-S.K.); Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea (J-K.H., Hyun-Jai C.,
B-H.O., Y-B.P., H-S.K.); Center for Vascular Biology Research, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (P.O.); and
Molecular Medicine & Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea (H-S.K.). hyosoo@snu.ac.kr.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2014 Sep 30;130(14):1136-8.

BACKGROUND: Cell-based therapies to augment endothelial cells (ECs) hold great
therapeutic promise. Here, we report a novel approach to generate functional ECs 
directly from adult fibroblasts.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Eleven candidate genes that are key regulators of
endothelial development were selected. Green fluorescent protein (GFP)-negative
skin fibroblasts were prepared from Tie2-GFP mice and infected with lentiviruses 
allowing simultaneous overexpression of all 11 factors. Tie2-GFP(+) cells (0.9%),
representing Tie2 gene activation, were detected by flow cytometry. Serial
stepwise screening revealed 5 key factors (Foxo1, Er71, Klf2, Tal1, and Lmo2)
that were required for efficient reprogramming of skin fibroblasts into
Tie2-GFP(+) cells (4%). This reprogramming strategy did not involve pluripotency 
induction because neither Oct4 nor Nanog was expressed after 5 key factor
transduction. Tie2-GFP(+) cells were isolated using fluorescence-activated cell
sorting and designated as induced ECs (iECs). iECs exhibited endothelium-like
cobblestone morphology and expressed EC molecular markers. iECs possessed
endothelial functions such as Bandeiraea simplicifolia-1 lectin binding,
acetylated low-density lipoprotein uptake, capillary formation on Matrigel, and
nitric oxide production. The epigenetic profile of iECs was similar to that of
authentic ECs because the promoters of VE-cadherin and Tie2 genes were
demethylated. mRNA profiling showed clustering of iECs with authentic ECs and
highly enriched endothelial genes in iECs. In a murine model of hind-limb
ischemia, iEC implantation increased capillary density and enhanced limb
perfusion, demonstrating the in vivo viability and functionality of iECs.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated the first direct conversion of adult fibroblasts to 
functional ECs. These results suggest a novel therapeutic modality for cell
therapy in ischemic vascular disease.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25186941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biotechnol Biofuels. 2014 Aug 20;7(1):122. doi: 10.1186/s13068-014-0122-x.
eCollection 2014.

Systematic and evolutionary engineering of a xylose isomerase-based pathway in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae for efficient conversion yields.

Lee SM(1), Jellison T(2), Alper HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)McKetta Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin,
200 E Dean Keeton Street, Stop C0400, Austin, TX 78712 USA ; Clean Energy
Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, 39-1 Hawolgok-dong,
Seoul, 136-791 Seongbuk-gu Korea. (2)McKetta Department of Chemical Engineering, 
The University of Texas at Austin, 200 E Dean Keeton Street, Stop C0400, Austin, 
TX 78712 USA. (3)McKetta Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of
Texas at Austin, 200 E Dean Keeton Street, Stop C0400, Austin, TX 78712 USA ;
Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, 
2500 Speedway Avenue, Austin, TX 78712 USA.

BACKGROUND: Efficient xylose fermentation by yeast would improve the economical
and sustainable nature of biofuels production from lignocellulosic biomass.
However, the efficiency of xylose fermentation by the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae is suboptimal, especially in conversion yield, despite decades of
research. Here, we present an improved performance of S. cerevisiae in xylose
fermentation through systematic and evolutionary engineering approaches.
RESULTS: The engineering of S. cerevisiae harboring xylose isomerase-based
pathway significantly improved the xylose fermentation performance without the
need for intensive downstream pathway engineering. This strain contained two
integrated copies of a mutant xylose isomerase, gre3 and pho13 deletion and XKS1 
and S. stipitis tal1 overexpression. This strain was subjected to rapid adaptive 
evolution to yield the final, evolved strain (SXA-R2P-E) which could efficiently 
convert xylose to ethanol with a yield of 0.45 g ethanol/g xylose, the highest
yield reported to date. The xylose consumption and ethanol production rates,
0.98 g xylose g cell(-1) h(-1) and 0.44 g ethanol g cell(-1) h(-1), respectively,
were also among the highest reported. During this process, the positive effect of
a pho13 deletion was identified for a xylose isomerase-containing strain and
resulted in up to an 8.2-fold increase in aerobic growth rate on xylose.
Moreover, these results demonstrated that low inoculum size and the cell transfer
at exponential phase was found to be the most effective adaptation strategy
during a batch culture adaptation process.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the xylose isomerase pathway should be
the pathway of choice for efficient xylose fermentation in S. cerevisiae as it
can outperform strains with the oxidoreductase pathway in terms of yield and
ethanol production and xylose consumption rates. Consequently, the strain
developed in this study could significantly improve the prospect of biofuels
production from lignocellulosic biomass.

PMCID: PMC4147937
PMID: 25170344  [PubMed]


79. Dev Dyn. 2014 Dec;243(12):1544-53. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24181. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Ncor1 and Ncor2 play essential but distinct roles in zebrafish primitive
myelopoiesis.

Li J(1), Li K, Dong X, Liang D, Zhao Q.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Model Animal for Disease Study, Model Animal Research
Center, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China; Maternal and Child Health Medical
Institute, Nanjing Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Although Ncor1 and Ncor2, the co-repressors that can actively repress
gene transcription through binding nuclear receptors in the absence of ligands,
are crucial to vertebrate embryogenesis, their roles in its primitive
myelopoiesis remain unknown. We investigated the function of ncor1 or ncor2 in
zebrafish embryos by antisense morpholino knocking down technologies.
RESULTS: Development of both mfap4(+) macrophages and mpx(+) neutrophils was
abolished in ncor2 morphants, whereas development of mpx(+) neutrophils was
depleted in ncor1 morphants. ncor2 was essential to the development of spi1b(+)
myeloid precursors but not anterior hemangioblasts whereas ncor1 was dispensable 
to the specification of spi1b(+) myeloid precursors and anterior hemangioblasts. 
Overexpressing spi1b could partially rescue expressions of mfap4 and mpx in ncor2
morphants. Furthermore, overexpressing tal1/lmo2 could well rescue the defective 
myelopoiesis in both ncor1 and ncor2 morphants.
CONCLUSIONS: Ncor1 and Ncor2 play essential but distinct roles in zebrafish
primitive myelopoiesis. ncor2 could parallel with tal1/lmo2 and acted upstream of
spi1b to produce mature macrophages and neutrophils during primitive
myelopoiesis. The role of ncor1 in zebrafish myelopoiesis could be substituted by
excessive Tal1/Lmo2.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25156564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Haematologica. 2014 Oct;99(10):e205-7. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.104844. Epub
2014 Aug 1.

Mice over-expressing human erythropoietin indicate that erythropoietin enhances
expression of its receptor via up-regulated Gata1 and Tal1.

Deindl P(1), Klar M(2), Drews D(2), Cremer M(2), Gammella E(3), Gassmann M(4),
Dame C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany
Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care Medicine, University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. (2)Department of Neonatology, Charité 
- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany. (3)Department of Biomedical Sciences for
Health, University of Milano, Italyand. (4)Institute of Veterinary Physiology and
Zurich Center for Human Integrative Physiology (ZIHP), University of Zürich,
Switzerland. (5)Department of Neonatology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Germany christof.dame@charite.de.

PMCID: PMC4181272
PMID: 25085352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Nat Commun. 2014 Jul 14;5:4372. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5372.

Direct induction of haematoendothelial programs in human pluripotent stem cells
by transcriptional regulators.

Elcheva I(1), Brok-Volchanskaya V(1), Kumar A(1), Liu P(1), Lee JH(1), Tong L(1),
Vodyanik M(1), Swanson S(2), Stewart R(2), Kyba M(3), Yakubov E(4), Cooke J(4),
Thomson JA(5), Slukvin I(6).

Author information: 
(1)National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin Graduate School,
1220 Capitol Court, Madison, Wisconsin 53715, USA. (2)Morgridge Institute for
Research, 330 N. Orchard Street, Madison, Wisconsin 53715, USA. (3)Lillehei Heart
Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. (4)Center 
for Cardiovascular Regeneration, Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Houston
Methodist Research Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (5)1] Morgridge
Institute for Research, 330 N. Orchard Street, Madison, Wisconsin 53715, USA [2] 
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53707-7365, USA [3] Department of 
Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of California, Santa
Barbara, California 93106, USA. (6)1] National Primate Research Center,
University of Wisconsin Graduate School, 1220 Capitol Court, Madison, Wisconsin
53715, USA [2] Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53707-7365,
USA [3] Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin 
Medical School, 600 Highland Avenue, Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA.

Advancing pluripotent stem cell technologies for modelling haematopoietic stem
cell development and blood therapies requires identifying key regulators of
haematopoietic commitment from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). Here, by
screening the effect of 27 candidate factors, we reveal two groups of
transcriptional regulators capable of inducing distinct haematopoietic programs
from hPSCs: pan-myeloid (ETV2 and GATA2) and erythro-megakaryocytic (GATA2 and
TAL1). In both cases, these transcription factors directly convert hPSCs to
endothelium, which subsequently transform into blood cells with pan-myeloid or
erythro-megakaryocytic potential. These data demonstrate that two distinct
genetic programs regulate the haematopoietic development from hPSCs and that both
of these programs specify hPSCs directly to haemogenic endothelial cells. In
addition, this study provides a novel method for the efficient induction of blood
and endothelial cells from hPSCs via the overexpression of modified mRNA for the 
selected transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4107340
PMID: 25019369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Dev Biol. 2014 Sep 1;393(1):71-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.06.019. Epub 2014
Jun 28.

Transcriptional inhibition of etv2 expression is essential for embryonic cardiac 
development.

Schupp MO(1), Waas M(2), Chun CZ(3), Ramchandran R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Wisconsin, Department of Pediatrics, CRI Developmental
Vascular Biology Program, Translational and Biomedical Research Center, CRI
C3420, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, P.O. Box 26509, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Hypertension and Renal Transplantation, Room CG-98,
1600 Archer Road, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. (3)Medical
College of Wisconsin, Department of Pediatrics, CRI Developmental Vascular
Biology Program, Translational and Biomedical Research Center, CRI C3420, 8701
Watertown Plank Road, P.O. Box 26509, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA; Division of
Nephrology, Hypertension and Renal Transplantation, Room CG-98, 1600 Archer Road,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. (4)Medical College of
Wisconsin, Department of Pediatrics, CRI Developmental Vascular Biology Program, 
Translational and Biomedical Research Center, CRI C3420, 8701 Watertown Plank
Road, P.O. Box 26509, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. Electronic address:
rramchan@mcw.edu.

E-twenty six variant 2 (Etv2) transcription factor participates in cardiac,
vascular-endothelial and blood cell lineage specification decisions during
embryonic development. Previous studies have identified genomic elements in the
etv2 locus responsible for vascular endothelial cell specification. Using
transgenic analysis in zebrafish, we report here an etv2 proximal promoter
fragment that prevents transgene misexpression in myocardial progenitor cells.
This inhibition of etv2 expression in the cardiac progenitor population is partly
mediated by Scl and Nkx2.5, likely through direct binding to the etv2 promoter,
and cis-regulatory elements located in the first and second introns. The results 
identify an etv2 cis-regulatory mechanism controlling cardiovascular fate choice 
implying that etv2 participates in a transcriptional network mediating
developmental plasticity of endothelial progenitor cells during embryonic
development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4137469
PMID: 24984259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Biotechnol Lett. 2014 Oct;36(10):2011-21. doi: 10.1007/s10529-014-1581-7. Epub
2014 Jun 26.

Synergistic effects of TAL1 over-expression and PHO13 deletion on the weak acid
inhibition of xylose fermentation by industrial Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain.

Li YC(1), Gou ZX, Liu ZS, Tang YQ, Akamatsu T, Kida K.

Author information: 
(1)College of Light Industry Textile and Food Engineering, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, 610064, Sichuan, China.

In the industrial production of bioethanol from lignocellulosic biomass, a strain
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae that can ferment xylose in the presence of inhibitors
is of utmost importance. The recombinant, industrial-flocculating S. cerevisiae
strain NAPX37, which can ferment xylose, was used as the parent to delete the
gene encoding p-nitrophenylphosphatase (PHO13) and overexpress the gene encoding 
transaldolase (TAL1) to evaluate the synergistic effects of these two genes on
xylose fermentation in the presence of weak acid inhibitors, including formic,
acetic, or levulinic acids. TAL1 over-expression or PHO13 deletion improved
xylose fermentation as well as the tolerance of NAPX37 to all three weak acids.
The simultaneous deletion of PHO13 and the over-expression of TAL1 had
synergistic effects and improved ethanol production and reduction of xylitol
accumulation in the absence and presence of weak acid inhibitors.

PMID: 24966040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Dev Biol. 2014 Sep 1;393(1):149-59. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.06.011. Epub 2014
Jun 20.

Distinct regulation of the anterior and posterior myeloperoxidase expression by
Etv2 and Gata1 during primitive Granulopoiesis in zebrafish.

Glenn NO(1), Schumacher JA(1), Kim HJ(1), Zhao EJ(1), Skerniskyte J(1), Sumanas
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children<U+05F3>s Hospital Medical
Center, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (2)Division of Developmental
Biology, Cincinnati Children<U+05F3>s Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave.,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. Electronic address: saulius.sumanas@cchmc.org.

Neutrophilic granulocytes are the most abundant type of myeloid cells and form an
essential part of the innate immune system. In vertebrates the first neutrophils 
are thought to originate during primitive hematopoiesis, which precedes
hematopoietic stem cell formation. In zebrafish embryos, it has been suggested
that primitive neutrophils may originate in two distinct sites, the anterior
(ALPM) and posterior lateral plate mesoderm (PLPM). An ETS-family transcription
factor Etsrp/Etv2/ER71 has been implicated in vasculogenesis and hematopoiesis in
multiple vertebrates. However, its role during neutrophil development is not well
understood. Here we demonstrate using zebrafish embryos that Etv2 has a specific 
cell-autonomous function during primitive neutropoiesis in the anterior lateral
plate mesoderm (ALPM) but has little effect on erythropoiesis or the posterior
lateral plate mesoderm (PLPM) expression of neutrophil marker myeloperoxidase
mpo/mpx. Our results argue that ALPM-derived neutrophils originate from
etv2-expressing cells which downregulate etv2 during neutropoiesis. We further
show that Scl functions downstream of Etv2 in anterior neutropoiesis.
Additionally, we demonstrate that mpx expression within the PLPM overlaps with
gata1 expression, potentially marking the cells with a dual myelo-erythroid
potential. Intriguingly, initiation of mpx expression in the PLPM is dependent on
gata1 but not etv2 function. Our results demonstrate that mpx expression is
controlled differently in the ALPM and PLPM regions and describe novel roles for 
etv2 and gata1 during primitive neutropoiesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4134770
PMID: 24956419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Genome Med. 2014 Apr 30;6(4):34. doi: 10.1186/gm551. eCollection 2014.

Early aberrant DNA methylation events in a mouse model of acute myeloid leukemia.

Sonnet M(1), Claus R(2), Becker N(3), Zucknick M(3), Petersen J(1), Lipka DB(1), 
Oakes CC(1), Andrulis M(4), Lier A(5), Milsom MD(5), Witte T(1), Gu L(6),
Kim-Wanner SZ(1), Schirmacher P(4), Wulfert M(7), Gattermann N(7), Lübbert M(8), 
Rosenbauer F(9), Rehli M(10), Bullinger L(11), Weichenhan D(1), Plass C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Department of Epigenomics and
Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany ; Department of Hematology/Oncology, University Medical Center, D-79106
Freiburg, Germany. (3)Division of Biostatistics, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Department of General Pathology,
Institute of Pathology, University Heidelberg, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Division of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Department of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk
Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany ;
Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (7)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Clinical
Immunology, Heinrich-Heine University, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany. (8)Department
of Hematology/Oncology, University Medical Center, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany.
(9)Institute of Molecular Tumor Biology, Westfälische Wilhelms Universität,
D-48149 Münster, Germany. (10)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University
Hospital Regensburg, D-93042 Regensburg, Germany. (11)Department of Internal
Medicine III, University of Ulm, D-89081 Ulm, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation is frequently found in human malignancies
including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). While most studies focus on later disease
stages, the onset of aberrant DNA methylation events and their dynamics during
leukemic progression are largely unknown.
METHODS: We screened genome-wide for aberrant CpG island methylation in three
disease stages of a murine AML model that is driven by hypomorphic expression of 
the hematopoietic transcription factor PU.1. DNA methylation levels of selected
genes were correlated with methylation levels of CD34+ cells and lineage
negative, CD127-, c-Kit+, Sca-1+ cells; common myeloid progenitors;
granulocyte-macrophage progenitors; and megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors.
RESULTS: We identified 1,184 hypermethylated array probes covering 762 associated
genes in the preleukemic stage. During disease progression, the number of
hypermethylated genes increased to 5,465 in the late leukemic disease stage.
Using publicly available data, we found a significant enrichment of PU.1 binding 
sites in the preleukemic hypermethylated genes, suggesting that shortage of PU.1 
makes PU.1 binding sites in the DNA accessible for aberrant methylation. Many
known AML associated genes such as RUNX1 and HIC1 were found among the
preleukemic hypermethylated genes. Nine novel hypermethylated genes, FZD5, FZD8, 
PRDM16, ROBO3, CXCL14, BCOR, ITPKA, HES6 and TAL1, the latter four being
potential PU.1 targets, were confirmed to be hypermethylated in human normal
karyotype AML patients, underscoring the relevance of the mouse model for human
AML.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified early aberrantly methylated genes as potential 
contributors to onset and progression of AML.

PMCID: PMC4062060
PMID: 24944583  [PubMed]


86. Blood. 2014 Jul 24;124(4):567-78. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-03-562751. Epub 2014
Jun 5.

PTEN microdeletions in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia are caused by
illegitimate RAG-mediated recombination events.

Mendes RD(1), Sarmento LM(2), Canté-Barrett K(1), Zuurbier L(1), Buijs-Gladdines 
JG(1), Póvoa V(2), Smits WK(1), Abecasis M(3), Yunes JA(4), Sonneveld E(5),
Horstmann MA(6), Pieters R(7), Barata JT(2), Meijerink JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus University Medical
Center-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; (2)Instituto de
Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa,
Portugal; (3)Cardiologia Pediatrica Medico Cirúrgica, Hospital Sta. Cruz, Lisboa,
Portugal; (4)Centro Infantil Boldrini, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil; (5)Dutch
Childhood Oncology Group, The Hague, The Netherlands; (6)German Cooperative Study
Group for Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia, Hamburg, Germany; Research
Institute Children's Cancer Center Hamburg, Clinic of Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany; and.
(7)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus University Medical
Center-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Princess Maxima
Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)-inactivating mutations and/or deletions are
an independent risk factor for relapse of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL) patients treated on Dutch Childhood Oncology Group or German Cooperative 
Study Group for Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia protocols. Some
monoallelic mutated or PTEN wild-type patients lack PTEN protein, implying that
additional PTEN inactivation mechanisms exist. We show that PTEN is inactivated
by small deletions affecting a few exons in 8% of pediatric T-ALL patients. These
microdeletions were clonal in 3% and subclonal in 5% of patients. Conserved
deletion breakpoints are flanked by cryptic recombination signal sequences
(cRSSs) and frequently have non-template-derived nucleotides inserted in between 
breakpoints, pointing to an illegitimate RAG recombination-driven activity.
Identified cRSSs drive RAG-dependent recombination in a reporter system as
efficiently as bona fide RSSs that flank gene segments of the T-cell receptor
locus. Remarkably, equivalent microdeletions were detected in thymocytes of
healthy individuals. Microdeletions strongly associate with the TALLMO subtype
characterized by TAL1 or LMO2 rearrangements. Primary and secondary
xenotransplantation of TAL1-rearranged leukemia allowed development of leukemic
subclones with newly acquired PTEN microdeletions. Ongoing RAG activity may
therefore actively contribute to the acquisition of preleukemic hits, clonal
diversification, and disease progression.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 24904117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nat Commun. 2014 May 29;5:3995. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4995.

PADI4 acts as a coactivator of Tal1 by counteracting repressive histone arginine 
methylation.

Kolodziej S(1), Kuvardina ON(1), Oellerich T(2), Herglotz J(3), Backert I(3),
Kohrs N(1), Buscató El(4), Wittmann SK(4), Salinas-Riester G(5), Bonig H(6),
Karas M(4), Serve H(7), Proschak E(8), Lausen J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 42-44, D-60596 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (2)Department of 
Medicine, Hematology/Oncology, Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (3)1] Georg-Speyer-Haus,
Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy, Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 42-44,
D-60596 Frankfurt am Main, Germany [2]. (4)Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry,
Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 9, D-60438 Frankfurt am
Main, Germany. (5)Medical-University Goettingen, Transcriptome Analysis
Laboratory, Justus-von-Liebig-Weg 11, D-37077 Goettingen, Germany. (6)German Red 
Cross Blood Service and Institute for Transfusion Medicine and Immunohematology, 
Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University, Sandhofstrasse 1, D-60528 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany. (7)1] Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology,
Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, D-60590 Frankfurt am
Main, Germany [2] German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany. (8)1]
Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University,
Max-von-Laue-Strasse 9, D-60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany [2] German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.

The transcription factor Tal1 is a critical activator or repressor of gene
expression in hematopoiesis and leukaemia. The mechanism by which Tal1
differentially influences transcription of distinct genes is not fully
understood. Here we show that Tal1 interacts with the peptidylarginine deiminase 
IV (PADI4). We demonstrate that PADI4 can act as an epigenetic coactivator
through influencing H3R2me2a. At the Tal1/PADI4 target gene IL6ST the repressive 
H3R2me2a mark triggered by PRMT6 is counteracted by PADI4, which augments the
active H3K4me3 mark and thus increases IL6ST expression. In contrast, at the CTCF
promoter PADI4 acts as a repressor. We propose that the influence of PADI4 on
IL6ST transcription plays a role in the control of IL6ST expression during
lineage differentiation of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. These results
open the possibility to pharmacologically influence Tal1 in leukaemia.

PMCID: PMC4050257
PMID: 24874575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Dev Cell. 2014 May 27;29(4):437-53. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.04.012.

Estrogen defines the dorsal-ventral limit of VEGF regulation to specify the
location of the hemogenic endothelial niche.

Carroll KJ(1), Esain V(1), Garnaas MK(2), Cortes M(1), Dovey MC(1), Nissim S(2), 
Frechette GM(1), Liu SY(1), Kwan W(1), Cutting CC(2), Harris JM(1), Gorelick
DA(3), Halpern ME(4), Lawson ND(5), Goessling W(6), North TE(7).

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA. (2)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA. (3)University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(4)Carnegie Institution for Science, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA. (5)University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (6)Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. Electronic address: wgoessling@partners.org.
(7)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. Electronic
address: tnorth@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Genetic control of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) function is
increasingly understood; however, less is known about the interactions specifying
the embryonic hematopoietic niche. Here, we report that 17ß-estradiol (E2)
influences production of runx1+ HSPCs in the AGM region by antagonizing VEGF
signaling and subsequent assignment of hemogenic endothelial (HE) identity.
Exposure to exogenous E2 during vascular niche development significantly
disrupted flk1+ vessel maturation, ephrinB2+ arterial identity, and specification
of scl+ HE by decreasing expression of VEGFAa and downstream arterial
Notch-pathway components; heat shock induction of VEGFAa/Notch rescued
E2-mediated hematovascular defects. Conversely, repression of endogenous E2
activity increased somitic VEGF expression and vascular target regulation,
shifting assignment of arterial/venous fate and HE localization; blocking E2
signaling allowed venous production of scl+/runx1+ cells, independent of arterial
identity acquisition. Together, these data suggest that yolk-derived E2 sets the 
ventral boundary of hemogenic vascular niche specification by antagonizing the
dorsal-ventral regulatory limits of VEGF.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4469361
PMID: 24871948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Curr Opin Hematol. 2014 Jul;21(4):256-64. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000052.

Kit and Scl regulation of hematopoietic stem cells.

Rojas-Sutterlin S(1), Lecuyer E, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)aInstitute of Research in Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal
bMolecular Biology Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of Montreal cInstitut
de Recherches Cliniques de Montreal (IRCM) dDepartment of Biochemistry
eDepartment of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: KIT tyrosine kinase receptor is essential for several tissue
stem cells, especially for hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Moderately decreased 
KIT signaling is well known to cause anemia and defective HSC self-renewal,
whereas gain-of-function mutations are infrequently found in leukemias. Thus,
maintaining KIT signal strength is critically important for homeostasis. KIT
signaling in HSCs involves effectors such as SHP2 and PTPN11. This review
summarizes the recent developments on the novel mechanisms regulating or
reinforcing KIT signal strength in HSCs and its perturbation in polycythemia
vera.
RECENT FINDINGS: Stem cell leukemia (SCL) is a transcription factor that is
essential for HSC development. Genetic experiments indicate that Kit, protein
tyrosine phosphatase, nonreceptor type 11 (Ptpn11), or Scl control long-term HSC 
self-renewal, survival, and quiescence in adults. Kit is now shown to be
centrally involved in two feedforward loops in HSCs, one with Ptpn11 and the
other with Scl.
SUMMARY: Knowledge of the regulatory mechanisms that favor self-renewal divisions
or a lineage determination process is central to the design of strategies to
expand HSCs for the purpose of cell therapy. In addition, transcriptome and
phosphoproteome analyses of erythroblasts in polycythemia vera identified lower
SCL expression and hypophosphorylated KIT, suggesting that the KIT-SCL loop is
relevant to the pathophysiology of human blood disorders as well.

PMID: 24857885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 11;449(4):444-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.048. Epub 2014 May 20.

Characterization of the human oncogene SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus (Stil)
mediated Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling transduction in proliferating mammalian
dopaminergic neurons.

Sun L(1), Carr AL(2), Li P(3), Lee J(3), McGregor M(3), Li L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN
46556, USA; Department of Physiology, Nankai University School of Medicine,
Tianjin 300071, China. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre 
Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA; Center for Zebrafish Research, University of
Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. (3)Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. (4)Department of Biological 
Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA; Center for
Zebrafish Research, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA.
Electronic address: Li.78@nd.edu.

The human oncogene SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus (Stil) is highly conserved in all 
vertebrate species. In humans, the expression of Stil is involved in cancer cell 
survival, apoptosis and proliferation. In this research, we investigated the
roles of Stil expression in cell proliferation of mammalian dopaminergic (DA)
PC12 cells. Stil functions through the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signal transduction
pathway. Co-immunoprecipitation tests revealed that STIL interacts with Shh
downstream components, which include SUFU and GLI1. By examining the expression
of Stil, Gli1, CyclinD2 (cell-cycle marker) and PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear 
antigen), we found that up-regulation of Stil expression (transfection with
overexpression plasmids) increased Shh signaling transduction and PC12 cell
proliferation, whereas down-regulation of Stil expression (by shRNA) inhibited
Shh signaling transduction, and thereby decreased PC12 cell proliferation.
Transient transfection of PC12 cells with Stil knockdown or overexpression
plasmids did not affect PC12 cell neural differentiation, further indicating the 
specific roles of Stil in cell proliferation. The results from this research
suggest that Stil may serve as a bio-marker for neurological diseases involved in
DA neurons, such as Parkinson's disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24853807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2014 Oct;111(10):2082-94. doi: 10.1002/bit.25262. Epub 2014
Jul 14.

Dynamic transcription factor activity profiles reveal key regulatory interactions
during megakaryocytic and erythroid differentiation.

Duncan MT(1), Shin S, Wu JJ, Mays Z, Weng S, Bagheri N, Miller WM, Shea LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University,
2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, Illinois, 60208.

The directed differentiation toward erythroid (E) or megakaryocytic (MK) lineages
by the MK-E progenitor (MEP) could enhance the ex vivo generation of red blood
cells and platelets for therapeutic transfusions. The lineage choice at the MEP
bifurcation is controlled in large part by activity within the intracellular
signal transduction network, the output of which determines the activity of
transcription factors (TFs) and ultimately gene expression. Although many TFs
have been implicated, E or MK differentiation is a complex process requiring
multiple days, and the dynamics of TF activities during commitment and terminal
maturation are relatively unexplored. Herein, we applied a living cell array for 
the large-scale, dynamic quantification of TF activities during MEP bifurcation. 
A panel of hematopoietic TFs (GATA-1, GATA-2, SCL/TAL1, FLI-1, NF-E2, PU.1,
c-Myb) was characterized during E and MK differentiation of bipotent K562 cells. 
Dynamic TF activity profiles associated with differentiation towards each lineage
were identified, and validated with previous reports. From these activity
profiles, we show that GATA-1 is an important hub during early hemin- and
PMA-induced differentiation, and reveal several characteristic TF interactions
for E and MK differentiation that confirm regulatory mechanisms documented in the
literature. Additionally, we highlight several novel TF interactions at various
stages of E and MK differentiation. Furthermore, we investigated the mechanism by
which nicotinamide (NIC) promoted terminal MK maturation using an MK-committed
cell line, CHRF-288-11 (CHRF). Concomitant with its enhancement of ploidy, NIC
strongly enhanced the activity of three TFs with known involvement in terminal MK
maturation: FLI-1, NF-E2, and p53. Dynamic profiling of TF activity represents a 
novel tool to complement traditional assays focused on mRNA and protein
expression levels to understand progenitor cell differentiation.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4232189
PMID: 24853077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Feb;56(2):480-91. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.924119. Epub
2014 Jun 12.

Repressed BMP signaling reactivates NKL homeobox gene MSX1 in a T-ALL subset.

Nagel S(1), Ehrentraut S, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ - German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures , Braunschweig , Germany.

In T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), several members of the NK-like
(NKL) homeobox genes are aberrantly expressed. Here, we have analyzed the
activity of NKL homeobox gene MSX1 using pediatric T-ALL in silico data,
detecting overexpression in 11% of patients. Quantification of MSX1 transcripts
in a panel of 24 T-ALL cell lines demonstrated overexpression in two examples.
Comparative expression profiling indicated inhibition of the bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) signaling pathway, which was shown to inhibit MSX1 transcription.
In the LOUCY cell line we identified conspicuous expression of CHRDL1 encoding a 
BMP inhibitor which mediated activation of MSX1. Promoter analyses demonstrated
activation of CHRDL1 by oncogenic PITX1. Furthermore, knockdown and
overexpression studies of hematopoietic transcription factors demonstrated that
GATA2 and FOXC1 mediate activation and GATA3, LEF1, TAL1 and TOX repression of
MSX1 transcription. Collectively, our findings suggest that MSX1 is
physiologically restricted to lymphoid progenitors. The identification of
deregulated BMP signaling may provide novel therapeutic options for the treatment
of T-ALL.

PMID: 24844359  [PubMed - in process]


93. Exp Hematol. 2014 Aug;42(8):637-50. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2014.04.012. Epub 2014 
May 6.

The genome-wide molecular signature of transcription factors in leukemia.

Prange KH(1), Singh AA(1), Martens JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Electronic address: j.martens@ncmls.ru.nl.

Transcription factors control expression of genes essential for the normal
functioning of the hematopoietic system and regulate development of distinct
blood cell types. During leukemogenesis, aberrant regulation of transcription
factors such as RUNX1, CBFß, MLL, C/EBPa, SPI1, GATA, and TAL1 is central to the 
disease. Here, we will discuss the mechanisms of transcription factor
deregulation in leukemia and how in recent years next-generation sequencing
approaches have helped to elucidate the molecular role of many of these
aberrantly expressed transcription factors. We will focus on the complexes in
which these factors reside, the role of posttranslational modification of these
factors, their involvement in setting up higher order chromatin structures, and
their influence on the local epigenetic environment. We suggest that only
comprehensive knowledge on all these aspects will increase our understanding of
aberrant gene expression in leukemia as well as open new entry points for
therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2014 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24814246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 May 1;14(5):644-57. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.03.003.

Trichostatin A enhances vascular repair by injected human endothelial progenitors
through increasing the expression of TAL1-dependent genes.

Palii CG(1), Vulesevic B(2), Fraineau S(3), Pranckeviciene E(3), Griffith AJ(4), 
Chu A(1), Faralli H(3), Li Y(1), McNeill B(5), Sun J(1), Perkins TJ(6), Dilworth 
FJ(3), Perez-Iratxeta C(3), Suuronen EJ(2), Allan DS(1), Brand M(7).

Author information: 
(1)The Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative Medicine Program,
Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON K1H8L6, Canada. (2)Division of
Cardiac Surgery, University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, ON K1Y4W7, Canada;
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON
K1H8L6, Canada. (3)The Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative
Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON K1H8L6, Canada; 
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON
K1H8L6, Canada. (4)The Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative
Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON K1H8L6, Canada; 
Ottawa-Carleton Joint Program in Biomedical Engineering, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, ON K1H 8L6, Canada. (5)Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Ottawa 
Heart Institute, Ottawa, ON K1Y4W7, Canada. (6)The Sprott Center for Stem Cell
Research, Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,
Ottawa, ON K1H8L6, Canada; Ottawa-Carleton Joint Program in Biomedical
Engineering, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8L6, Canada; Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON
K1H8L6, Canada. (7)The Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative
Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON K1H8L6, Canada; 
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON
K1H8L6, Canada. Electronic address: mbrand@ohri.ca.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2014 May 1;14(5):553-4.

A major goal of cell therapy for vascular diseases is to promote
revascularization through the injection of endothelial stem/progenitor cells. The
gene regulatory mechanisms that underlie endothelial progenitor-mediated vascular
repair, however, remain elusive. Here, we identify the transcription factor
TAL1/SCL as a key mediator of the vascular repair function of primary human
endothelial colony-forming cells (ECFCs). Genome-wide analyses in ECFCs
demonstrate that TAL1 activates a transcriptional program that promotes cell
adhesion and migration. At the mechanistic level, we show that TAL1 upregulates
the expression of migratory and adhesion genes through recruitment of the histone
acetyltransferase p300. Based on these findings, we establish a strategy that
enhances the revascularization efficiency of ECFCs after ischemia through ex vivo
priming with the histone deacetylase inhibitor TSA. Thus, small molecule
epigenetics drugs are effective tools for modifying the epigenome of
stem/progenitor cells prior to transplantation as a means to enhance their
therapeutic potential.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24792117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 May 1;14(5):553-4. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.04.018.

Targeting epigenetics to speed up repair.

Soler E(1), Grosveld F(2).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR967 CEA/DSV/iRCM, 92265 Fontenay-aux-Roses, France. Electronic
address: eric.soler@cea.fr. (2)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: f.grosveld@erasmusmc.nl.

Comment on
    Cell Stem Cell. 2014 May 1;14(5):644-57.

In this issue of Cell Stem Cell, Palii et al. reveal that TAL1 is a master
regulator of adhesion and migration networks in human endothelial progenitors and
that ex vivo treatment with the histone deacetylase inhibitor TSA enables their
faster vascularization after ischemic injury.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24792110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Physiol Rep. 2014 Mar 20;2(3):e00261. doi: 10.1002/phy2.261. Print 2014.

Dextran induces differentiation of circulating endothelial progenitor cells.

Obi S(1), Masuda H, Akimaru H, Shizuno T, Yamamoto K, Ando J, Asahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine Science, Tokai University School of
Medicine, Isehara, Japan.

Abstract Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) have been demonstrated to be
effective for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases. However, the
differentiation process from circulation to adhesion has not been clarified
because circulating EPCs rarely attached to dishes in EPC cultures previously.
Here we investigated whether immature circulating EPCs differentiate into mature 
adhesive EPCs in response to dextran. When floating-circulating EPCs derived from
ex vivo expanded human cord blood were cultured with 5% and 10% dextran, they
attached to fibronectin-coated dishes and grew exponentially. The bioactivities
of adhesion, proliferation, migration, tube formation, and differentiated type of
EPC colony formation increased in EPCs exposed to dextran. The surface protein
expression rate of the endothelial markers vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2, ICAM1, VCAM1, and integrin av/ß3 increased in
EPCs exposed to dextran. The mRNA levels of VEGF-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2,
endothelial nitric oxide synthase, MMP9, and VEGF increased in EPCs treated with 
dextran. Those of endothelium-related transcription factors ID1/2, FOXM1, HEY1,
SMAD1, FOSL1, NFkB1, NRF2, HIF1A, EPAS1 increased in dextran-treated EPCs;
however, those of hematopoietic- and antiangiogenic-related transcription factors
TAL1, RUNX1, c-MYB, GATA1/2, ERG, FOXH1, HHEX, SMAD2/3 decreased in
dextran-exposed EPCs. Inhibitor analysis showed that PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and
p38 signal transduction pathways are involved in the differentiation in response 
to dextran. In conclusion, dextran induces differentiation of circulating EPCs in
terms of adhesion, migration, proliferation, and vasculogenesis. The
differentiation mechanism in response to dextran is regulated by multiple signal 
transductions including PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and p38. These findings indicate
that dextran is an effective treatment for EPCs in regenerative medicines.

PMCID: PMC4002241
PMID: 24760515  [PubMed]


97. Exp Hematol. 2014 Jun;42(6):464-76.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2014.03.001. Epub
2014 Mar 7.

Global analysis of induced transcription factors and cofactors identifies Tfdp2
as an essential coregulator during terminal erythropoiesis.

Chen C(1), Lodish HF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. (2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA; Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Electronic address:
lodish@wi.mit.edu.

Key transcriptional regulators of terminal erythropoiesis, such as GATA-binding
factor 1 (GATA1) and T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia protein 1 (TAL1), have
been well characterized, but transcription factors and cofactors and their
expression modulations have not yet been explored on a global scale. Here, we use
global gene expression analysis to identify 28 transcription factors and 19
transcriptional cofactors induced during terminal erythroid differentiation whose
promoters are enriched for binding by GATA1 and TAL1. Utilizing protein-protein
interaction databases to identify cofactors for each transcription factor, we
pinpoint several co-induced pairs, of which E2f2 and its cofactor transcription
factor Dp-2 (Tfdp2) were the most highly induced. TFDP2 is a critical cofactor
required for proper cell cycle control and gene expression. GATA1 and TAL1 are
bound to the regulatory regions of Tfdp2 and upregulate its expression and
knockdown of Tfdp2 results in significantly reduced rates of proliferation as
well as reduced upregulation of many erythroid-important genes. Loss of Tfdp2
also globally inhibits the normal downregulation of many E2F2 target genes,
including those that regulate the cell cycle, causing cells to accumulate in S
phase and resulting in increased erythrocyte size. Our findings highlight the
importance of TFDP2 in coupling the erythroid cell cycle with terminal
differentiation and validate this study as a resource for future work on
elucidating the role of diverse transcription factors and coregulators in
erythropoiesis.

Copyright © 2014 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4071162
PMID: 24607859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Stem Cells. 2014 Mar;32(3):791-801. doi: 10.1002/stem.1598.

Stress hematopoiesis is regulated by the Krüppel-like transcription factor
ZBP-89.

Li X(1), Romain RD, Park D, Scadden DT, Merchant JL, Arnaout MA.

Author information: 
(1)Leukocyte Biology & Inflammation Program, Division of Nephrology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA.

Previous studies have shown that ZBP-89 (Zfp148) plays a critical role in
erythroid lineage development, with its loss at the embryonic stage causing
lethal anemia and thrombocytopenia. Its role in adult hematopoiesis has not been 
described. We now show that conditional deletion of ZBP-89 in adult mouse
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPC) causes anemia and thrombocytopenia
that are transient in the steady state, but readily uncovered following
chemically induced erythro/megakaryopoietic stress. Unexpectedly, stress induced 
by bone marrow transplantation of ZBP89(-/-) HSPC also resulted in a myeloid-to-B
lymphoid lineage switch in bone marrow recipients. The erythroid and myeloid/B
lymphoid lineage anomalies in ZBP89(-/-) HSPC are reproduced in vitro in the
ZBP-89-silenced multipotent hematopoietic cell line FDCP-Mix A4, and are
associated with the upregulation of PU.1 and downregulation of SCL/Tal1 and
GATA-1 in ZBP89-deficient cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and luciferase
reporter assays show that ZBP-89 is a direct repressor of PU.1 and activator of
SCL/Tal1 and GATA-1. These data identify an important role for ZBP-89 in
regulating stress hematopoiesis in adult mouse bone marrow.

© 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3930080
PMID: 24549639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Blood. 2014 Mar 20;123(12):1927-37. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-544494. Epub 2014 
Feb 4.

Lineage and species-specific long noncoding RNAs during erythro-megakaryocytic
development.

Paralkar VR(1), Mishra T, Luan J, Yao Y, Kossenkov AV, Anderson SM, Dunagin M,
Pimkin M, Gore M, Sun D, Konuthula N, Raj A, An X, Mohandas N, Bodine DM,
Hardison RC, Weiss MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA;

Mammals express thousands of long noncoding (lnc) RNAs, a few of which are known 
to function in tissue development. However, the entire repertoire of lncRNAs in
most tissues and species is not defined. Indeed, most lncRNAs are not conserved, 
raising questions about function. We used RNA sequencing to identify 1109
polyadenylated lncRNAs expressed in erythroblasts, megakaryocytes, and
megakaryocyte-erythroid precursors of mice, and 594 in erythroblasts of humans.
More than half of these lncRNAs were unannotated, emphasizing the opportunity for
new discovery through studies of specialized cell types. Analysis of the mouse
erythro-megakaryocytic polyadenylated lncRNA transcriptome indicates that ~75%
arise from promoters and 25% from enhancers, many of which are regulated by key
transcription factors including GATA1 and TAL1. Erythroid lncRNA expression is
largely conserved among 8 different mouse strains, yet only 15% of mouse lncRNAs 
are expressed in humans and vice versa, reflecting dramatic species-specificity. 
RNA interference assays of 21 abundant erythroid-specific murine lncRNAs in
primary mouse erythroid precursors identified 7 whose knockdown inhibited
terminal erythroid maturation. At least 6 of these 7 functional lncRNAs have no
detectable expression in human erythroblasts, suggesting that lack of
conservation between mammalian species does not predict lack of function.

PMCID: PMC3962165
PMID: 24497530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(7):4283-93. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku072. Epub 2014 Jan
26.

The hematopoietic regulator TAL1 is required for chromatin looping between the
ß-globin LCR and human <U+03B3>-globin genes to activate transcription.

Yun WJ(1), Kim YW, Kang Y, Lee J, Dean A, Kim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Pusan 609-735, Korea and Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental
Biology, NIDDK, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

TAL1 is a key hematopoietic transcription factor that binds to regulatory regions
of a large cohort of erythroid genes as part of a complex with GATA-1, LMO2 and
Ldb1. The complex mediates long-range interaction between the ß-globin locus
control region (LCR) and active globin genes, and although TAL1 is one of the two
DNA-binding complex members, its role is unclear. To explore the role of TAL1 in 
transcription activation of the human <U+03B3>-globin genes, we reduced the expression
of TAL1 in erythroid K562 cells using lentiviral short hairpin RNA, compromising 
its association in the ß-globin locus. In the TAL1 knockdown cells, the <U+03B3>-globin 
transcription was reduced to 35% and chromatin looping of the (G)<U+03B3>-globin gene
with the LCR was disrupted with decreased occupancy of the complex member Ldb1
and LMO2 in the locus. However, GATA-1 binding, DNase I hypersensitive site
formation and several histone modifications were largely maintained across the
ß-globin locus. In addition, overexpression of TAL1 increased the <U+03B3>-globin
transcription and increased interaction frequency between the (G)<U+03B3>-globin gene
and LCR. These results indicate that TAL1 plays a critical role in chromatin loop
formation between the <U+03B3>-globin genes and LCR, which is a critical step for the
transcription of the <U+03B3>-globin genes.

PMCID: PMC3985645
PMID: 24470145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 7;289(10):6934-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.506295. Epub 2014 
Jan 27.

Transcription of the SCL/TAL1 interrupting Locus (Stil) is required for cell
proliferation in adult Zebrafish Retinas.

Sun L(1), Li P, Carr AL, Gorsuch R, Yarka C, Li J, Bartlett M, Pfister D, Hyde
DR, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biological Sciences and.

The human oncogene SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus (Stil) is highly conserved in
vertebrate species. Previously, we identified a homolog of the Stil gene in
zebrafish mutant (night blindness b, nbb), which showed neural defects in the
retina (e.g. dopaminergic cell degeneration and/or lack of regeneration). In this
research, we examined the roles of Stil in cell proliferation after degeneration 
in adult zebrafish retinas. We demonstrated that knockdown of Stil gene
expression or inhibition of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling transduction decreases
the rate of cell proliferation. In contrast, activation of Shh signal
transduction promotes cell proliferation. In nbb(+/-) retinas, inhibition of SUFU
(a repressor in the Shh pathway) rescues the defects in cell proliferation due to
down-regulation of Stil gene expression. The latter data suggest that Stil play a
role in cell proliferation through the Shh signal transduction pathway.

PMCID: PMC3945354
PMID: 24469449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Blood. 2014 Jan 23;123(4):465-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-538306.

Long noncoding RNAs in erythropoiesis.

Gallagher PG(1).

Author information: 
(1)YALE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE.

Comment on
    Blood. 2014 Jan 23;123(4):570-81.

In this issue of Blood, Alvarez-Dominguez et al use a combination of genomics
technology, bioinformatics, and functional analyses to provide new insights into 
our understanding of the role of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) in
erythropoiesis.1 This is an initial step forward in our understanding of the many
roles of lncRNAs in normal and perturbed erythropoiesis. lncRNAs have recently
emerged as critical, multifunctional regulators of cellular gene expression.

PMID: 24458276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2014 Jun-Aug;53(1-2):39-46. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2013.12.007.
Epub 2014 Jan 7.

Transcription factor SCL/TAL1 mediates the phosphorylation of MEK/ERK pathway in 
umbilical cord blood CD34<U+207A> stem cells during hematopoietic differentiation.

Zhou RQ(1), Wu JH(2), Gong YP(3), Guo Y(4), Xing HY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China. Electronic address: zrq_hematology@foxmail.com. (2)Department of 
Hematology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
Electronic address: medea_wu@qq.com. (3)Department of Hematology, West China
Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. Electronic address:
gongyuping2010@aliyun.com. (4)Department of Hematology, West China Hospital of
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. Electronic address:
guoyong-hematology@hotmail.com. (5)Department of Hematology, West China Hospital 
of Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. Electronic address:
393064897@qq.com.

Transcription factor stem cell leukemia (SCL), also known as the T-cell acute
lymphocytic leukemia 1 (TAL1), plays a key role in the regulation of
hematopoiesis, but the molecular mechanisms are not well understood. The aim of
the present study is to elucidate the effects of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) signal pathways underlying the biologic activity of SCL/TAL1 on
normal hematopoietic development. Lentiviral vectors with up or down-regulation
of SCL/TAL1 were transfected into umbilical cord blood CD34 stem cells. EGFR
signaling pathways (including MEK/ERK and Akt/mTOR) and surface hematopoietic
markers were analyzed in the process of hematopoietic differentiation. The data
revealed that up or down-regulation of SCL/TAL1 gene was accompanied positively
by the expressions of p-MEK and p-ERK1/2 protein, but the changes of Akt/mTOR
were unobvious. MEK/ERK inhibitor U0126 and SCL/TAL1 down-regulation showed
similar inhibitory effects on erythroid, myeloid, and megakaryoid
differentiation. However, Akt/mTOR pathway altered insignificantly. MEK/ERK
inhibitor U0126 could not affect the expression of SCL/TAL1 mRNA or protein.
Taken together, these findings fully illustrated that SCL/TAL1 is located in the 
up-stream of MEK/ERK pathway and partially regulates hematopoiesis by modulating 
the phosphorylation level of the key proteins in MEK/ERK pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24405580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 21;111(3):E344-53. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1322570111. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Analysis of chromatin-state plasticity identifies cell-type-specific regulators
of H3K27me3 patterns.

Pinello L(1), Xu J, Orkin SH, Yuan GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard School of Public Heath, Boston, MA 02215.

Chromatin states are highly cell-type-specific, but the underlying mechanisms for
the establishment and maintenance of their genome-wide patterns remain poorly
understood. Here we present a computational approach for investigation of
chromatin-state plasticity. We applied this approach to investigate an ENCODE
ChIP-seq dataset profiling the genome-wide distributions of the H3K27me3 mark in 
19 human cell lines. We found that the high plasticity regions (HPRs) can be
divided into two functionally and mechanistically distinct subsets, which
correspond to CpG island (CGI) proximal or distal regions, respectively. Although
the CGI proximal HPRs are typically associated with continuous variation across
different cell-types, the distal HPRs are associated with binary-like variations.
We developed a computational approach to predict putative cell-type-specific
modulators of H3K27me3 patterns and validated the predictions by comparing with
public ChIP-seq data. Furthermore, we applied this approach to investigate
mechanisms for poised enhancer establishment in primary human erythroid
precursors. Importantly, we predicted and experimentally validated that the
principal hematopoietic regulator T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia-1 (TAL1) is
involved in regulating H3K27me3 variations in collaboration with the
transcription factor growth factor independent 1B (GFI1B), providing fresh
insights into the context-specific role of TAL1 in erythropoiesis. Our approach
is generally applicable to investigate the regulatory mechanisms of epigenetic
pathways in establishing cellular identity.

PMCID: PMC3903219
PMID: 24395799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Turk J Haematol. 2012 Dec;29(4):325-33. doi: 10.5505/tjh.2012.13540. Epub 2012
Dec 5.

Upregulation of T-Cell-Specific Transcription Factor Expression in Pediatric
T-Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (T-ALL).

Sayitoglu M(1), Erbilgin Y(1), Hatirnaz Ng O(1), Yildiz I(2), Celkan T(2), Anak
S(3), Devecioglu O(3), Aydogan G(4), Karaman S(5), Sarper N(6), Timur C(7), Ure
U(8), Ozbek U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istanbul University, Department of Genetics, Institute of Experimental
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. (2)Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa School of
Medicine, Department of Pediatric Hematology, Istanbul, Turkey. (3)Istanbul
University, Istanbul School of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Hematology,
Istanbul, Turkey. (4)Bakirköy Maternity and Children's Hospital, Department of
Pediatrics, Istanbul, Turkey. (5)Ministry of Health Sisli Etfal Teaching
Hospital, Department of Pediatric Hematology, Istanbul, Turkey. (6)Kocaeli School
of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Hematology, Kocaeli, Turkey. (7)Ministry of 
Health Göztepe Teaching Hospital, Department of Pediatric Hematology, Istanbul,
Turkey. (8)Ministry of Health Bakirköy Sadi Konuk Teaching Hospital, Department
of Hematology, Istanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is associated with
recurrent chromosomal aberrations andabnormal ectopic gene expression during
T-cell development. In order to gain insight into the pathogenesis of T-ALLthis
study aimed to measure the level of expression of 7 T-cell oncogenes (LMO2, LYL1,
TAL1, TLX1, TLX3, BMI1, andCALM-AF10) in pediatric T-ALL patients Material and
Methods: LMO2, LYL1, TLX1, TLX3, BMI1, TAL1, and CALM-AF10 expression was
measured usingquantitative real-time PCR in 43 pediatric T-ALL patients.
RESULTS: A high level of expression of LMO2, LYL1, TAL1, and BMI1 genes was
observed in a large group of T-ALL.Several gene expression signatures indicative 
of leukemic arrest at specific stages of normal thymocyte development(LYL1 and
LMO2) were highly expressed during the cortical and mature stages of T-cell
development. Furthermore,upregulated TAL1 and BMI1 expression was observed in all
phenotypic subgroups. In all, 6 of the patients had TLX1and TLX3 proto-oncogene
expression, which does not occur in normal cells, and none of the patients had
CALM-AF10fusion gene transcription. Expression of LYL1 alone and LMO2-LYL1
co-expression were associated with mediastinalinvolvement; however, high-level
oncogene expression was not predictive of outcome in the present pediatric
T-ALLpatient group, but there was a trend towards a poor prognostic impact of
TAL1 and/or LMO2 and/or LYL1 protooncogeneexpression.
CONCLUSION: Poor prognostic impact of TAL1 and/or LMO2 and/or LYL1 proto-oncogene
expression indicate the needfor extensive study on oncogenic rearrangement and
immunophenotypic markers in T-ALL, and their relationship totreatment outcome.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST: None declared.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMCID: PMC3781625
PMID: 24385720  [PubMed]


106. BMC Biotechnol. 2013 Dec 19;13:110. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-13-110.

Construction of fast xylose-fermenting yeast based on industrial
ethanol-producing diploid Saccharomyces cerevisiae by rational design and
adaptive evolution.

Diao L, Liu Y, Qian F, Yang J, Jiang Y, Yang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Institute of Plant Physiology and
Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 300 Fenglin Road, Shanghai 200032, China. syang@sibs.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: It remains a challenge for recombinant S. cerevisiae to convert
xylose in lignocellulosic biomass hydrolysates to ethanol. Although industrial
diploid strains are more robust compared to laboratory haploid strains, however, 
industrial diploid S. cerevisiae strains have been less pursued in previous
studies. This work aims to construct fast xylose-fermenting yeast using an
industrial ethanol-producing diploid S. cerevisiae strain as a host.
RESULTS: Fast xylose-fermenting yeast was constructed by genome integration of
xylose-utilizing genes and adaptive evolution, including 1) Piromyces XYLA was
introduced to enable the host strain to convert xylose to xylulose; 2) endogenous
genes (XKS1, RKI1, RPE1, TKL1, and TAL1) were overexpressed to accelerate
conversion of xylulose to ethanol; 3) Candida intermedia GXF1, which encodes a
xylose transporter, was introduced at the GRE3 locus to improve xylose uptake; 4)
aerobic evolution in rich xylose media was carried out to increase growth and
xylose consumption rates. The best evolved strain CIBTS0735 consumed 80 g/l
glucose and 40 g/l xylose in rich media within 24 hours at an initial OD600 of
1.0 (0.63 g DCW/l) and produced 53 g/l ethanol.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the above fermentation performance, we conclude that
CIBTS0735 shows great potential for ethanol production from lignocellulosic
biomass.

PMCID: PMC3878346
PMID: 24354503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. BMC Genomics. 2013 Dec 17;14:896. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-896.

Assessment of hematopoietic failure due to Rpl11 deficiency in a zebrafish model 
of Diamond-Blackfan anemia by deep sequencing.

Zhang Z, Jia H, Zhang Q, Wan Y, Zhou Y, Jia Q, Zhang W, Yuan W, Cheng T, Zhu
X(1), Fang X.

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
zhuxf6465@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Diamond-Blackfan anemia is a rare congenital red blood cell dysplasia
that develops soon after birth. RPL11 mutations account for approximately 4.8% of
human DBA cases with defective hematopoietic phenotypes. However, the mechanisms 
by which RPL11 regulates hematopoiesis in DBA remain elusive. In this study, we
analyzed the transcriptome using deep sequencing data from an Rpl11-deficient
zebrafish model to identify Rpl11-mediated hematopoietic failure and investigate 
the underlying mechanisms.
RESULTS: We characterized hematological defects in Rpl11-deficient zebrafish
embryos by identifying affected hematological genes, hematopoiesis-associated
pathways, and regulatory networks. We found that hemoglobin biosynthetic and
hematological defects in Rpl11-deficient zebrafish were related to dysregulation 
of iron metabolism-related genes, including tfa, tfr1b, alas2 and slc25a37, which
are involved in heme and hemoglobin biosynthesis. In addition, we found reduced
expression of the hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) marker cmyb and HSC
transcription factors tal1 and hoxb4a in Rpl11-deficient zebrafish embryos,
indicating that the hematopoietic defects may be related to impaired HSC
formation, differentiation, and proliferation. However, Rpl11 deficiency did not 
affect the development of other blood cell lineages such as granulocytes and
myelocytes.
CONCLUSION: We identified hematopoietic failure of Rpl11-deficient zebrafish
embryos using transcriptome deep sequencing and elucidated potential underlying
mechanisms. The present analyses demonstrate that Rpl11-deficient zebrafish may
serve as a model of DBA and may provide insights into the pathogenesis of mutant 
RPL11-mediated human DBA disease.

PMCID: PMC3890587
PMID: 24341334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Oncotarget. 2014 Jan 15;5(1):120-30.

MYCN is a novel oncogenic target in pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.

Astolfi A(1), Vendemini F, Urbini M, Melchionda F, Masetti R, Franzoni M, Libri
V, Serravalle S, Togni M, Paone G, Montemurro L, Bressanin D, Chiarini F,
Martelli AM, Tonelli R, Pession A.

Author information: 
(1)"Giorgio Prodi" Cancer Research Center, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

MYCN is an oncogene frequently overexpressed in pediatric solid tumors whereas
few evidences suggest his involvement in the pathogenesis of haematologic
malignancies. Here we show that MYCN is overexpressed in a relevant proportion
(40 to 50%) of adult and pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALL). 
Focusing on pediatric T-ALL, MYCN-expressing samples were found almost
exclusively in the TAL1-positive subgroup. Moreover, TAL1 knockdown in T-ALL cell
lines resulted in a reduction of MYCN expression, and TAL1 directly binds to MYCN
promoter region, suggesting that TAL1 pathway activation could sustain the
up-regulation of MYCN. The role of MYCN in T-ALL was investigated by peptide
nucleic acid (PNA-MYCN)-mediated transcriptional silencing of MYCN and by siRNAs.
MYCN knockdown in T-ALL cell lines resulted in a reduction of cell viability, up 
to 50%, while no effect was elicited with a mismatch PNA. The inhibitory effect
of PNA-MYCN on cell viability was due to a significant increase in apoptosis.
PNA-MYCN treatment in pediatric T-ALL samples reduced cell viability of leukemic 
cells from patients with high MYCN expression, while no effect was obtained in
MYCN-negative blast cells. These results showed that MYCN is frequently
overexpressed in pediatric T-ALL and suggested his role as a candidate for
molecularly-directed therapies.

PMCID: PMC3960194
PMID: 24334727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Int J Lab Hematol. 2014 Oct;36(5):e69-70. doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12179. Epub 2013 Dec 
12.

Simultaneous rearrangements of TAL1 and LMO2 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.

Kim HK(1), Lim JH, Koh KN, Chi HS, Seo EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Ulsan College of Medicine and
Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

PMID: 24330618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. DNA Cell Biol. 2014 Jan;33(1):49-56. doi: 10.1089/dna.2013.2199. Epub 2013 Dec
13.

The TCR <U+03B3>d repertoire and relative gene expression characteristics of T-ALL cases
with biclonal malignant Vd1 and Vd2 T cells.

Zheng H(1), Wang X, Ma Y, Xu B, Chen S, Yang L, Wu X, Przybylski GK, Huang S, Ye 
T, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)1 Institute of Hematology, Jinan University , Guangzhou, People's Republic of 
China .

Despite significant improvement in our understanding of T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) biology and pathogenesis, many questions remain
unanswered. In previous studies, we found a T-ALL case with two malignant T-cell 
clones with Vd1Dd2Dd3Jd1 and Vd2Dd3Jd2 rearrangements. In this study, we further 
characterized T-ALL cases with two malignant clones containing Vd1Dd3Jd1 and
Vd2Dd1Jd1 rearrangements using fine-tiling array comparative genomic
hybridization, ligation-mediated polymerase chain reaction (LM-PCR), sequencing, 
and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis. We further
analyzed the distribution and clonality of the T-cell receptor (TCR) V<U+03B3> and Vd
subfamily T cells in the two T-ALL cases by RT-PCR and GeneScan. Monoclonal Vd1
and Vd2 subfamilies were confirmed in both samples, the Vd3 through Vd7
subfamilies could not be detected in the T-ALL samples, whereas the oligoclonal
Vd8 subfamily could be identified. Based on the clinical finding that both of the
T-ALL cases with two malignant T-cell clones had a poor outcome, we attempted to 
compare the expression pattern of genes related to T-cell activation and
proliferation between cases with the malignant Vd1 and Vd2 T-cell clones and
T-ALL cases with a mono-malignant Va T-cell clone. We selected two T-ALL cases
with VaJa rearrangements and analyzed the expression level of Notch1, TAL1, and
the CARMA-BCL10-MALT-A20-NF-<U+03BA>B pathway genes by real-time PCR. A20 had
significantly higher expression in the biclonal compared with the monoclonal
T-ALL group (p=0.0354), and there was a trend toward higher expression for the
other genes in the biclonal group with the exception of TAL1, although the
differences were not statistically significant. In conclusion, we identified two 
T-ALL cases with biclonal malignant T-cell clones and described the
characteristics of the biclonal T-ALL subtype and its gene expression pattern.
Thus, our findings may improve the understanding of biclonal T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC3880916
PMID: 24329526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Genes Immun. 2014 Mar;15(2):72-81. doi: 10.1038/gene.2013.63. Epub 2013 Dec 5.

Genetic and epigenetic determinants mediate proneness of oncogene breakpoint
sites for involvement in TCR translocations.

Larmonie NS(1), van der Spek A(1), Bogers AJ(2), van Dongen JJ(1), Langerak
AW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Cardio-thoracic Surgery, Erasmus MC,
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

T-cell receptor (TCR) translocations are a genetic hallmark of T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia and lead to juxtaposition of oncogene and TCR loci.
Oncogene loci become involved in translocations because they are accessible to
the V(D)J recombination machinery. Such accessibility is predicted at cryptic
recombination signal sequence (cRSS) sites ('Type 1') as well as other sites that
are subject to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) ('Type 2') during early stages of 
thymocyte development. As chromatin accessibility markers have not been analyzed 
in the context of TCR-associated translocations, various genetic and epigenetic
determinants of LMO2, TAL1 and TLX1 translocation breakpoint (BP) sites and BP
cluster regions (BCRs) were examined in human thymocytes to establish DSB
proneness and heterogeneity of BP site involvement in TCR translocations. Our
data show that DSBs in BCRs are primarily induced in the presence of a genetic
element of sequence vulnerability (cRSSs, transposable elements), whereas breaks 
at single BP sites lacking such elements are more likely induced by chance or
perhaps because of patient-specific genetic vulnerability. Vulnerability to
obtain DSBs is increased by features that determine chromatin organization, such 
as methylation status and nucleosome occupancy, although at different levels at
different BP sites.

PMID: 24304972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Trends Genet. 2014 Jan;30(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2013.10.001. Epub 2013 Nov
27.

Ldb1 complexes: the new master regulators of erythroid gene transcription.

Love PE(1), Warzecha C(2), Li L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Eunice Kennedy Shriver, National Institute of Child Health & Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic
address: lovep@mail.nih.gov. (2)Eunice Kennedy Shriver, National Institute of
Child Health & Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Elucidation of the genetic pathways that control red blood cell development has
been a central goal of erythropoiesis research over the past decade. Notably,
data from several recent studies have provided new insights into the regulation
of erythroid gene transcription. Transcription profiling demonstrates that
erythropoiesis is mainly controlled by a small group of lineage-restricted
transcription factors [Gata binding protein 1 (Gata1), T cell acute lymphocytic
leukemia 1 protein (Tal1), and Erythroid Kruppel-like factor (EKLF; henceforth
referred to as Klf1)]. Binding-site mapping using ChIP-Seq indicates that most
DNA-bound Gata1 and Tal1 proteins are contained within higher order complexes
(Ldb1 complexes) that include the nuclear adapters Ldb1 and Lmo2. Ldb1 complexes 
regulate Klf1, and Ldb1 complex-binding sites frequently colocalize with Klf1 at 
erythroid genes and cis-regulatory elements, indicating strong functional synergy
between Gata1, Tal1, and Klf1. Together with new data demonstrating that Ldb1 can
mediate long-range promoter-enhancer interactions, these findings provide a
foundation for the first comprehensive models of the global regulation of
erythroid gene transcription.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3882320
PMID: 24290192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Plant Cell. 2013 Nov;25(11):4305-23. doi: 10.1105/tpc.113.117580. Epub 2013 Nov
26.

Systems-level analysis of nitrogen starvation-induced modifications of carbon
metabolism in a Chlamydomonas reinhardtii starchless mutant.

Blaby IK(1), Glaesener AG, Mettler T, Fitz-Gibbon ST, Gallaher SD, Liu B, Boyle
NR, Kropat J, Stitt M, Johnson S, Benning C, Pellegrini M, Casero D, Merchant SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los
Angeles, California 90095.

To understand the molecular basis underlying increased triacylglycerol (TAG)
accumulation in starchless (sta) Chlamydomonas reinhardtii mutants, we undertook 
comparative time-course transcriptomics of strains CC-4348 (sta6 mutant),
CC-4349, a cell wall-deficient (cw) strain purported to represent the parental
STA6 strain, and three independent STA6 strains generated by complementation of
sta6 (CC-4565/STA6-C2, CC-4566/STA6-C4, and CC-4567/STA6-C6) in the context of N 
deprivation. Despite N starvation-induced dramatic remodeling of the
transcriptome, there were relatively few differences (5 × 10(2)) observed between
sta6 and STA6, the most dramatic of which were increased abundance of transcripts
encoding key regulated or rate-limiting steps in central carbon metabolism,
specifically isocitrate lyase, malate synthase, transaldolase, fructose
bisphosphatase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (encoded by ICL1, MAS1,
TAL1, FBP1, and PCK1 respectively), suggestive of increased carbon movement
toward hexose-phosphate in sta6 by upregulation of the glyoxylate pathway and
gluconeogenesis. Enzyme assays validated the increase in isocitrate lyase and
malate synthase activities. Targeted metabolite analysis indicated increased
succinate, malate, and Glc-6-P and decreased Fru-1,6-bisphosphate, illustrating
the effect of these changes. Comparisons of independent data sets in multiple
strains allowed the delineation of a sequence of events in the global N
starvation response in C. reinhardtii, starting within minutes with the
upregulation of alternative N assimilation routes and carbohydrate synthesis and 
subsequently a more gradual upregulation of genes encoding enzymes of TAG
synthesis. Finally, genome resequencing analysis indicated that (1) the deletion 
in sta6 extends into the neighboring gene encoding respiratory burst oxidase, and
(2) a commonly used STA6 strain (CC-4349) as well as the sequenced reference
(CC-503) are not congenic with respect to sta6 (CC-4348), underscoring the
importance of using complemented strains for more rigorous assignment of
phenotype to genotype.

PMCID: PMC3875720
PMID: 24280389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Rev Bras Hematol Hemoter. 2013;35(5):337-42. doi: 10.5581/1516-8484.20130115.

Gene rearrangement study for minimal residual disease monitoring in children with
acute lymphocytic leukemia.

Assumpção JG(1), Paula FD, Xavier SG, Murao M, de Aguirre JC Neto, Dutra AP, Lima
ER, de Oliveira BM, Viana MB.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais - UFMG, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To detect markers for minimal residual disease monitoring based on
conventional polymerase chain reaction for immunoglobulin, T-cell receptor
rearrangements and the Sil-Tal1 deletion in patients with acute lymphocytic
leukemia.
METHODS: Fifty-nine children with acute lymphocytic leukemia from three
institutions in Minas Gerais, Brazil, were prospectively studied. Clonal
rearrangements were detected by polymerase chain reaction followed by
homo/heteroduplex clonality analysis in DNA samples from diagnostic bone marrow. 
Follow-up samples were collected on Days 14 and 28-35 of the induction phase. The
Kaplan-Meier and multivariate Cox methods were used for survival analysis.
RESULTS: Immunoglobulin/T-cell receptor rearrangements were not detected in 5/55 
children screened (9.0%). For precursor-B acute lymphocytic leukemia, the most
frequent rearrangement was IgH (72.7%), then TCRG (61.4%), and TCRD and IgK
(47.7%); for T-acute lymphocytic leukemia, TCRG (80.0%), and TCRD and Sil-Tal
deletion (20.0%) were the most common. Minimal residual disease was detected in
35% of the cases on Day 14 and in 22.5% on Day 28-35. Minimal residual disease on
Day 28-35, T-acute lymphocytic leukemia, and leukocyte count above 50 x 10(9)/L
at diagnosis were bad prognostic factors for leukemia-free survival in univariate
analysis. Relapse risk for minimal residual disease positive relative to minimal 
residual disease negative children was 8.5 times higher (95% confidence interval:
1.02-70.7).
CONCLUSION: Immunoglobulin/T-cell receptor rearrangement frequencies were similar
to those reported before. Minimal residual disease is an independent prognostic
factor for leukemia-free survival, even when based on a non-quantitative
technique, but longer follow-ups are needed.

PMCID: PMC3832314
PMID: 24255617  [PubMed]


115. FEBS Open Bio. 2013 Oct 11;3:428-32. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2013.10.004. eCollection 
2013.

Expression profiling of ETO2-regulated miRNAs in erythroid cells: Possible
influence on miRNA abundance.

Fujiwara T(1), Okitsu Y, Katsuoka Y, Fukuhara N, Onishi Y, Ishizawa K, Harigae H.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan ; Molecular Hematology/Oncology, Tohoku University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

ETO2 is a component of a protein complex containing master regulators of
hematopoiesis, including GATA-1 and SCL/TAL1, and also has RNA binding
properties. Although ETO2 has been reported to repress GATA-1 target genes
through histone deacetylation of the target gene loci in erythroid cells, little 
is known about the contribution of ETO2 to microRNA (miRNA) regulation. Here, we 
conducted miRNA profiling in ETO2-overexpressing and ETO2-silenced K562 cells.
The analysis suggests that ETO2 positively regulates the abundance of mature
miRNAs, including miR-21, miR-29b and let-7e. Our data suggest a novel mode of
ETO2-mediated target gene repression via effects on miRNA expression.

PMCID: PMC3821025
PMID: 24251106  [PubMed]


116. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Jan;53(1):52-66. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22117. Epub 2013
Oct 12.

MYC fails to efficiently shape malignant transformation in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Loosveld M(1), Bonnet M, Gon S, Montpellier B, Quilichini B, Navarro JM, Crouzet 
T, Goujart MA, Chasson L, Morgado E, Picard C, Hernandez L, Fossat C, Gabert J,
Michel G, Nadel B, Payet-Bornet D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille Université, 13288,
Marseille, France; INSERM U1104; CNRS UMR7280, 13288, Marseille, France;
Department of Hematology, AP-HM La Timone, 13385, Marseille, France.

MYC is a potent oncogene involved in ~70% of human cancers, inducing
tumorigenesis with high penetrance and short latency in experimental transgenic
models. Accordingly, MYC is recognized as a major driver of T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) in human and zebrafish/mouse models, and
uncovering the context by which MYC-mediated malignant transformation initiates
and develops remains a considerable challenge. Because MYC is a very complex
oncogene, highly dependent on the microenvironment and cell-intrinsic context, we
generated transgenic mice (tgMyc(spo)) in which ectopic Myc activation occurs
sporadically (<10(-6) thymocytes) within otherwise normal thymic environment,
thereby mimicking the unicellular context in which oncogenic alterations initiate
human tumors. We show that while Myc(+) clones in tgMyc(spo) mice develop and
initially proliferate in thymus and the periphery, no tumor or clonal expansion
progress in aging mice (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>130), suggesting an unexpectedly low ability of Myc
to initiate efficient tumorigenesis. Furthermore, to determine the relevance of
this observation in human pathogenesis we analyzed a human T-ALL case at
diagnosis and relapse using the molecular stigmata of V(D)J recombination as
markers of malignant progression; we similarly demonstrate that despite the
occurrence of TAL1 and MYC translocations in early thymocyte ontogeny, subsequent
oncogenic alterations were required to drive oncogenesis. Altogether, our data
suggest that although central to T-ALL, MYC overexpression per se is inefficient 
in triggering the cascade of events leading to malignant transformation.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24249258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cell Signal. 2014 Feb;26(2):306-12. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.11.010. Epub 2013
Nov 12.

The human oncogene SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus is required for mammalian
dopaminergic cell proliferation through the Sonic hedgehog pathway.

Carr AL(1), Sun L(2), Lee E(3), Li P(3), Antonacci C(3), Gorbea E(3), Finlay
C(3), Li L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN
46556, United States; Center for Zebrafish Research, University of Notre Dame,
Notre Dame, IN 46556, United States. (2)Department of Physiology, Nankai
University, Tianjin 300071, China. (3)Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, United States. (4)Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, United
States; Center for Zebrafish Research, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN
46556, United States. Electronic address: Li.78@nd.edu.

The human oncogene SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus (Stil) is highly conserved in all 
vertebrate species. In humans, the expression of Stil regulates cancer cell
proliferation and survival. In this study, we examined the function of Stil in
neural progenitor cell proliferation and neural differentiation using the
mammalian dopaminergic (DA) PC12 cells. Stil is expressed in both proliferating
and differentiated PC12 cells. The RNAi-mediated knockdown of Stil expression
yielded a decreased proliferation rate of PC12 cells, whereas the overexpression 
of Stil transcript increased PC12 cell proliferation. The up- and down-regulation
of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway by pharmacological approaches targeting
Smoothened (Smo) demonstrated that Stil functions in the Shh pathway for PC12
proliferation. Smo antagonist cyclopamine decreased the proliferation rate of
PC12 cells, whereas the overexpression of Stil rescued the cyclopamine-induced
decrease in cell proliferation. Oppositely, the application of Smo agonist
purmorphamine increased the rate of PC12 cell proliferation. However, the
proliferation defect caused by Stil knockdown remained evident after activating
the Shh pathway by purmorphamine. The expression of Stil is not required for PC12
cell neural differentiation. In PC12 cells transfected with Stil shRNA plasmids, 
the outgrowth of neurites persisted after treatment with nerve growth factor
(NGF), whereas overexpression of Stil did not increase neurite growth in response
to NGF induction. Together, the results from this study suggest a novel role for 
the oncogene Stil in neural progenitor cells through the Shh pathway, and further
introduces Stil as a bio-marker for DA cells.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24240054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Blood. 2013 Dec 19;122(26):4199-209. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-02-483875. Epub 2013
Nov 7.

Chromatin looping defines expression of TAL1, its flanking genes, and regulation 
in T-ALL.

Zhou Y(1), Kurukuti S, Saffrey P, Vukovic M, Michie AM, Strogantsev R, West AG,
Vetrie D.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Unit and.

TAL1 is an important regulator of hematopoiesis and its expression is tightly
controlled despite complexities in its genomic organization. It is frequently
misregulated in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), often due to
deletions between TAL1 and the neighboring STIL gene. To better understand the
events that lead to TAL1 expression in hematopoiesis and in T-ALL, we studied
looping interactions at the TAL1 locus. In TAL1-expressing erythroid cells, the
locus adopts a looping "hub" which brings into close physical proximity all known
TAL1 cis-regulatory elements including CTCF-bound insulators. Loss of GATA1
results in disassembly of the hub and loss of CTCF/RAD21 from one of its
insulators. Genes flanking TAL1 are partly dependent on hub integrity for their
transcriptional regulation. We identified looping patterns unique to
TAL1-expressing T-ALL cells, and, intriguingly, loops occurring between the TAL1 
and STIL genes at the common TAL1/STIL breakpoints found in T-ALL. These findings
redefine how TAL1 and neighboring genes communicate within the nucleus, and
indicate that looping facilitates both normal and aberrant TAL1 expression and
may predispose to structural rearrangements in T-ALL. We also propose that
GATA1-dependent looping mechanisms may facilitate the conservation of TAL1
regulation despite cis-regulatory remodeling during vertebrate evolution.

PMID: 24200685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Blood. 2014 Jan 23;123(4):570-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-530683. Epub 2013
Nov 7.

Global discovery of erythroid long noncoding RNAs reveals novel regulators of red
cell maturation.

Alvarez-Dominguez JR(1), Hu W, Yuan B, Shi J, Park SS, Gromatzky AA, van
Oudenaarden A, Lodish HF.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA;

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Jan 23;123(4):465-6.

Erythropoiesis is regulated at multiple levels to ensure the proper generation of
mature red cells under multiple physiological conditions. To probe the
contribution of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) to this process, we examined >1
billion RNA-seq reads of polyadenylated and nonpolyadenylated RNA from
differentiating mouse fetal liver red blood cells and identified 655 lncRNA genes
including not only intergenic, antisense, and intronic but also pseudogene and
enhancer loci. More than 100 of these genes are previously unrecognized and
highly erythroid specific. By integrating genome-wide surveys of chromatin
states, transcription factor occupancy, and tissue expression patterns, we
identify multiple lncRNAs that are dynamically expressed during erythropoiesis,
show epigenetic regulation, and are targeted by key erythroid transcription
factors GATA1, TAL1, or KLF1. We focus on 12 such candidates and find that they
are nuclear-localized and exhibit complex developmental expression patterns.
Depleting them severely impaired erythrocyte maturation, inhibiting cell size
reduction and subsequent enucleation. One of them, alncRNA-EC7, is transcribed
from an enhancer and is specifically needed for activation of the neighboring
gene encoding BAND 3. Our study provides an annotated catalog of erythroid
lncRNAs, readily available through an online resource, and shows that diverse
types of lncRNAs participate in the regulatory circuitry underlying
erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3901070
PMID: 24200680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Apr;71(8):1395-415. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1501-3. Epub 
2013 Nov 7.

Mechanisms regulating GABAergic neuron development.

Achim K(1), Salminen M, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL Heidelberg, Meyerhofstr. 1, 69117, Heidelberg, Germany,
kaia.achim@embl.de.

Neurons using gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) as their neurotransmitter are the
main inhibitory neurons in the mature central nervous system (CNS) and show great
variation in their form and function. GABAergic neurons are produced in all of
the main domains of the CNS, where they develop from discrete regions of the
neuroepithelium. Here, we review the gene expression and regulatory mechanisms
controlling the main steps of GABAergic neuron development: early patterning of
the proliferative neuroepithelium, production of postmitotic neural precursors,
establishment of their identity and migration. By comparing the molecular
regulation of these events across CNS, we broadly identify three regions
utilizing distinct molecular toolkits for GABAergic fate determination:
telencephalon-anterior diencephalon (DLX2 type), posterior diencephalon-midbrain 
(GATA2 type) and hindbrain-spinal cord (PTF1A and TAL1 types). Similarities and
differences in the molecular regulatory mechanisms reveal the core determinants
of a GABAergic neuron as well as provide insights into generation of the vast
diversity of these neurons.

PMID: 24196748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:461204. doi: 10.1155/2013/461204. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Improvement of L-arabinose fermentation by modifying the metabolic pathway and
transport in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Wang C(1), Shen Y, Zhang Y, Suo F, Hou J, Bao X.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Shan Da
Nan Road No. 27, Jinan 250100, China.

The L-arabinose utilization pathway was established in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 
by expressing the codon-optimized araA, araB, and araD genes of Lactobacillus
plantarum. After overexpressing the TAL1, TKL1, RPE1, RKI1, and GAL2 genes and
adaptive evolution, the L-arabinose utilization of the recombinant strain became 
efficient. The resulting strain displayed a maximum specific growth rate of
0.075<U+2009>h(-1), a maximum specific L-arabinose consumption rate of
0.61<U+2009>g<U+2009>h(-1)<U+2009>g(-1) dry cell weight, and a promising ethanol yield of 0.43<U+2009>g<U+2009>g(-1)
from L-arabinose fermentation.

PMCID: PMC3806156
PMID: 24195072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. World J Stem Cells. 2013 Oct 26;5(4):205-16. doi: 10.4252/wjsc.v5.i4.205.

Human adipose tissue contains erythroid progenitors expressing fetal hemoglobin.

Navarro A(1), Carbonell-Uberos F, Marín S, Miñana MD.

Author information: 
(1)Amparo Navarro, María Dolores Miñana, Regenerative Medicine Laboratory,
Fundación Hospital General Universitario, 46014 Valencia, Spain.

AIM: To investigate the origin of hematopoietic progenitors contained in the
stromal vascular fraction (SVF) of human adipose tissue.
METHODS: Tissue samples obtained from lipectomies were subjected to enzymatic
digestion with collagenase to obtain a single-cell suspension. The centrifuged
cell pellet, termed SVF, was separated immunomagnetically into CD45(+) and
CD45(-) cells and cultured in serum-free medium containing hematopoietic
cytokines. The freshly isolated and cultured cells were evaluated to determine
their ability to form hematopoietic colony-forming units in clonogenic assays and
for the expression of certain hematopoietic transcription factors by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction; the gene expression level was compared
to that in CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells from cord blood (CB) and adult 
peripheral blood (PB). To characterize erythroid progenitors, burst-forming
units-erythroid (BFU-E) were developed in a semisolid medium under different
culture conditions, and the hemoglobin composition and globin gene expression in 
the erythroid colonies were determined.
RESULTS: The transcription factors SCL/TAL1, RUNX1, RUNX2 and GATA2 were
expressed in both the CD45(+) and CD45(-) SVF populations; however, in contrast
to our observations in the CD34(+) cells from CB and adult PB, GATA1 was not
detected. Nevertheless, GATA1 could be detected in the SVF cells after seven days
in culture, whereas its expression was upregulated in the CB CD34(+) cells. The
analysis of BFU-E-derived colonies revealed that virtually all erythroid cells
produced by SVF cells expressed fetal hemoglobin, and the <U+03B3>-globin mRNA levels
ranged between those obtained in the adult- and neonatal-derived erythroid cells.
Moreover, the SVF-derived erythroid cells synthesized similar levels of a- and
ß-globin mRNA, whereas the a-globin transcript levels were consistently higher
those of ß-globin in the cells derived from CB or PB CD34(+) cells. Furthermore, 
although the cellular distribution of hemoglobin in the erythroid cells derived
from the CD34(+) cells obtained from hematopoietic tissues was dependent on the
presence or absence of serum in the culture medium, this did not affect the
SVF-derived erythroid cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that hematopoietic progenitors in SVF have
molecular and functional features that differ from those exhibited by circulating
progenitors, suggesting the possibility of a different origin.

PMCID: PMC3812524
PMID: 24179608  [PubMed]


123. Biol Open. 2013 Aug 9;2(10):990-7. doi: 10.1242/bio.20135041. eCollection 2013.

The role of Tal2 and Tal1 in the differentiation of midbrain GABAergic neuron
precursors.

Achim K(1), Peltopuro P, Lahti L, Tsai HH, Zachariah A, Astrand M, Salminen M,
Rowitch D, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, P.O. Box 56, Viikinkaari 5, FIN00014-University of 
Helsinki , Helsinki , Finland.

Midbrain- and hindbrain-derived GABAergic interneurons are critical for
regulation of sleep, respiratory, sensory-motor and motivational processes, and
they are implicated in human neurological disorders. However, the precise
mechanisms that underlie generation of GABAergic neuron diversity in the
midbrain-hindbrain region are poorly understood. Here, we show unique and
overlapping requirements for the related bHLH proteins Tal1 and Tal2 in GABAergic
neurogenesis in the midbrain. We show that Tal2 and Tal1 are specifically and
sequentially activated during midbrain GABAergic neurogenesis. Similar to Gata2, 
a post-mitotic selector of the midbrain GABAergic neuron identity, Tal2
expression is activated very early during GABAergic neuron differentiation.
Although the expression of Tal2 and Gata2 genes are independent of each other,
Tal2 is important for normal midbrain GABAergic neurogenesis, possibly as a
partner of Gata2. In the absence of Tal2, the majority of midbrain GABAergic
neurons switch to a glutamatergic-like phenotype. In contrast, Tal1 expression is
activated in a Gata2 and Tal2 dependent fashion in the more mature midbrain
GABAergic neuron precursors, but Tal1 alone is not required for GABAergic neuron 
differentiation from the midbrain neuroepithelium. However, inactivation of both 
Tal2 and Tal1 in the developing midbrain suggests that the two factors co-operate
to guide GABAergic neuron differentiation in a specific ventro-lateral midbrain
domain. The observed similarities and differences between Tal1/Tal2 and Gata2
mutants suggest both co-operative and unique roles for these factors in
determination of midbrain GABAergic neuron identities.

PMCID: PMC3798194
PMID: 24167708  [PubMed]


124. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 29;288(48):34719-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.506568. Epub
2013 Oct 25.

Histone lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) protein is involved in Sal-like
protein 4 (SALL4)-mediated transcriptional repression in hematopoietic stem
cells.

Liu L(1), Souto J, Liao W, Jiang Y, Li Y, Nishinakamura R, Huang S, Rosengart T, 
Yang VW, Schuster M, Ma Y, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Surgery.

The stem cell protein SALL4 plays a critical role in hematopoiesis by regulating 
the cell fate. In primitive hematopoietic precursors, it activates or represses
important genes via recruitment of various epigenetic factors such as DNA
methyltransferases, and histone deacylases. Here, we demonstrate that LSD1, a
histone lysine demethylase, also participates in the trans-repressive effects of 
SALL4. Based on luciferase assays, the amine oxidase domain of LSD1 is important 
in suppressing SALL4-mediated reporter transcription. In freshly isolated adult
mouse bone marrows, both SALL4 and LSD1 proteins are preferentially expressed in 
undifferentiated progenitor cells and co-localize in the nuclei. Further
sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed that these two factors
share the same binding sites at the promoter regions of important hematopoietic
regulatory genes including EBF1, GATA1, and TNF. In addition, studies from both
gain- and loss-of-function models revealed that SALL4 dynamically controls the
binding levels of LSD1, which is accompanied by a reversely changed histone 3
dimethylated lysine 4 at the same promoter regions. Finally, shRNA-mediated
knockdown of LSD1 in hematopoietic precursor cells resulted in altered SALL4
downstream gene expression and increased cellular activity. Thus, our data
revealed that histone demethylase LSD1 may negatively regulate SALL4-mediated
transcription, and the dynamic regulation of SALL4-associated epigenetic factors 
cooperatively modulates early hematopoietic precursor proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3843083
PMID: 24163373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Sep;34(9):777-81. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-2727.2013.09.009.

[The expression and clinical significance of miR-203 in pediatric acute
leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang N(1), Pan J, Cao L, Lu J, Xiao PF, Zhao WL, Hu SY, Chai YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, 
Suzhou 215003, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the methylation, expression and clinical significance
of miR-203 in pediatric acute leukemia.
METHODS: The methylation status of miR-203 promoter CpG islands was detected with
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. The expression of miR-203 was
detected by Taqman real- time quantitative polymerase chain reaction. And the
clinical significance of miR-203 in pediatric acute leukemia (ALL) was also
analyzed.
RESULTS: The promoter of miR-203 was unmethylated in all of 31 pediatric acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, all of 15 pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and all 
of 23 controls. The relative expression levels of miR-203 in controls, pediatric 
acute leukemia, ALL and AML were 16.93±6.31, 48.97±10.38, 55.88±12.91, 24.28±9.10
respectively. The results indicated that miR-203 was significantly up- regulated 
in pediatric acute leukemia (P=0.011) and ALL (P=0.009), not in pediatric AML
(P=0.514) compared with control. The expression of miR-203 was significantly
related with the gender, immunophenotype, chromosome, fusion gene, BCR-ABL,
SIL-TAL1 and prednisone experiment in pediatric ALL and the gender, chromosome,
fusion gene, SIL-TAL1 in pediatric acute leukemia (P<0.05). And in risk
stratification pairwise comparisons, the expression of miR-203 in the medium-risk
and high-risk groups appeared significantly different (P=0.022).
CONCLUSION: miR-203 may not be regulated with methylation mechanism in pediatric 
acute leukemia. miR- 203 may be a protooncogene involved in the formation of
pediatric acute leukemia and ALL. Further analyses indicated that high expression
of miR-203 may be associated with poor prognosis of pediatric ALL and acute
leukemia.

PMID: 24103876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Exp Hematol. 2014 Jan;42(1):46-58. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2013.09.010. Epub 2013
Oct 2.

The orphan nuclear receptor Ear-2 (Nr2f6) is a novel negative regulator of T cell
development.

Ichim CV(1), Dervovic DD(2), Zúñiga-Pflücker JC(2), Wells RA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada;
Biological Sciences, Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, Canada; Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, USA. (2)Biological Sciences,
Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, Canada; Department of Immunology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. (3)Department of Medical Biophysics,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Biological Sciences, Sunnybrook Research 
Institute, Toronto, Canada; Department of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada; Department of Medical Oncology, Myelodysplastic Syndromes
Program, Toronto Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Centre, Toronto, Canada. Electronic
address: rwells@sri.utoronto.ca.

We describe a novel role for the orphan nuclear receptor Ear-2 in regulating T
cell development. Retrovirus-mediated overexpression of Ear-2 (EAR-2++) in a bone
marrow (BM) transplantation assay resulted in limited T cell development and a
greater than tenfold decrease in thymus size and cellularity relative to
controls. Ear-2-transduced murine BM hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in OP9-DL1
cultures showed a proliferation deficit during days 1-5 after induction of
differentiation, which corresponded to increased expression of the cell cycle
regulators p21 (cdkn1a) and p27 (cdkn1b), as well as increased expression of
Hes1, Notch3, Egr1, and Scl (Tal1) and decreased expression of Gli1, Gfi-1,
HoxA9, PU.1, Nrarp, and Tcf1. In addition, there was a block in differentiation
at the DN4 to double-positive (DP) transition accompanied by an increase in
apoptosis, similar to the deficit seen in the ROR<U+03B3>t null mouse. Gene expression
profiling revealed that, like the ROR<U+03B3>t-deficient mouse, EAR-2++ DP cells had
decreased expression of BclXL and increased expression of the proapoptosis gene
Bad. In addition, EAR-2++ DP cells had decreased expression of Bcl11b, PU.1, and 
HoxA9, and increased expression of Id2. Based on these findings, we conclude that
EAR-2++ cells were able to migrate to, but not fully repopulate, the thymus
because of a cell-intrinsic defect in the proliferation of DN1 cells followed by 
a block in differentiation from the DN4 to DP stage of T cell development. We
conclude that Ear-2 is a novel negative regulator of T-cell development and that 
downregulation of Ear-2 is indispensable for the proliferation of DN1 cells and
the survival of DN4-DP cells.

Copyright © 2014 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24096122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 26;8(9):e76637. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076637. eCollection
2013.

The T-cell oncogene Tal2 Is a Target of PU.1 and upregulated during
osteoclastogenesis.

Courtial N(1), Mücke C, Herkt S, Kolodziej S, Hussong H, Lausen J.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Biomedical Research, Frankfurt, Germany.

Transcription factors play a crucial role in regulating differentiation processes
during human life and are important in disease. The basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors Tal1 and Lyl1 play a major role in the regulation of gene
expression in the hematopoietic system and are involved in human leukemia. Tal2, 
which belongs to the same family of transcription factors as Tal1 and Lyl1, is
also involved in human leukaemia. However, little is known regarding the
expression and regulation of Tal2 in hematopoietic cells. Here we show that Tal2 
is expressed in hematopoietic cells of the myeloid lineage. Interestingly, we
found that usage of the Tal2 promoter is different in human and mouse cells. Two 
promoters, hP1 and hP2 drive Tal2 expression in human erythroleukemia K562 cells,
however in mouse RAW cells only the mP1 promoter is used. Furthermore, we found
that Tal2 expression is upregulated during oesteoclastogenesis. We show that Tal2
is a direct target gene of the myeloid transcription factor PU.1, which is a key 
transcription factor for osteoclast gene expression. Strikingly, PU.1 binding to 
the P1 promoter is conserved between mouse and human, but PU.1 binding to P2 was 
only detected in human K562 cells. Additionally, we provide evidence that Tal2
influences the expression of the osteoclastic differentiation gene TRACP. These
findings provide novel insight into the expression control of Tal2 in
hematopoietic cells and reveal a function of Tal2 as a regulator of gene
expression during osteoclast differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3784441
PMID: 24086757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Dev Biol. 2013 Nov 15;383(2):214-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.09.019. Epub 2013 
Sep 25.

tal1 Regulates the formation of intercellular junctions and the maintenance of
identity in the endocardium.

Schumacher JA(1), Bloomekatz J, Garavito-Aguilar ZV, Yelon D.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell Biology, Kimmel Center
for Biology and Medicine, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The endocardium forms the inner lining of the heart tube, where it enables blood 
flow and also interacts with the myocardium during the formation of valves and
trabeculae. Although a number of studies have identified regulators in the
morphogenesis of the myocardium, relatively little is known about the molecules
that control endocardial morphogenesis. Prior work has implicated the bHLH
transcription factor Tal1 in endocardial tube formation: in zebrafish embryos
lacking Tal1, endocardial cells form a disorganized mass within the ventricle and
do not populate the atrium. Through blastomere transplantation, we find that tal1
plays a cell-autonomous role in regulating endocardial extension, suggesting that
Tal1 activity influences the behavior of individual endocardial cells. The
defects in endocardial behavior in tal1-deficient embryos originate during the
earliest steps of endocardial morphogenesis: tal1-deficient endocardial cells
fail to generate a cohesive monolayer at the midline and instead pack tightly
together into a multi-layered aggregate. Moreover, the tight junction protein
ZO-1 is mislocalized in the tal1-deficient endocardium, indicating a defect in
intercellular junction formation. In addition, we find that the tal1-deficient
endocardium fails to maintain its identity; over time, a progressively increasing
number of tal1-deficient endocardial cells initiate myocardial gene expression.
However, the onset of defects in intercellular junction formation precedes the
onset of ectopic myocardial gene expression in the tal1-deficient endocardium. We
therefore propose a model in which Tal1 has distinct roles in regulating the
formation of endocardial intercellular junctions and maintaining endocardial
identity.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3932745
PMID: 24075907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Development. 2013 Oct;140(19):3977-85. doi: 10.1242/dev.097071.

Hemogenic endothelium specification and hematopoietic stem cell maintenance
employ distinct Scl isoforms.

Zhen F(1), Lan Y, Yan B, Zhang W, Wen Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Center of Systems Biology and 
Human Health, Division of Life Science, Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, P.R. China.

Recent studies have shown that nascent hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) derive
directly from the ventral aortic endothelium (VAE) via endothelial to
hematopoietic transition (EHT). However, whether EHT initiates from a random or
predetermined subpopulation of VAE, as well as the molecular mechanism underlying
this process, remain unclear. We previously reported that different zebrafish
stem cell leukemia (scl) isoforms are differentially required for HSC formation
in the ventral wall of the dorsal aorta. However, the exact stage at which these 
isoforms impact HSC development was not defined. Here, using in vivo time-lapse
imaging of scl isoform-specific reporter transgenic zebrafish lines, we show that
prior to EHT scl-ß is selectively expressed in hemogenic endothelial cells, a
unique subset of VAE cells possessing hemogenic potential, whereas scl-a is
expressed later in nascent HSCs as they egress from VAE cells. In accordance with
their expression, loss-of-function studies coupled with in vivo imaging analysis 
reveal that scl-ß acts earlier to specify hemogenic endothelium, which is later
transformed by runx1 into HSCs. Our results also reveal a previously unexpected
role of scl-a in maintaining newly born HSCs in the aorta-gonads-mesonephros.
Thus, our data suggest that a defined hemogenic endothelial population preset by 
scl-ß supports the deterministic emergence of HSCs, and unravel the cellular
mechanisms by which scl isoforms regulate HSC development.

PMID: 24046317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Feb 1;23(3):590-601. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt447. Epub 2013 Sep
17.

Frequent and sex-biased deletion of SLX4IP by illegitimate V(D)J-mediated
recombination in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Meissner B(1), Bartram T, Eckert C, Trka J, Panzer-Grümayer R, Hermanova I,
Ellinghaus E, Franke A, Möricke A, Schrauder A, Teigler-Schlegel A, Dörge P, von 
Stackelberg A, Basso G, Bartram CR, Kirschner-Schwabe R, Bornhäuser B, Bourquin
JP, Cazzaniga G, Hauer J, Attarbaschi A, Izraeli S, Zaliova M, Cario G,
Zimmermann M, Avigad S, Sokalska-Duhme M, Metzler M, Schrappe M, Koehler R, Te
Kronnie G, Stanulla M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel,
Germany.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) accounts for ~25% of pediatric malignancies.
Of interest, the incidence of ALL is observed ~20% higher in males relative to
females. The mechanism behind the phenomenon of sex-specific differences is
presently not understood. Employing genome-wide genetic aberration screening in
19 ALL samples, one of the most recurrent lesions identified was monoallelic
deletion of the 5' region of SLX4IP. We characterized this deletion by
conventional molecular genetic techniques and analyzed its interrelationships
with biological and clinical characteristics using specimens and data from 993
pediatric patients enrolled into trial AIEOP-BFM ALL 2000. Deletion of SLX4IP was
detected in ~30% of patients. Breakpoints within SLX4IP were defined to recurrent
positions and revealed junctions with typical characteristics of illegitimate
V(D)J-mediated recombination. In initial and validation analyses, SLX4IP
deletions were significantly associated with male gender and
ETV6/RUNX1-rearranged ALL (both overall P < 0.0001). For mechanistic validation, 
a second recurrent deletion affecting TAL1 and caused by the same molecular
mechanism was analyzed in 1149 T-cell ALL patients. Validating a differential
role by sex of illegitimate V(D)J-mediated recombination at the TAL1 locus, 128
out of 1149 T-cell ALL samples bore a deletion and males were significantly more 
often affected (P = 0.002). The repeatedly detected association of SLX4IP
deletion with male sex and the extension of the sex bias to deletion of the TAL1 
locus suggest that differential illegitimate V(D)J-mediated recombination events 
at specific loci may contribute to the consistent observation of higher incidence
rates of childhood ALL in boys compared with girls.

PMID: 24045615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Exp Hematol. 2013 Dec;41(12):1062-76.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2013.09.003. Epub 
2013 Sep 13.

Elucidation of the role of LMO2 in human erythroid cells.

Inoue A(1), Fujiwara T, Okitsu Y, Katsuoka Y, Fukuhara N, Onishi Y, Ishizawa K,
Harigae H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

LIM-only protein 2 (LMO2) is a non-DNA-binding component of a protein complex
containing master regulators of hematopoiesis, including GATA-1, SCL/TAL1, and
LDB1. However, the role of LMO2 in human erythroid differentiation is unclear.
LMO2 knockdown in hemin-treated K562 cells reduced the benzidine-positive cell
ratio, suggesting that LMO2 retards hemin-mediated K562 cell differentiation.
Microarray analysis using K562 cells after siRNA-mediated LMO2 knockdown
indicated that 177 and 78 genes were upregulated and downregulated (>1.5-fold),
respectively. The downregulated gene ensemble contained prototypical erythroid
genes (HBB, SLC4A1). Whereas LMO2 knockdown did not affect GATA-1 or SCL/TAL1
expression, it resulted in significantly reduced chromatin occupancy of GATA-1,
SCL/TAL1, and LDB1 at the ß-globin locus control region and SLC4A1 locus in both 
K562 cells and human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived erythroid cells.
Introduction of GATA-1 mutations, shown to impair direct interaction with LMO2,
significantly diminished chromatin occupancy. On the other hand, knockdown of
either SCL/TAL1 or LDB1 also resulted in significantly reduced chromatin
occupancy of GATA-1 at endogenous loci, suggesting that impaired assembly of
these components also affects GATA-1 chromatin occupancy. In an ex vivo model of 
erythroid differentiation from CD34(+) cells, LMO2 protein level peaked on day 5 
and decreased at later stages of differentiation. The LMO2 expression pattern was
similar to those of GATA-1 and SCL/TAL1. Furthermore, shRNA-mediated LMO2
knockdown in primary erythroblasts suggested that LMO2 regulates HBB, HBA, and
SLC4A1 expression. LMO2 contributes to GATA-1 target gene expression by affecting
assembly of the GATA-SCL/TAL1 complex components at endogenous loci.

Copyright © 2013 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24041784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e73865. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073865. eCollection 
2013.

SIL-TAL1 rearrangement is related with poor outcome: a study from a Chinese
institution.

Wang D(1), Zhu G, Wang N, Zhou X, Yang Y, Zhou S, Xiong J, He J, Jiang L, Li C,
Xu D, Huang L, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, The People's Republic of
China.

SIL-TAL1 rearrangement is common in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), 
however its prognostic implication remains controversial. To investigate the
clinical characteristics and outcome of this subtype in Chinese population, we
systemically reviewed 62 patients with newly diagnosed T-ALL, including 15
patients with SIL-TAL1 rearrangement. We found that SIL-TAL1(+) T-ALL was
characterized by higher white blood cell count (P = 0.029) at diagnosis,
predominant cortical T-ALL immunophenotype (P = 0.028) of the leukemic blasts,
and a higher prevalence of tumor lysis syndrome (TLS, P<0.001) and disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIC, P<0.001), which led to a higher early mortality
(P = 0.011). Compared with SIL-TAL1(-) patients, SIL-TAL1(+) patients had shorter
relapse free survival (P = 0.007) and overall survival (P = 0.002). Our NOD/SCID 
xenotransplantation model also demonstrated that SIL-TAL1(+) mice models had
earlier disease onset, higher leukemia cell load in peripheral blood and shorter 
overall survival (P<0.001). Moreover, the SIL-TAL1(+) mice models exerted a
tendency of TLS/DIC and seemed vulnerable towards chemotherapy, which further
simulated our clinical settings. These data demonstrate that SIL-TAL1
rearrangement identifies a distinct subtype with inferior outcome which could
allow for individual therapeutic stratification for T-ALL patients.

PMCID: PMC3767609
PMID: 24040098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Int Immunol. 2013 Dec;25(12):703-14. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxt035. Epub 2013 Sep
13.

Human skin-derived keratinocytes and fibroblasts co-cultured on 3D poly
e-caprolactone scaffold support in vitro HSC differentiation into T-lineage
committed cells.

Palamaro L(1), Guarino V, Scalia G, Antonini D, De Falco L, Bianchino G, Fusco A,
Romano R, Grieco V, Missero C, Del Vecchio L, Ambrosio L, Pignata C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, 'Federico II' University, Naples
80131, Italy.

In humans, the thymus is the primary lymphoid organ able to support the
development of T cells through its three-dimensional (3D) organization of the
thymic stromal cells. Since a remarkable number of similarities are shared
between the thymic epithelial cells (TECs) and skin-derived keratinocytes and
fibroblasts, in this study we used human keratinocytes seeded with fibroblasts on
the 3D poly e-caprolactone scaffold to evaluate their ability to replace TECs in 
supporting T-cell differentiation from human haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). We
observed that in the multicellular biocomposite, early thymocytes expressing
CD7(+)CD1a(+), peculiar markers of an initial T-cell commitment, were de novo
generated. Molecular studies of genes selectively expressed during T-cell
development revealed that TAL1 was down-regulated and Spi-B was up-regulated in
the cell suspension, consistently with a T-cell lineage commitment. Moreover,
PTCRA and RAG2 expression was detected, indicative of a recombinant activity,
required for the generation of a T-cell receptor repertoire. Our results indicate
that in the multicellular biocomposite, containing skin-derived elements in the
absence of thymic stroma, HSCs do start differentiating toward a T-cell lineage
commitment. In conclusion, the construct described in this study exerts some
properties of a lymphoid organoid, suitable for future clinical applications in
cell-based therapies.

PMID: 24038600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Leukemia. 2014 Apr;28(4):770-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.257. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

CBFB-MYH11/RUNX1 together with a compendium of hematopoietic regulators,
chromatin modifiers and basal transcription factors occupies self-renewal genes
in inv(16) acute myeloid leukemia.

Mandoli A(1), Singh AA(1), Jansen PW(2), Wierenga AT(3), Riahi H(1), Franci G(4),
Prange K(1), Saeed S(1), Vellenga E(5), Vermeulen M(2), Stunnenberg HG(1),
Martens JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Cancer Research, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (3)1] Department of Hematology, University of Groningen and
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands [2] Department of
Laboratory Medicine University of Groningen and University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e
Patologia Generale, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy.
(5)Department of Hematology, University of Groningen and University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Different mechanisms for CBFß-MYH11 function in acute myeloid leukemia with
inv(16) have been proposed such as tethering of RUNX1 outside the nucleus,
interference with transcription factor complex assembly and recruitment of
histone deacetylases, all resulting in transcriptional repression of RUNX1 target
genes. Here, through genome-wide CBFß-MYH11-binding site analysis and
quantitative interaction proteomics, we found that CBFß-MYH11 localizes to RUNX1 
occupied promoters, where it interacts with TAL1, FLI1 and TBP-associated factors
(TAFs) in the context of the hematopoietic transcription factors ERG, GATA2 and
PU.1/SPI1 and the coregulators EP300 and HDAC1. Transcriptional analysis revealed
that upon fusion protein knockdown, a small subset of the CBFß-MYH11 target genes
show increased expression, confirming a role in transcriptional repression.
However, the majority of CBFß-MYH11 target genes, including genes implicated in
hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal such as ID1, LMO1 and JAG1, are actively
transcribed and repressed upon fusion protein knockdown. Together these results
suggest an essential role for CBFß-MYH11 in regulating the expression of genes
involved in maintaining a stem cell phenotype.

PMID: 24002588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Exp Med. 2013 Sep 23;210(10):1947-60. doi: 10.1084/jem.20130512. Epub 2013 Aug 
26.

Strawberry notch homologue 2 regulates osteoclast fusion by enhancing the
expression of DC-STAMP.

Maruyama K(1), Uematsu S, Kondo T, Takeuchi O, Martino MM, Kawasaki T, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defense, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center (IFReC),
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka
565-0871, Japan.

Osteoclasts are multinucleated cells formed by fusion of mononuclear precursors
in response to receptor activator of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) ligand (RANKL). We
found that RANKL induced expression of the DExD/H helicase family corepressor
strawberry notch homologue 2 (Sbno2). Previous in vitro studies showed that Sbno2
is induced by IL-10 and is involved in NF-<U+03BA>B repression. However, the role of
Sbno2 in vivo and its pleiotropic functions are unknown. Sbno2 gene targeting
resulted in normal NF-<U+03BA>B activation by TLR ligands. However, Sbno2-deficient mice
exhibited increased bone mass due to impaired osteoclast fusion. Expression of
dendritic cell-specific transmembrane protein (DC-STAMP), a critical player in
osteoclast fusion, was significantly attenuated, and cell fusion of
Sbno2-deficient osteoclasts was rescued by DC-STAMP. Sbno2 directly bound to T
cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1 (Tal1) and attenuated its inhibition of
DC-STAMP expression, leading to activation of the DC-STAMP promoter by
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF). Thus, Sbno2 plays a
pivotal role in bone homeostasis in vivo by fine-tuning osteoclast fusion.

PMCID: PMC3782043
PMID: 23980096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Blood. 2013 Sep 19;122(12):2093-103. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-09-458570. Epub 2013
Aug 7.

Requirement for Lyl1 in a model of Lmo2-driven early T-cell precursor ALL.

McCormack MP(1), Shields BJ, Jackson JT, Nasa C, Shi W, Slater NJ, Tremblay CS,
Rabbitts TH, Curtis DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Haematology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Australia;

Lmo2 is an oncogenic transcription factor that is frequently overexpressed in
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), including early T-cell precursor ALL
(ETP-ALL) cases with poor prognosis. Lmo2 must be recruited to DNA by binding to 
the hematopoietic basic helix-loop-helix factors Scl/Tal1 or Lyl1. However, it is
unknown which of these factors can mediate the leukemic activity of Lmo2. To
address this, we have generated Lmo2-transgenic mice lacking either Scl or Lyl1
in the thymus. We show that although Scl is dispensable for Lmo2-driven leukemia,
Lyl1 is critical for all oncogenic functions of Lmo2, including upregulation of a
stem cell-like gene signature, aberrant self-renewal of thymocytes, and
subsequent generation of T-cell leukemia. Lyl1 expression is restricted to
preleukemic and leukemic stem cell populations in this model, providing a
molecular explanation for the stage-specific expression of the Lmo2-induced gene 
expression program. Moreover, LMO2 and LYL1 are coexpressed in ETP-ALL patient
samples, and LYL1 is required for growth of ETP-ALL cell lines. Thus, the
LMO2-LYL1 interaction is a promising therapeutic target for inhibiting
self-renewing cancer stem cells in T-ALL, including poor-prognosis ETP-ALL cases.

PMID: 23926305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 29;8(7):e70116. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070116. Print 2013.

Ectopic Runx1 expression rescues Tal-1-deficiency in the generation of primitive 
and definitive hematopoiesis.

Tornack J(1), Seiler K, Grützkau A, Grün JR, Onodera M, Melchers F, Tsuneto M.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany.

The transcription factors SCL/Tal-1 and AML1/Runx1 control the generation of
pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells (pHSC) and, thereby, primitive and
definitive hematopoiesis, during embryonic development of the mouse from
mesoderm. Thus, Runx1-deficient mice generate primitive, but not definitive
hematopoiesis, while Tal-1-deficient mice are completely defective. Primitive as 
well as definitive hematopoiesis can be developed "in vitro" from embryonic stem 
cells (ESC). We show that wild type, as well as Tal-1(-/-) and Runx1(-/-) ESCs,
induced to differentiation, all expand within 5 days to comparable numbers of
Flk1(+) mesodermal cells. While wild type ESCs further differentiate to primitive
and definitive erythrocytes, to c-fms(+)Gr1(+)Mac1(+) myeloid cells, and to
B220(+)CD19(+) B- and CD4(+)/CD8(+) T-lymphoid cells, Runx1(-/-) ESCs, as
expected, only develop primitive erythrocytes, and Tal-1(-/-) ESCs do not
generate any hematopoietic cells. Retroviral transduction with Runx1 of
Runx1(-/-) ESCs, differentiated for 4 days to mesoderm, rescues definitive
erythropoiesis, myelopoiesis and lymphopoiesis, though only with 1-10% of the
efficiencies of wild type ESC hematopoiesis. Surprisingly, Tal-1(-/-) ESCs can
also be rescued at comparably low efficiencies to primitive and definitive
erythropoiesis, and to myelopoiesis and lymphopoiesis by retroviral transduction 
with Runx1. These results suggest that Tal-1 expression is needed to express
Runx1 in mesoderm, and that ectopic expression of Runx1 in mesoderm is sufficient
to induce primitive as well as definitive hematopoiesis in the absence of Tal-1. 
Retroviral transduction of "in vitro" differentiating Tal-1(-/-) and Runx1(-/-)
ESCs should be a useful experimental tool to probe selected genes for activities 
in the generation of hematopoietic progenitors "in vitro", and to assess the
potential transforming activities in hematopoiesis of mutant forms of Tal-1 and
Runx1 from acute myeloid leukemia and related tumors.

PMCID: PMC3726448
PMID: 23922928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Stem Cells. 2013 Dec;31(12):2680-9. doi: 10.1002/stem.1500.

Molecular functions of the LIM-homeobox transcription factor Lhx2 in
hematopoietic progenitor cells derived from mouse embryonic stem cells.

Kitajima K(1), Kawaguchi M, Iacovino M, Kyba M, Hara T.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Project Group, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science,
Tokyo, Japan.

We previously demonstrated that hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)-like cells are
robustly expanded from mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) by enforced expression
of Lhx2, a LIM-homeobox domain (LIM-HD) transcription factor. In this study, we
analyzed the functions of Lhx2 in that process using an ESC line harboring an
inducible Lhx2 gene cassette. When ESCs are cultured on OP9 stromal cells,
hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) are differentiated and these HPCs are prone
to undergo rapid differentiation into mature hematopoietic cells. Lhx2 inhibited 
differentiation of HPCs into mature hematopoietic cells and this effect would
lead to accumulation of HSC-like cells. LIM-HD factors interact with LIM domain
binding (Ldb) protein and this interaction abrogates binding of LIM-only (Lmo)
protein to Ldb. We found that one of Lmo protein, Lmo2, was unstable due to
dissociation of Lmo2 from Ldb1 in the presence of Lhx2. This effect of Lhx2 on
the amount of Lmo2 contributed into accumulation of HSC-like cells, since
enforced expression of Lmo2 into HSC-like cells inhibited their self-renewal.
Expression of Gata3 and Tal1/Scl was increased in HSC-like cells and enforced
expression of Lmo2 reduced expression of Gata3 but not Tal1/Scl. Enforced
expression of Gata3 into HPCs inhibited mature hematopoietic cell
differentiation, whereas Gata3-knockdown abrogated the Lhx2-mediated expansion of
HPCs. We propose that multiple transcription factors/cofactors are involved in
the Lhx2-mediated expansion of HSC-like cells from ESCs. Lhx2 appears to
fine-tune the balance between self-renewal and differentiation of HSC-like cells.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23922318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biosci Bioeng. 2014 Feb;117(2):165-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2013.07.007. Epub
2013 Aug 3.

Co-expression of TAL1 and ADH1 in recombinant xylose-fermenting Saccharomyces
cerevisiae improves ethanol production from lignocellulosic hydrolysates in the
presence of furfural.

Hasunuma T(1), Ismail KS(2), Nambu Y(3), Kondo A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Organization of Advanced Science and Technology, 1-1 Rokkodai-cho, Nada, Kobe 
657-8501, Japan. Electronic address: hasunuma@port.kobe-u.ac.jp. (2)School of
Bioprocess Engineering, Universiti Malaysia Perlis, Kompleks Pusat Pengajian
Jejawi 3, Arau, 02600 Perlis, Malaysia; Department of Chemical Science and
Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai-cho,
Nada, Kobe 657-8501, Japan. Electronic address: kusyahidah@unimap.edu.my.
(3)Department of Chemical Science and Engineering, Graduate School of
Engineering, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai-cho, Nada, Kobe 657-8501, Japan.
Electronic address: nambu@people.kobe-u.ac.jp. (4)Department of Chemical Science 
and Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Kobe University, 1-1
Rokkodai-cho, Nada, Kobe 657-8501, Japan. Electronic address:
akondo@kobe-u.ac.jp.

Lignocellulosic biomass dedicated to bioethanol production usually contains
pentoses and inhibitory compounds such as furfural that are not well tolerated by
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Thus, S. cerevisiae strains with the capability of
utilizing both glucose and xylose in the presence of inhibitors such as furfural 
are very important in industrial ethanol production. Under the synergistic
conditions of transaldolase (TAL) and alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) overexpression,
S. cerevisiae MT8-1X/TAL-ADH was able to produce 1.3-fold and 2.3-fold more
ethanol in the presence of 70 mM furfural than a TAL-expressing strain and a
control strain, respectively. We also tested the strains' ability by mimicking
industrial ethanol production from hemicellulosic hydrolysate containing
fermentation inhibitors, and ethanol production was further improved by 16% when 
using MT8-1X/TAL-ADH compared to the control strain. Transcript analysis further 
revealed that besides the pentose phosphate pathway genes TKL1 and TAL1, ADH7 was
also upregulated in response to furfural stress, which resulted in higher ethanol
production compared to the TAL-expressing strain. The improved capability of our 
modified strain was based on its capacity to more quickly reduce furfural in situ
resulting in higher ethanol production. The co-expression of TAL/ADH genes is one
crucial strategy to fully utilize undetoxified lignocellulosic hydrolysate,
leading to cost-competitive ethanol production.

Copyright © 2013 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 23916856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Leuk Res. 2013 Oct;37(10):1309-14. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.07.001. Epub 2013 
Aug 1.

FoxO3a and nilotinib-induced erythroid differentiation of CML-BC cells.

Wang W(1), Li NN, Du Y, Lv FF, Lin GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Southeast Hospital of Xiamen University (175
Hospital of Chinese PLA), Zhangzhou, Fujian Province, China.
wangwei220012@163.com

We explored the potential involvement of FoxO3a activation in erythroid and
granulocytic differentiation for Ph(+) cells of chronic myeloid leukemia blast
crisis (CML BC). We demonstrate that FoxO3a activation in CML blast crisis (BC)
cells by overexpressing FoxO3a leads to the maturation of CML BC cells.
Hemoglobin production significantly increased upon FoxO3a activation in CML BC
cells. FoxO3a activation upregulated erythroid surface protein (glycophorin A,
GPA), but did not significantly modulate granulocytic markers (CD11b).
Additionally, FoxO3a activation reduced the mRNA and protein expression of Tal1. 
Similar results were observed in cells that were given nilotinib. Our results
indicate that FoxO3a activation may promote erythroid differentiation of BC cells
via down-regulating Tal1 expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23915976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Haematologica. 2013 Aug;98(8):1173-84. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.082156.

Breakpoint sites disclose the role of the V(D)J recombination machinery in the
formation of T-cell receptor (TCR) and non-TCR associated aberrations in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Larmonie NS(1), Dik WA, Meijerink JP, Homminga I, van Dongen JJ, Langerak AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Aberrant recombination between T-cell receptor genes and oncogenes gives rise to 
chromosomal translocations that are genetic hallmarks in several subsets of human
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias. The V(D)J recombination machinery has been 
shown to play a role in the formation of these T-cell receptor translocations.
Other, non-T-cell receptor chromosomal aberrations, such as SIL-TAL1 deletions,
have likewise been recognized as V(D)J recombination associated aberrations.
Despite the postulated role of V(D)J recombination, the extent of the V(D)J
recombination machinery involvement in the formation of T-cell receptor and
non-T-cell receptor aberrations in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia is still
poorly understood. We performed a comprehensive in silico and ex vivo evaluation 
of 117 breakpoint sites from 22 different T-cell receptor translocation partners 
as well as 118 breakpoint sites from non-T-cell receptor chromosomal aberrations.
Based on this extensive set of breakpoint data, we provide a comprehensive
overview of T-cell receptor and oncogene involvement in T-ALL. Moreover, we
assessed the role of the V(D)J recombination machinery in the formation of
chromosomal aberrations, and propose an up-dated mechanistic classification on
how the V(D)J recombination machinery contributes to the formation of T-cell
receptor and non-T-cell receptor aberrations in human T-cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3729897
PMID: 23904235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Exp Med. 2013 Jul 29;210(8):1545-57. doi: 10.1084/jem.20122516. Epub 2013 Jul
15.

The TAL1 complex targets the FBXW7 tumor suppressor by activating miR-223 in
human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Mansour MR(1), Sanda T, Lawton LN, Li X, Kreslavsky T, Novina CD, Brand M,
Gutierrez A, Kelliher MA, Jamieson CH, von Boehmer H, Young RA, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02216, USA.

The oncogenic transcription factor TAL1/SCL is aberrantly expressed in 60% of
cases of human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and initiates T-ALL in
mouse models. By performing global microRNA (miRNA) expression profiling after
depletion of TAL1, together with genome-wide analysis of TAL1 occupancy by
chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to massively parallel DNA sequencing, we
identified the miRNA genes directly controlled by TAL1 and its regulatory
partners HEB, E2A, LMO1/2, GATA3, and RUNX1. The most dynamically regulated miRNA
was miR-223, which is bound at its promoter and up-regulated by the TAL1 complex.
miR-223 expression mirrors TAL1 levels during thymic development, with high
expression in early thymocytes and marked down-regulation after the
double-negative-2 stage of maturation. We demonstrate that aberrant miR-223
up-regulation by TAL1 is important for optimal growth of TAL1-positive T-ALL
cells and that sustained expression of miR-223 partially rescues T-ALL cells
after TAL1 knockdown. Overexpression of miR-223 also leads to marked
down-regulation of FBXW7 protein expression, whereas knockdown of TAL1 leads to
up-regulation of FBXW7 protein levels, with a marked reduction of its substrates 
MYC, MYB, NOTCH1, and CYCLIN E. We conclude that TAL1-mediated up-regulation of
miR-223 promotes the malignant phenotype in T-ALL through repression of the FBXW7
tumor suppressor.

PMCID: PMC3727321
PMID: 23857984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Blood. 2013 Aug 15;122(7):1150-61. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-331819. Epub 2013
Jul 8.

Genetic interaction between Kit and Scl.

Lacombe J(1), Krosl G, Tremblay M, Gerby B, Martin R, Aplan PD, Lemieux S, Hoang 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Montréal, QC, Canada.

SCL/TAL1, a tissue-specific transcription factor of the basic helix-loop-helix
family, and c-Kit, a tyrosine kinase receptor, control hematopoietic stem cell
survival and quiescence. Here we report that SCL levels are limiting for the
clonal expansion of Kit<U+207A> multipotent and erythroid progenitors. In addition,
increased SCL expression specifically enhances the sensitivity of these
progenitors to steel factor (KIT ligand) without affecting interleukin-3
response, whereas a DNA-binding mutant antagonizes KIT function and induces
apoptosis in progenitors. Furthermore, a twofold increase in SCL levels in mice
bearing a hypomorphic Kit allele (W41/41) corrects their hematocrits and
deficiencies in erythroid progenitor numbers. At the molecular level, we found
that SCL and c-Kit signaling control a common gene expression signature, of which
19 genes are associated with apoptosis. Half of those were decreased in purified 
megakaryocyte/erythroid progenitors (MEPs) from W41/41 mice and rescued by the
SCL transgene. We conclude that Scl operates downstream of Kit to support the
survival of MEPs. Finally, higher SCL expression upregulates Kit in normal bone
marrow cells and increases chimerism after bone marrow transplantation,
indicating that Scl is also upstream of Kit. We conclude that Scl and Kit
establish a positive feedback loop in multipotent and MEPs.

PMCID: PMC3952531
PMID: 23836559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Biosci Bioeng. 2013 Dec;116(6):706-15. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2013.05.027. Epub 
2013 Jun 27.

Isolation and characterization of a mutant recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae
strain with high efficiency xylose utilization.

Tomitaka M(1), Taguchi H, Fukuda K, Akamatsu T, Kida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Microbial Technology, Faculty of Biotechnology and Life 
Science, Sojo University, 4-22-1 Ikeda, Kumamoto 860-0082, Japan.

A recombinant xylose-utilizing Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain carrying one copy 
of heterologous XYL1 and XYL2 from Pichia stipitis and endogenous XKS1 under the 
control of the TDH3 promoter in the chromosomal DNA was constructed from the
industrial haploid yeast strain NAM34-4C, which showed thermotolerance and acid
tolerance. The recombinant S. cerevisiae strain SCB7 grew in minimal medium
containing xylose as the sole carbon source, and its shortest generation time
(G(short)) was 5 h. From this strain, four mutants showing rapid growth (G(short)
= 2.5 h) in the minimal medium were isolated. The mutants carried four mutations 
that were classified into three linkage groups. Three mutations were dominant and
one mutation was recessive to the wild type allele. The recessive mutation was in
the PHO13 gene encoding para-nitrophenyl phosphatase. The other mutant genes were
not linked to TAL1 gene encoding transaldolase. When the mutants and their
parental strain were used for the batch fermentation in a complex medium at pH
4.0 containing 30 g/L xylose at 35 °C with shaking (60 rpm) and an initial cell
density (Absorbance at 660 nm) of 1.0, all mutants showed efficient ethanol
production and xylose consumption from the early stage of the fermentation
culture. In two mutants, within 24 h, 4.8 g/L ethanol was produced, and the
ethanol yield was 47%, which was 1.4 times higher than that achieved with the
parental strain. The xylose concentration in the medium containing the mutant
decreased linearly at a rate of 1 g/L/h until 24 h.

Copyright © 2013 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 23810666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Anticancer Res. 2013 Jul;33(7):2833-7.

Roles of ZFAT in haematopoiesis, angiogenesis and cancer development.

Tsunoda T(1), Shirasawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, 
Japan.

A zinc-finger gene in autoimmune thyroid disease susceptibility region (ZFAT) was
originally identified as a highly conserved immune-related transcriptional
regulator containing one adenosine-thymidine (AT)-hook and 18 C2H2-type
zinc-finger domains. Subsequently, roles of ZFAT in development, primitive
haematopoiesis, angiogenesis, immune responses and several common diseases, such 
as multiple sclerosis, hypertension and cancer, have been demonstrated.
Previously, we recorded a ZFAT protein expression in MOLT-4 human acute
T-lymphoblastic leukaemia cells, while ZFAT knockdown activated caspases and
induced apoptosis in these cells. Hence, the precise functions of ZFAT are of
particular interest in cancer research. In this article, we have reviewed
investigations on the roles of ZFAT in haematopoietic and angiogenesis, and
discussed the possible involvement of ZFAT in haematopoietic malignancies.

PMID: 23780967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS Genet. 2013 Jun;9(6):e1003524. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003524. Epub 2013 
Jun 6.

USF1 and hSET1A mediated epigenetic modifications regulate lineage
differentiation and HoxB4 transcription.

Deng C(1), Li Y, Liang S, Cui K, Salz T, Yang H, Tang Z, Gallagher PG, Qiu Y,
Roeder R, Zhao K, Bungert J, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.

The interplay between polycomb and trithorax complexes has been implicated in
embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and differentiation. It has been shown
recently that WRD5 and Dpy-30, specific components of the SET1/MLL protein
complexes, play important roles during ESC self-renewal and differentiation of
neural lineages. However, not much is known about how and where specific
trithorax complexes are targeted to genes involved in self-renewal or
lineage-specification. Here, we report that the recruitment of the hSET1A histone
H3K4 methyltransferase (HMT) complex by transcription factor USF1 is required for
mesoderm specification and lineage differentiation. In undifferentiated ESCs,
USF1 maintains hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell (HS/PC) associated bivalent
chromatin domains and differentiation potential. Furthermore, USF1 directed
recruitment of the hSET1A complex to the HoxB4 promoter governs the
transcriptional activation of HoxB4 gene and regulates the formation of early
hematopoietic cell populations. Disruption of USF or hSET1A function by
overexpression of a dominant-negative AUSF1 mutant or by
RNA-interference-mediated knockdown, respectively, led to reduced expression of
mesoderm markers and inhibition of lineage differentiation. We show that USF1 and
hSET1A together regulate H3K4me3 modifications and transcription preinitiation
complex assembly at the hematopoietic-associated HoxB4 gene during
differentiation. Finally, ectopic expression of USF1 in ESCs promotes mesoderm
differentiation and enforces the endothelial-to-hematopoietic transition by
inducing hematopoietic-associated transcription factors, HoxB4 and TAL1. Taken
together, our findings reveal that the guided-recruitment of the hSET1A histone
methyltransferase complex and its H3K4 methyltransferase activity by
transcription regulator USF1 safeguards hematopoietic transcription programs and 
enhances mesoderm/hematopoietic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3675019
PMID: 23754954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Exp Ther Med. 2013 May;5(5):1332-1338. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Characteristics of the four subtypes of myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative
neoplasms.

Wu H(1), Bian S, Chu J, Zhong X, Sun H, Zhang B, Lu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory of Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, 
Jinan, Shandong 250021;

The aim of the present study was to investigate the characteristics of the four
subtypes of myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasms (MDS/MPNs) in order to
improve current knowledge and to aid their diagnosis. A total of 53 cases of
MDS/MPNs were analyzed using routine blood cell analysis and morphological,
cytogenetic and molecular genetic characteristics were investigated. Numerical
data for several groups were compared using a single-factor analysis of variance.
The Student-Newman-Keuls test was used to compare the means of two groups. The
proportions were compared using a Chi-square test or Fisher's exact test.
Analysis of the patients with MDS/MPNs revealed that 46 patients (86.8%) had
paleness and fatigue, and blood analysis revealed hemoglobin (Hb) levels of
83.1±24.6 g/l, a white blood cell (WBC) count of 19.8±8.1×10(9)/l and a platelet 
(PLT) count of 158.7±108.2×10(12)/l. Immature neutrophils and monocytes were
identified in the peripheral blood at levels of 0.058±0.031 and 0.152±0.034%,
respectively. There were 23 cases (43.4%) with dyserythropoiesis and 36 cases
(67.9%) had dysgranulopoiesis. Fifteen cases were immunologically characterized
using flow cytometry (FCM), of which 13 cases showed abnormalities on blasts and 
myelocytes. Karyotyping was performed in 27 cases of MDS/MPN and 12 (44.4%) were 
identified as abnormal. In 23 cases, testing for BCR/ABL1, AML-ETO, CBF-MYH11A,
PML-RARA, E2A-PBX1, TEL-AML1, SIL-TAL1 returned negative results. The JAK2V617F
mutation was positive in one of five cases. The majority of MDS/MPN cases had
anemia, cytosis, low-grade blasts and immature neutrophils in the peripheral
blood and dysplasia in the bone marrow. Immunological abnormalities and abnormal 
karyotypes occurred frequently in MDS/MPNs and although there were no statistical
differences between the four subtypes, these were able to aid diagnosis. No
specific molecular abnormalities were identified in MDS/MPNs.

PMCID: PMC3671785
PMID: 23737874  [PubMed]


148. Am J Hematol. 2013 Sep;88(9):723-9. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23487. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Transcriptomic and phospho-proteomic analyzes of erythroblasts expanded in vitro 
from normal donors and from patients with polycythemia vera.

Hricik T(1), Federici G, Zeuner A, Alimena G, Tafuri A, Tirelli V, Varricchio L, 
Masiello F, Ciaffoni F, Vaglio S, Petricoin EF, Girelli G, Levine RL, Migliaccio 
AR.

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Leukemia Service, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Erythropoiesis is a tightly regulated process which becomes decoupled from its
normal differentiation program in patients with polycythemia vera (PV). Somatic
mutations in JAK2 are commonly associated with this myeloid proliferative
disorder. To gain insight into the molecular events that are required for
abnormally developing erythroid cells to escape dependence on normal growth
signals, we performed in vitro expansion of mature erythroblasts (ERY) from seven
normal healthy donors and from seven polycythemic patients in the presence of
IL3, EPO, SCF for 10, 11, or 13 days. Normal ERYs required exposure to the
glucocorticoid dexamethasone (Dex) for expansion, while PV-derived ERYs expanded 
in the absence of dexamethasone. RNA expression profiling revealed enrichment of 
two known oncogenes, GPR56 and RAB4a, in PV-derived ERYs along with reduced
expression levels of transcription factor TAL1 (ANOVA FDR < 0.05). While both
normal and polycythemic-derived ERYs integrated signaling cascades for growth,
they did so via different signaling pathways which are represented by their
differential phospho-profiles. Our results show that normal ERYs displayed
greater levels of phosphorylation of EGFR, PDGFRß, TGFß, and cKit, while
PV-derived ERYs were characterized by increased phosphorylation of cytoplasmic
kinases in the JAK/STAT, PI3K, and GATA1 pathways. Together these data suggest
that PV erythroblast expansion and maturation may be maintained and enriched in
the absence of dexamethasone through reduced TAL1 expression and by accessing
additional signaling cascades. Members of this acquired repertoire may provide
important insight into the pathogenesis of aberrant erythropoiesis in
myeloproliferative neoplasms such as polycythemia vera.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3771389
PMID: 23720412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Blood. 2013 Jun 27;121(26):5218-27. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-03-488080. Epub 2013 
May 23.

Analysis of disease-causing GATA1 mutations in murine gene complementation
systems.

Campbell AE(1), Wilkinson-White L, Mackay JP, Matthews JM, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA 19104-4318, USA.

Missense mutations in transcription factor GATA1 underlie a spectrum of
congenital red blood cell and platelet disorders. We investigated how these
alterations cause distinct clinical phenotypes by combining structural,
biochemical, and genomic approaches with gene complementation systems that
examine GATA1 function in biologically relevant cellular contexts. Substitutions 
that disrupt FOG1 cofactor binding impair both gene activation and repression and
are associated with pronounced clinical phenotypes. Moreover, clinical severity
correlates with the degree of FOG1 disruption. Surprisingly, 2 mutations shown to
impair DNA binding of GATA1 in vitro did not measurably affect in vivo target
gene occupancy. Rather, one of these disrupted binding to the TAL1 complex,
implicating it in diseases caused by GATA1 mutations. Diminished TAL1 complex
recruitment mainly impairs transcriptional activation and is linked to relatively
mild disease. Notably, different substitutions at the same amino acid can
selectively inhibit TAL1 complex or FOG1 binding, producing distinct cellular and
clinical phenotypes. The structure-function relationships elucidated here were
not predicted by prior in vitro or computational studies. Thus, our findings
uncover novel disease mechanisms underlying GATA1 mutations and highlight the
power of gene complementation assays for elucidating the molecular basis of
genetic diseases.

PMCID: PMC3695365
PMID: 23704091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Leukemia. 2014 Feb;28(2):349-61. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.158. Epub 2013 May 23.

Aberrant TAL1 activation is mediated by an interchromosomal interaction in human 
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Patel B(1), Kang Y(2), Cui K(3), Litt M(4), Riberio MS(1), Deng C(1), Salz T(1), 
Casada S(4), Fu X(5), Qiu Y(6), Zhao K(3), Huang S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. (2)1] Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL,
USA [2] College of Life Science, Jilin University, Changchun, China. (3)Center
for System Biology, NHLBI, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Medical Education Center, Ball State University, Muncie, IN, USA. (5)College
of Life Science, Jilin University, Changchun, China. (6)1] Department of Anatomy 
and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL,
USA [2] Shands Cancer Center, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA. (7)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA [2] Shands
Cancer Center, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.

Long-range chromatin interactions control metazoan gene transcription. However,
the involvement of intra- and interchromosomal interactions in development and
oncogenesis remains unclear. TAL1/SCL is a critical transcription factor required
for the development of all hematopoietic lineages; yet, aberrant TAL1
transcription often occurs in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Here, 
we report that oncogenic TAL1 expression is regulated by different intra- and
interchromosomal loops in normal hematopoietic and leukemic cells, respectively. 
These intra- and interchromosomal loops alter the cell-type-specific enhancers
that interact with the TAL1 promoter. We show that human SET1 (hSET1)-mediated
H3K4 methylations promote a long-range chromatin loop, which brings the +51
enhancer in close proximity to TAL1 promoter 1 in erythroid cells. The
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) facilitates this long-range enhancer/promoter
interaction of the TAL1 locus in erythroid cells while blocking the same
enhancer/promoter interaction of the TAL1 locus in human T-cell leukemia. In
human T-ALL, a T-cell-specific transcription factor c-Maf-mediated
interchromosomal interaction brings the TAL1 promoter into close proximity with a
T-cell-specific regulatory element located on chromosome 16, activating aberrant 
TAL1 oncogene expression. Thus, our study reveals a novel molecular mechanism
involving changes in three-dimensional chromatin interactions that activate the
TAL1 oncogene in human T-cell leukemia.

PMID: 23698277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2013 Apr;35(2):177-84. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2013.02.010.

[Effect of LMO2 overexpression in hemangioblast on its proliferation and
hematopoietic differentiation].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou HS(1), Li C, Zha XJ, Chen B, Liu DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Anhui Medical University,
Hefei, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate function of the Lim-only protein(LMO2) in hemangioblast
generated from murine embryonic stem cells differentiation to hematopoietic
cells.
METHODS: The hemangioblast-specific expression vector with lmo2 or green
fluorescence protein gene was constructed, respectively. The murine embryonic
stem cells were transfected by the hemangioblast-specific expression vectors. The
neomycin-resistance ES cell clones were obtained after having been screened by
G418. The cell clones were spontaneously differentiated into embryo bodies(EB)
containing hemangioblast.Expression of the hematopoietic genes was investigated
by real-time reverse transcription-ploymerase chain reaction during EB
differentiation.For the EB cells, blast-cloning forming cells analysis and
blood-colony forming unit analysis were then performed, respectively. The numbers
of the blasts were counted during hematopoietic differentiation.
RESULTS: The hemangioblast-specific expression vector with lmo2 or green
fluorescence protein was transfected into ES cells.The neomycin-resistance ES
cells generated EBs from 2.5 days to 10 days.Real time reverse
transcription-ploymerase chain reaction analysis indicated that overexpression of
lmo2 increased the expression of hematopoietic genes(gata1, tal1, <U+0392>-h1, and
<U+0392>-major globin) during EB formation.Blast-cloning forming cells analysis showed
that the numbers of the blasts generated by ES/lmo2 was 2-or 3-fold than those in
the controls.The total numbers of the blood-colony forming unit or the numbers of
the erythrocyte colony-forming unit generated by ES/lmo2 were 2.5 times or 3
times, respectively, when compared with the controls.
CONCLUSION: LMO2 enhances the proliferation and differentiation of
hemangioblasts.

PMID: 23643007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 May 2;12(5):587-601. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.03.004.

Mesp1 patterns mesoderm into cardiac, hematopoietic, or skeletal myogenic
progenitors in a context-dependent manner.

Chan SS(1), Shi X, Toyama A, Arpke RW, Dandapat A, Iacovino M, Kang J, Le G,
Hagen HR, Garry DJ, Kyba M.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Mesp1 is regarded as the master regulator of cardiovascular development,
initiating the cardiac transcription factor cascade to direct the generation of
cardiac mesoderm. To define the early embryonic cell population that responds to 
Mesp1, we performed pulse inductions of gene expression over tight temporal
windows following embryonic stem cell differentiation. Remarkably, instead of
promoting cardiac differentiation in the initial wave of mesoderm, Mesp1 binds to
the Tal1 (Scl) +40 kb enhancer and generates Flk-1+ precursors expressing Etv2
(ER71) and Tal1 that undergo hematopoietic differentiation. The second wave of
mesoderm responds to Mesp1 by differentiating into PDGFRa+ precursors that
undergo cardiac differentiation. Furthermore, in the absence of serum-derived
factors, Mesp1 promotes skeletal myogenic differentiation. Lineage tracing
revealed that the majority of yolk sac and many adult hematopoietic cells derive 
from Mesp1+ precursors. Thus, Mesp1 is a context-dependent determination factor, 
integrating the stage of differentiation and the signaling environment to specify
different lineage outcomes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3646300
PMID: 23642367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Development. 2013 Jun;140(12):2632-42. doi: 10.1242/dev.090829. Epub 2013 May 1.

VEGFA-dependent and -independent pathways synergise to drive Scl expression and
initiate programming of the blood stem cell lineage in Xenopus.

Ciau-Uitz A(1), Pinheiro P, Kirmizitas A, Zuo J, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.

The first haematopoietic stem cells share a common origin with the dorsal aorta
and derive from putative adult haemangioblasts in the dorsal lateral plate (DLP) 
mesoderm. Here we show that the transcription factor (TF) stem cell leukaemia
(Scl/Tal1) is crucial for development of these adult haemangioblasts in Xenopus
and establish the regulatory cascade controlling its expression. We show that
VEGFA produced in the somites is required to initiate adult haemangioblast
programming in the adjacent DLP by establishing endogenous VEGFA signalling. This
response depends on expression of the VEGF receptor Flk1, driven by Fli1 and
Gata2. Scl activation requires synergy between this VEGFA-controlled pathway and 
a VEGFA-independent pathway controlled by Fli1, Gata2 and Etv2/Etsrp/ER71, which 
also drives expression of the Scl partner Lmo2. Thus, the two ETS factors Fli1
and Etv6, which drives the VEGFA expression in both somites and the DLP, sit at
the top of the adult haemangioblast gene regulatory network (GRN). Furthermore,
Gata2 is initially activated by Fli1 but later maintained by another ETS factor, 
Etv2. We also establish that Flk1 and Etv2 act independently in the two pathways 
to Scl activation. Thus, detailed temporal, epistatic measurements of key TFs and
VEGFA plus its receptor have enabled us to build a Xenopus adult haemangioblast
GRN.

PMCID: PMC3666388
PMID: 23637333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Sep 15;22(18):2532-42. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0623. Epub 2013
Jun 8.

Ddx46 is required for multi-lineage differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells
in zebrafish.

Hirabayashi R(1), Hozumi S, Higashijima S, Kikuchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Balanced and precisely controlled processes between self-renewal and
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) into all blood lineages are
critical for vertebrate definitive hematopoiesis. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying the maintenance and differentiation of HSCs have not been
fully elucidated. Here, we show that zebrafish Ddx46, encoding a DEAD-box RNA
helicase, is expressed in HSCs of the caudal hematopoietic tissue (CHT). The
number of HSCs expressing the molecular markers cmyb or T-cell acute lymphocytic 
leukemia 1 (tal1) was markedly reduced in Ddx46 mutants. However, massive cell
death of HSCs was not detected, and proliferation of HSCs was normal in the CHT
of the mutants at 48<U+2009>h postfertilization. We found that myelopoiesis occurred,
but erythropoiesis and lymphopoiesis were suppressed, in Ddx46 mutants.
Consistent with these results, the expression of spi1, encoding a regulator of
myeloid development, was maintained, but the expression of gata1a, encoding a
regulator of erythrocyte development, was downregulated in the mutants. Taken
together, our results provide the first genetic evidence that zebrafish Ddx46 is 
required for the multilineage differentiation of HSCs during development, through
the regulation of specific gene expressions.

PMCID: PMC3760052
PMID: 23635340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Blood. 2013 May 30;121(22):4575-85. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-01-479451. Epub 2013 
Apr 22.

Ldb1-nucleated transcription complexes function as primary mediators of global
erythroid gene activation.

Li L(1), Freudenberg J, Cui K, Dale R, Song SH, Dean A, Zhao K, Jothi R, Love PE.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Cellular and Developmental Biology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erythropoiesis is dependent on the lineage-specific transcription factors Gata1, 
Tal1, and Klf1. Several erythroid genes have been shown to require all 3 factors 
for their expression, suggesting that they function synergistically; however,
there is little direct evidence for widespread cooperation. Gata1 and Tal1 can
assemble within higher-order protein complexes (Ldb1 complexes) that include the 
adapter molecules Lmo2 and Ldb1. Ldb1 proteins are capable of coassociation, and 
long-range Ldb1-mediated oligomerization of enhancer- and promoter-bound Ldb1
complexes has been shown to be required for ß-globin gene expression. In this
study, we generated a genomewide map of Ldb1 complex binding sites that revealed 
widespread binding at erythroid genes and at known erythroid enhancer elements.
Ldb1 complex binding sites frequently colocalized with Klf1 binding sites and
with consensus binding motifs for other erythroid transcription factors.
Transcriptomic analysis demonstrated a strong correlation between Ldb1 complex
binding and Ldb1 dependency for gene expression and identified a large cohort of 
genes coregulated by Ldb1 complexes and Klf1. Together, these results provide a
foundation for defining the mechanism and scope of Ldb1 complex activity during
erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3668490
PMID: 23610375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Med Sci (Paris). 2013 Mar;29(3):257-9. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2013293010. Epub 2013 
Mar 27.

[An unexpected repressive role for Scl in the embryonic endothelium].

[Article in French]

Montel-Hagen A, Van Handel B, Mikkola H.

PMID: 23544378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Leukemia. 2013 Jul;27(7):1603-6. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.63. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Novel TAL1 targets beyond protein-coding genes: identification of TAL1-regulated 
microRNAs in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Correia NC, Durinck K, Leite AP, Ongenaert M, Rondou P, Speleman F, Enguita FJ,
Barata JT.

PMID: 23448994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55530. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055530. Epub 2013 Feb 12.

Generation of megakaryocytic progenitors from human embryonic stem cells in a
feeder- and serum-free medium.

Pick M(1), Azzola L, Osborne E, Stanley EG, Elefanty AG.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Immunology and Stem Cell Laboratories, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia. Marjorie@cc.huji.ac.il

BACKGROUND: The production of human platelets from embryonic stem cells in a
defined culture system is a prerequisite for the generation of platelets for
therapeutic use. As an important step towards this goal, we report the
differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) towards the megakaryocyte
(Mk) lineage using a 'spin embryoid body' method in serum-free differentiation
medium.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Immunophenotypic analyses of differentiating 
hESC identified a subpopulation of cells expressing high levels of CD41a that
expressed other markers associated with the Mk lineage, including CD110, CD42b
and CD61. Differentiated cells were sorted on the basis of their expression of
CD41a, CD34 and CD45 and assessed for Mk colony formation, expression of myeloid 
and Mk genes and ability to endoreplicate DNA. In a collagen-based colony assay, 
the CD41a<U+207A> cells sorted from these differentiation cultures produced 100-800 Mk
progenitors at day 13 and 25-160 Mk progenitors at day 20 of differentiation per 
100,000 cells assayed. Differentiated Mk cells produced platelet-like particles
which expressed CD42b and were activated by ADP, similar to platelets generated
from precursors in cord blood. These studies were complemented by real time PCR
analyses showing that subsets of cells enriched for CD41a<U+207A> Mk precursors
expressed high levels of Mk associated genes such as PF4 and MPL. Conversely,
high levels of myeloid and erythroid related transcripts, such as GATA1, TAL1/SCL
and PU.1, were detected in sorted fractions containing CD34<U+207A> and CD45<U+207A> cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe a serum- and feeder-free culture system that enabled the
generation of Mk progenitors from human embryonic stem cells. These cells formed 
colonies that included differentiated Mks that fragmented to form platelet-like
particles. This protocol represents an important step towards the generation of
human platelets for therapeutic use.

PMCID: PMC3570533
PMID: 23424635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng. 2013 Oct;36(10):1509-18. doi: 10.1007/s00449-013-0909-3. 
Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Transcriptome analysis of xylose metabolism in the thermotolerant methylotrophic 
yeast Hansenula polymorpha.

Kim OC(1), Suwannarangsee S, Oh DB, Kim S, Seo JW, Kim CH, Kang HA, Kim JY, Kwon 
O.

Author information: 
(1)Systems and Synthetic Biology Research Center, Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, 305-806, Korea.

The thermotolerant methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha is able to grow at
elevated temperature up to 48 °C as one of a few yeast strains which are
naturally capable of alcoholic fermentation of xylose, a pentose sugar abundant
in lignocellulosic biomass. However, the current level of ethanol production from
xylose by H. polymorpha is still very low compared to those of other
xylose-fermenting strains. Therefore, it is necessary to analyze and remodel the 
xylose metabolism in H. polymorpha at the whole genome level to identify and
overcome these limits. In the present study, the transcriptomes of H. polymorpha 
grown on xylose were compared with those of glucose-grown cells under both
aerobic and microaerobic conditions. Approximately, two percent of H. polymorpha 
genes were either up- or down-regulated by more than two-fold during the growth
on xylose. The majority of the up-regulated genes were involved in metabolism.
Some genes involved in xylose metabolism, such as XYL1, XYL2, and TAL1 were also 
up-regulated, despite the fact that the differences in their induction level were
only about three-fold. On the other hand, the majority of the down-regulated
genes were involved in metabolism and cellular transport. Interestingly, some
genes involved in glycolysis and ethanol fermentation were also repressed during 
growth on xylose, suggesting that these genes are good targets for engineering H.
polymorpha to improve xylose fermentation.

PMID: 23380941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Br J Haematol. 2013 Apr;161(1):117-27. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12231. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

KPT-330 inhibitor of CRM1 (XPO1)-mediated nuclear export has selective
anti-leukaemic activity in preclinical models of T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia and acute myeloid leukaemia.

Etchin J(1), Sanda T, Mansour MR, Kentsis A, Montero J, Le BT, Christie AL,
McCauley D, Rodig SJ, Kauffman M, Shacham S, Stone R, Letai A, Kung AL, Thomas
Look A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02215, USA.

This study explored the anti-leukaemic efficacy of novel irreversible inhibitors 
of the major nuclear export receptor, chromosome region maintenance 1 (CRM1, also
termed XPO1). We found that these novel CRM1 antagonists, termed SINE (Selective 
Inhibitors of Nuclear Export), induced rapid apoptosis at low nanomolar
concentrations in a panel of 14 human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
(T-ALL) cell lines representing different molecular subtypes of the disease. To
assess in vivo anti-leukaemia cell activity, we engrafted immunodeficient mice
intravenously with the human T-ALL MOLT-4 cells, which harbour activating
mutations of NOTCH1 and NRAS as well as loss of function of the CDKN2A, PTEN and 
TP53 tumour suppressors and express a high level of oncogenic transcription
factor TAL1. Importantly, we examined the in vivo anti-leukaemic efficacy of the 
clinical SINE compound KPT-330 against T-ALL and acute myeloid leukaemia (AML)
cells. These studies demonstrated striking in vivo activity of KPT-330 against
T-ALL and AML cells, with little toxicity to normal murine haematopoietic cells. 
Taken together, our results show that SINE CRM1 antagonists represent promising
'first-in-class' drugs with a novel mechanism of action and wide therapeutic
index, and imply that drugs of this class show promise for the targeted therapy
of T-ALL and AML.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3980736
PMID: 23373539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 22;288(12):8433-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.413260. Epub 2013
Jan 22.

Identification of biologically relevant enhancers in human erythroid cells.

Su MY(1), Steiner LA, Bogardus H, Mishra T, Schulz VP, Hardison RC, Gallagher PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA.

Identification of cell type-specific enhancers is important for understanding the
regulation of programs controlling cellular development and differentiation.
Enhancers are typically marked by the co-transcriptional activator protein p300
or by groups of cell-expressed transcription factors. We hypothesized that a
unique set of enhancers regulates gene expression in human erythroid cells, a
highly specialized cell type evolved to provide adequate amounts of oxygen
throughout the body. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by massively
parallel sequencing, genome-wide maps of candidate enhancers were constructed for
p300 and four transcription factors, GATA1, NF-E2, KLF1, and SCL, using primary
human erythroid cells. These data were combined with gene expression analyses,
and candidate enhancers were identified. Consistent with their predicted function
as candidate enhancers, there was statistically significant enrichment of p300
and combinations of co-localizing erythroid transcription factors within 1-50 kb 
of the transcriptional start site (TSS) of genes highly expressed in erythroid
cells. Candidate enhancers were also enriched near genes with known erythroid
cell function or phenotype. Candidate enhancers exhibited moderate conservation
with mouse and minimal conservation with nonplacental vertebrates. Candidate
enhancers were mapped to a set of erythroid-associated, biologically relevant,
SNPs from the genome-wide association studies (GWAS) catalogue of NHGRI, National
Institutes of Health. Fourteen candidate enhancers, representing 10 genetic loci,
mapped to sites associated with biologically relevant erythroid traits. Fragments
from these loci directed statistically significant expression in reporter gene
assays. Identification of enhancers in human erythroid cells will allow a better 
understanding of erythroid cell development, differentiation, structure, and
function and provide insights into inherited and acquired hematologic disease.

PMCID: PMC3605659
PMID: 23341446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Blood. 2013 Mar 21;121(12):2289-300. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-446120. Epub 2013
Jan 17.

Activity of a heptad of transcription factors is associated with stem cell
programs and clinical outcome in acute myeloid leukemia.

Diffner E(1), Beck D, Gudgin E, Thoms JA, Knezevic K, Pridans C, Foster S, Goode 
D, Lim WK, Boelen L, Metzeler KH, Micklem G, Bohlander SK, Buske C, Burnett A,
Ottersbach K, Vassiliou GS, Olivier J, Wong JW, Göttgens B, Huntly BJ, Pimanda
JE.

Author information: 
(1)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2014 May 1;123(18):2901.

Aberrant transcriptional programs in combination with abnormal proliferative
signaling drive leukemic transformation. These programs operate in normal
hematopoiesis where they are involved in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
proliferation and maintenance. Ets Related Gene (ERG) is a component of normal
and leukemic stem cell signatures and high ERG expression is a risk factor for
poor prognosis in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). However, mechanisms that underlie
ERG expression in AML and how its expression relates to leukemic stemness are
unknown. We report that ERG expression in AML is associated with activity of the 
ERG promoters and +85 stem cell enhancer and a heptad of transcription factors
that combinatorially regulate genes in HSCs. Gene expression signatures derived
from ERG promoter-stem cell enhancer and heptad activity are associated with
clinical outcome when ERG expression alone fails. We also show that the heptad
signature is associated with AMLs that lack somatic mutations in NPM1 and confers
an adverse prognosis when associated with FLT3 mutations. Taken together, these
results suggest that transcriptional regulators cooperate to establish or
maintain primitive stem cell-like signatures in leukemic cells and that the
underlying pattern of somatic mutations contributes to the development of these
signatures and modulate their influence on clinical outcome.

PMID: 23327922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Mar;33(6):1254-66. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01525-12. Epub 2013 Jan
14.

Impaired in vitro erythropoiesis following deletion of the Scl (Tal1) +40
enhancer is largely compensated for in vivo despite a significant reduction in
expression.

Ferreira R(1), Spensberger D, Silber Y, Dimond A, Li J, Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research & Wellcome
Trust and MRC Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

The Scl (Tal1) gene encodes a helix-loop-helix transcription factor essential for
hematopoietic stem cell and erythroid development. The Scl +40 enhancer is
situated downstream of Map17, the 3' flanking gene of Scl, and is active in
transgenic mice during primitive and definitive erythropoiesis. To analyze the in
vivo function of the Scl +40 enhancer within the Scl/Map17 transcriptional
domain, we deleted this element in the germ line. Scl(<U+0394>40/<U+0394>40) mice were viable
with reduced numbers of erythroid CFU in both bone marrow and spleen yet
displayed a normal response to stress hematopoiesis. Analysis of Scl(<U+0394>40/<U+0394>40)
embryonic stem (ES) cells revealed impaired erythroid differentiation, which was 
accompanied by a failure to upregulate Scl when erythropoiesis was initiated.
Map17 expression was also reduced in hematopoietic tissues and differentiating ES
cells, and the Scl +40 element was able to enhance activity of the Map17
promoter. However, only Scl but not Map17 could rescue the Scl(<U+0394>40/<U+0394>40) ES
phenotype. Together, these data demonstrate that the Scl +40 enhancer is an
erythroid cell-specific enhancer that regulates the expression of both Scl and
Map17. Moreover, deletion of the +40 enhancer causes a novel erythroid phenotype,
which can be rescued by ectopic expression of Scl but not Map17.

PMCID: PMC3592016
PMID: 23319051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(11):5469-75.

Five most common prognostically important fusion oncogenes are detected in the
majority of Pakistani pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients and are
strongly associated with disease biology and treatment outcome.

Awan T(1), Iqbal Z, Aleem A, Sabir N, Absar M, Rasool M, Tahir AH, Basit S,
Khalid AM, Sabar MF, Asad S, Ali AS, Mahmood A, Akram M, Saeed T, Saleem A,
Mohsin D, Shah IH, Khalid M, Asif M, Haq R, Iqbal M, Akhtar T.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, Oncology and Pharmacogenetic Engineering Sciences (HOPES) Group,
Health Sciences Laboratories, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Department of
Zoology, University of the Punjab, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a complex
genetic disease involving many fusion oncogenes (FO) having prognostic
significance. The frequency of various FO can vary in different ethnic groups,
with important implications for prognosis, drug selection and treatment outcome.
METHOD: We studied fusion oncogenes in 101 pediatric ALL patients using
interphase FISH and RT-PCR, and their associations with clinical features and
treatment outcome.
RESULTS: Five most common fusion genes i.e. BCR-ABL t (22; 9), TCF3-PBX1 (t 1;
19), ETV6-RUNX1 (t 12; 21), MLL-AF4 (t 4; 11) and SIL-TAL1 (del 1p32) were found 
in 89/101 (88.1%) patients. Frequency of BCR-ABL was 44.5% (45/101). BCR-ABL
positive patients had a significantly lower survival (43.7±4.24 weeks) and higher
white cell count as compared to others, except patients with MLL-AF4. The highest
relapse-free survival was documented with ETV6-RUNX1 (14.2 months) followed
closely by those cases in which no gene was detected (13.100). RFS with BCR-ABL, 
MLL-AF4, TCF3-PBX1 and SIL-TAL1 was less than 10 months (8.0, 3.6, 5.5 and 8.1
months, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study from Pakistan correlating molecular markers 
with disease biology and treatment outcome in pediatric ALL. It revealed the
highest reported frequency of BCR-ABL FO in pediatric ALL, associated with poor
overall survival. Our data indicate an immediate need for incorporation of
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in the treatment of BCR-ABL+ pediatric ALL in this
population and the development of facilities for stem cell transplantation.

PMID: 23317202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Thromb Haemost. 2013 Apr;11(4):593-604. doi: 10.1111/jth.12131.

Transcription factors in late megakaryopoiesis and related platelet disorders.

Tijssen MR(1), Ghevaert C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, UK.

Cell type-specific transcription factors regulate the repertoire of genes
expressed in a cell and thereby determine its phenotype. The differentiation of
megakaryocytes, the platelet progenitors, from hematopoietic stem cells is a
well-known process that can be mimicked in culture. However, the efficient
formation of platelets in culture remains a challenge. Platelet formation is a
complicated process including megakaryocyte maturation, platelet assembly and
platelet shedding. We hypothesize that a better understanding of the
transcriptional regulation of this process will allow us to influence it such
that sufficient numbers of platelets can be produced for clinical applications.
After an introduction to gene regulation and platelet formation, this review
summarizes the current knowledge of the regulation of platelet formation by the
transcription factors EVI1, GATA1, FLI1, NFE2, RUNX1, SRF and its co-factor MKL1,
and TAL1. Also covered is how some platelet disorders including
myeloproliferative neoplasms, result from disturbances of the transcriptional
regulation. These disorders give us invaluable insights into the crucial role
these transcription factors play in platelet formation. Finally, there is
discussion of how a better understanding of these processes will be needed to
allow for efficient production of platelets in vitro.

© 2013 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

PMCID: PMC3824237
PMID: 23311859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Leukemia. 2013 Jun;27(6):1348-57. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.2. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Bivalent promoter marks and a latent enhancer may prime the leukaemia oncogene
LMO1 for ectopic expression in T-cell leukaemia.

Oram SH(1), Thoms J, Sive JI, Calero-Nieto FJ, Kinston SJ, Schütte J, Knezevic K,
Lock RB, Pimanda JE, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and
Wellcome Trust and MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

LMO1 is a transcriptional regulator and a T-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL)
oncogene. Although first identified in association with a chromosomal
translocation in T-ALL, the ectopic expression of LMO1 occurs far more frequently
in the absence of any known mutation involving its locus. Given that LMO1 is
barely expressed in any haematopoietic lineage, and activation of transcriptional
drivers in leukaemic cells is not well described, we investigated the regulation 
of this gene in normal haematopoietic and leukaemic cells. We show that LMO1 has 
two promoters that drive reporter gene expression in transgenic mice to neural
tissues known to express endogenous LMO1. The LMO1 promoters display bivalent
histone marks in multiple blood lineages including T-cells, and a 3' flanking
region at LMO1 +57 contains a transcriptional enhancer that is active in
developing blood cells in transgenic mouse embryos. The LMO1 promoters become
activated in T-ALL together with the 3' enhancer, which is bound in primary T-ALL
cells by SCL/TAL1 and GATA3. Taken together, our results show that LMO1 is poised
for expression in normal progenitors, where activation of SCL/TAL1 together with 
a breakdown of epigenetic repression of LMO1 regulatory elements induces ectopic 
LMO1 expression that contributes to the development and maintenance of T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC3677138
PMID: 23302769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53426. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053426. Epub 2013 Jan 2.

Retrotransposon insertion in the T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1 (Tal1) gene 
is associated with severe renal disease and patchy alopecia in Hairpatches (Hpt) 
mice.

Hosur V(1), Cox ML, Burzenski LM, Riding RL, Alley L, Lyons BL, Kavirayani A,
Martin KA, Cox GA, Johnson KR, Shultz LD.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, United States of America.

"Hairpatches" (Hpt) is a naturally occurring, autosomal semi-dominant mouse
mutation. Hpt/Hpt homozygotes die in utero, while Hpt/+ heterozygotes exhibit
progressive renal failure accompanied by patchy alopecia. This mutation is a
model for the rare human disorder "glomerulonephritis with sparse hair and
telangiectases" (OMIM 137940). Fine mapping localized the Hpt locus to a 6.7 Mb
region of Chromosome 4 containing 62 known genes. Quantitative real time PCR
revealed differential expression for only one gene in the interval, T-cell acute 
lymphocytic leukemia 1 (Tal1), which was highly upregulated in the kidney and
skin of Hpt/+ mice. Southern blot analysis of Hpt mutant DNA indicated a new
EcoRI site in the Tal1 gene. High throughput sequencing identified an endogenous 
retroviral class II intracisternal A particle insertion in Tal1 intron 4. Our
data suggests that the IAP insertion in Tal1 underlies the histopathological
changes in the kidney by three weeks of age, and that glomerulosclerosis is a
consequence of an initial developmental defect, progressing in severity over
time. The Hairpatches mouse model allows an investigation into the effects of
Tal1, a transcription factor characterized by complex regulation patterns, and
its effects on renal disease.

PMCID: PMC3534690
PMID: 23301070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52319. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052319. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Gene expression profiling combined with bioinformatics analysis identify
biomarkers for Parkinson disease.

Diao H(1), Li X, Hu S, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, China.

Parkinson disease (PD) progresses relentlessly and affects approximately 4% of
the population aged over 80 years old. It is difficult to diagnose in its early
stages. The purpose of our study is to identify molecular biomarkers for PD
initiation using a computational bioinformatics analysis of gene expression. We
downloaded the gene expression profile of PD from Gene Expression Omnibus and
identified differentially coexpressed genes (DCGs) and dysfunctional pathways in 
PD patients compared to controls. Besides, we built a regulatory network by
mapping the DCGs to known regulatory data between transcription factors (TFs) and
target genes and calculated the regulatory impact factor of each transcription
factor. As the results, a total of 1004 genes associated with PD initiation were 
identified. Pathway enrichment of these genes suggests that biological processes 
of protein turnover were impaired in PD. In the regulatory network, HLF, E2F1 and
STAT4 were found have altered expression levels in PD patients. The expression
levels of other transcription factors, NKX3-1, TAL1, RFX1 and EGR3, were not
found altered. However, they regulated differentially expressed genes. In
conclusion, we suggest that HLF, E2F1 and STAT4 may be used as molecular
biomarkers for PD; however, more work is needed to validate our result.

PMCID: PMC3532340
PMID: 23284986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. FEMS Yeast Res. 2013 Mar;13(2):241-4. doi: 10.1111/1567-1364.12028. Epub 2013 Jan
16.

Isobutanol production from D-xylose by recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Brat D(1), Boles E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Goethe-University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany.

Simultaneous overexpression of an optimized, cytosolically localized valine
biosynthesis pathway together with overexpression of xylose isomerase XylA from
Clostridium phytofermentans, transaldolase Tal1 and xylulokinase Xks1 enabled
recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells to complement the valine auxotrophy of
ilv2,3,5 triple deletion mutants for growth on D-xylose as the sole carbon
source. Moreover, after additional overexpression of ketoacid decarboxylase Aro10
and alcohol dehydrogenase Adh2, the cells were able to ferment D-xylose directly 
to isobutanol.

© 2013 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23279585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jan 8;110(2):E141-50. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1214361110. Epub 2012 Dec 12.

Signaling axis involving Hedgehog, Notch, and Scl promotes the embryonic
endothelial-to-hematopoietic transition.

Kim PG(1), Albacker CE, Lu YF, Jang IH, Lim Y, Heffner GC, Arora N, Bowman TV,
Lin MI, Lensch MW, De Los Angeles A, Zon LI, Loewer S, Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, 
Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

During development, the hematopoietic lineage transits through hemogenic
endothelium, but the signaling pathways effecting this transition are
incompletely characterized. Although the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is hypothesized to
play a role in patterning blood formation, early embryonic lethality of mice
lacking Hh signaling precludes such analysis. To determine a role for Hh
signaling in patterning of hemogenic endothelium, we assessed the effect of
altered Hh signaling in differentiating mouse ES cells, cultured mouse embryos,
and developing zebrafish embryos. In differentiating mouse ES cells and mouse
yolk sac cultures, addition of Indian Hh ligand increased hematopoietic
progenitors, whereas chemical inhibition of Hh signaling reduced hematopoietic
progenitors without affecting primitive streak mesoderm formation. In the setting
of Hh inhibition, induction of either Notch signaling or overexpression of Stem
cell leukemia (Scl)/T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia protein 1 rescued hemogenic
vascular-endothelial cadherin(+) cells and hematopoietic progenitor formation.
Together, our results reveal that Scl overexpression is sufficient to rescue the 
developmental defects caused by blocking the Hh and Notch pathways, and inform
our understanding of the embryonic endothelial-to-hematopoietic transition.

PMCID: PMC3545793
PMID: 23236128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013 Jul;54(7):1521-6. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2012.754888. Epub
2013 Jan 7.

Detection and clinical significance of gene rearrangements in Chinese patients
with adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Liu F(1), Gao L, Jing Y, Xu YY, Ding Y, Zhou MH, Ma C, Li MY, Sun JZ, Wang LL, Yu
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.

This study aimed to develop a novel multiplex reverse transcription-nested
polymerase chain reaction (RT-nPCR) assay to accurately and effectively detect 10
common gene rearrangements in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and to
examine the clinicopathologic characteristics and other genetic aberrations of
patients with ALL expressing different fusion genes. Our RT-nPCR assay had a
positive detection rate of 35.15% (90/256) for the 10 fusion genes. BCR-ABL1,
FUS-ERG, MLL-AF4, ETV6-RUNX1, E2A-PBX1, dupMLL, MLL-AF10, MLL-ENL, SET-NUP214 and
SIL-TAL1 were detected in 36 (14.06%), 14 (5.47%), 14 (5.47%), four (1.56%), four
(1.56%), five (1.95%), four (1.56%), two (0.78%), two (0.78%) and five patients
(1.95%), respectively. The RT-nPCR results were further confirmed by split-out
PCR, and cytogenetic and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis
revealed corresponding translocations and fusions in 63 and 74 cases,
respectively. JAK2 and IKZF1 mutations were commonly detected in patients with
BCR-ABL1 ALL, and HOX overexpression was highly correlated with MLL fusions and
SET-NUP214. This study demonstrates that RT-nPCR is an effective method for
identifying 10 gene rearrangements in adult ALL, and it could potentially be
developed for diagnostic use and prognostic studies of ALL.

PMID: 23210573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 11;288(2):886-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.417089. Epub 2012
Nov 19.

Functional expression of SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus (Stil) protects retinal
dopaminergic cells from neurotoxin-induced degeneration.

Li J(1), Li P, Carr A, Wang X, DeLaPaz A, Sun L, Lee E, Tomei E, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
Indiana 46556, USA.

We previously isolated a dominant mutation, night blindness b (nbb), which causes
a late onset of retinal dopaminergic cell degeneration in zebrafish. In this
study, we cloned the zebrafish nbb locus. Sequencing results revealed that nbb is
a homolog of the vertebrate SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus (Stil). The Stil gene has
been shown to play important roles in the regulation of vertebrate embryonic
neural development and human cancer cell proliferation. In this study, we
demonstrate that functional expression of Stil is also required for neural
survival. In zebrafish, decreased expression of Stil resulted in increased toxic 
susceptibility of retinal dopaminergic cells to 6-hydroxydopamine. Increases in
Stil-mediated Shh signaling transduction (i.e. by knocking down the Shh repressor
Sufu) prevented dopaminergic cell death induced by neurotoxic insult. The data
suggest that the oncogene Stil also plays important roles in neural protection.

PMCID: PMC3543037
PMID: 23166330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Exp Hematol. 2013 Mar;41(3):303-15.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.10.015. Epub
2012 Nov 2.

Role of transcriptional corepressor ETO2 in erythroid cells.

Fujiwara T(1), Alqadi YW, Okitsu Y, Fukuhara N, Onishi Y, Ishizawa K, Harigae H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. fujiwara-to@apple.email.ne.jp

Transcriptional corepressor ETO2 is a component of a protein complex containing
master regulators of hematopoiesis, including GATA-1, SCL/TAL1, LMO2, and LDB1.
To elucidate the role of ETO2 during erythroid differentiation, including the
effects of ETO2 on GATA-1 targets, we performed gene expression profiling using
K562 cells overexpressed with ETO2. The analysis demonstrated that 667 and 598
genes were upregulated and downregulated (more than twofold), respectively, in
ETO2-overexpressing cells. ETO2-repressed genes included those encoding
prototypical erythroid proteins. To test what percentages of ETO2-repressed genes
could be direct target genes of GATA-1 in K562 cells, we merged the microarray
results with ChIP-seq profile (n = 5,749), demonstrating that 23.1% of
ETO2-repressed genes contained significant GATA-1 in their loci. However, there
was no significant enrichment of PU.1 target genes among ETO2-repressed genes.
Gene ontology analysis among ETO2-repressed genes revealed significant enrichment
of genes related to "oxygen transporter," corresponding to globin genes.
Quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation and ETO2 knockdown analyses confirmed 
that ETO2 directly regulates globin genes in K562 cells. Next, we evaluated the
role of ETO2 in human primary erythroblasts, derived from cord blood
CD34-positive cells. In an ex vivo model of erythroid differentiation from
CD34-positive cells, ETO2 protein level peaked at day 2-4 and almost diminished
at the later stage of differentiation. Furthermore, short hairpin RNA-mediated
knockdown and retroviral vector-mediated overexpression of ETO2 in primary
erythroblasts suggested that ETO2 significantly represses HBB, HBA, and ALAS2
expression. In summary, ETO2 regulates GATA-1 target genes critical for erythroid
differentiation, and the decrease of ETO2 levels during erythroid differentiation
would contribute to the activation of these targets.

Copyright © 2013 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23127762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47137. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047137. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

Integrative analysis of somatic mutations altering microRNA targeting in cancer
genomes.

Ziebarth JD(1), Bhattacharya A, Cui Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee, United States of America.

Determining the functional impact of somatic mutations is crucial to
understanding tumorigenesis and metastasis. Recent sequences of several cancers
have provided comprehensive lists of somatic mutations across entire genomes,
enabling investigation of the functional impact of somatic mutations in
non-coding regions. Here, we study somatic mutations in 3'UTRs of genes that have
been identified in four cancers and computationally predict how they may alter
miRNA targeting, potentially resulting in dysregulation of the expression of the 
genes harboring these mutations. We find that somatic mutations create or disrupt
putative miRNA target sites in the 3'UTRs of many genes, including several genes,
such as MITF, EPHA3, TAL1, SCG3, and GSDMA, which have been previously associated
with cancer. We also integrate the somatic mutations with germline mutations and 
results of association studies. Specifically, we identify putative miRNA target
sites in the 3'UTRs of BMPR1B, KLK3, and SPRY4 that are disrupted by both somatic
and germline mutations and, also, are in linkage disequilibrium blocks with high 
scoring markers from cancer association studies. The somatic mutation in BMPR1B
is located in a target site of miR-125b; germline mutations in this target site
have previously been both shown to disrupt regulation of BMPR1B by miR-125b and
linked with cancer.

PMCID: PMC3473044
PMID: 23091610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. EMBO J. 2012 Nov 14;31(22):4318-33. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.275. Epub 2012 Oct
12.

RUNX1 reshapes the epigenetic landscape at the onset of haematopoiesis.

Lichtinger M(1), Ingram R, Hannah R, Müller D, Clarke D, Assi SA, Lie-A-Ling M,
Noailles L, Vijayabaskar MS, Wu M, Tenen DG, Westhead DR, Kouskoff V, Lacaud G,
Göttgens B, Bonifer C.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Haematology, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

Cell fate decisions during haematopoiesis are governed by lineage-specific
transcription factors, such as RUNX1, SCL/TAL1, FLI1 and C/EBP family members. To
gain insight into how these transcription factors regulate the activation of
haematopoietic genes during embryonic development, we measured the genome-wide
dynamics of transcription factor assembly on their target genes during the
RUNX1-dependent transition from haemogenic endothelium (HE) to haematopoietic
progenitors. Using a Runx1-/- embryonic stem cell differentiation model
expressing an inducible Runx1 gene, we show that in the absence of RUNX1,
haematopoietic genes bind SCL/TAL1, FLI1 and C/EBPß and that this early priming
is required for correct temporal expression of the myeloid master regulator PU.1 
and its downstream targets. After induction, RUNX1 binds to numerous de novo
sites, initiating a local increase in histone acetylation and rapid global
alterations in the binding patterns of SCL/TAL1 and FLI1. The acquisition of
haematopoietic fate controlled by Runx1 therefore does not represent the
establishment of a new regulatory layer on top of a pre-existing HE program but
instead entails global reorganization of lineage-specific transcription factor
assemblies.

PMCID: PMC3501222
PMID: 23064151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2012 Nov;96(4):1079-91. doi:
10.1007/s00253-012-4418-0. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

An efficient xylose-fermenting recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain
obtained through adaptive evolution and its global transcription profile.

Shen Y(1), Chen X, Peng B, Chen L, Hou J, Bao X.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Shan Da
Nan Road 27#, Jinan 250100, China.

Factors related to ethanol production from xylose in engineered Saccharomyces
cerevisiae that contain an exogenous initial metabolic pathway are still to be
elucidated. In the present study, a strain that expresses the xylose isomerase
gene of Piromyces sp. Pi-xylA and overexpresses XKS1, RPE1, RKI1, TAL1, and TKL1,
with deleted GRE3 and COX4 genes was constructed. The xylose utilization capacity
of the respiratory deficiency strain was poor but improved via adaptive evolution
in xylose. The µ (max) of the evolved strain in 20 g<U+2009>l(-1) xylose is 0.11<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.00 
h(-1), and the evolved strain consumed 17.83 g<U+2009>l(-1) xylose within 72 h, with an 
ethanol yield of 0.43 g<U+2009>g(-1) total consumed sugars during glucose-xylose
cofermentation. Global transcriptional changes and effect of several specific
genes were studied. The result revealed that the increased xylose isomerase
acivity, the upregulation of enzymes involved in glycolysis and glutamate
synthesis, and the downregulation of trehalose and glycogen synthesis, may have
contributed to the improved xylose utilization of the strain. Furthermore, the
deletion of PHO13 decreased the xylose growth in the respiration deficiency
strain although deleting PHO13 can improve the xylose metabolism in other
strains.

PMID: 23053078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Dev Cell. 2012 Oct 16;23(4):796-811. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.09.003. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

Combinatorial assembly of developmental stage-specific enhancers controls gene
expression programs during human erythropoiesis.

Xu J(1), Shao Z, Glass K, Bauer DE, Pinello L, Van Handel B, Hou S,
Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Mikkola HK, Yuan GC, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston and Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Gene-distal enhancers are critical for tissue-specific gene expression, but their
genomic determinants within a specific lineage at different stages of development
are unknown. Here we profile chromatin state maps, transcription factor
occupancy, and gene expression profiles during human erythroid development at
fetal and adult stages. Comparative analyses of human erythropoiesis identify
developmental stage-specific enhancers as primary determinants of stage-specific 
gene expression programs. We find that erythroid master regulators GATA1 and TAL1
act cooperatively within active enhancers but confer little predictive value for 
stage specificity. Instead, a set of stage-specific coregulators collaborates
with master regulators and contributes to differential gene expression. We
further identify and validate IRF2, IRF6, and MYB as effectors of an adult-stage 
expression program. Thus, the combinatorial assembly of lineage-specific master
regulators and transcriptional coregulators within developmental stage-specific
enhancers determines gene expression programs and temporal regulation of
transcriptional networks in a mammalian genome.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3477283
PMID: 23041383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Infect Immun. 2012 Dec;80(12):4264-70. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00641-12. Epub 2012 Sep
24.

Progressive cross-reactivity in IgE responses: an explanation for the slow
development of human immunity to schistosomiasis?

Fitzsimmons CM(1), Jones FM, Pinot de Moira A, Protasio AV, Khalife J, Dickinson 
HA, Tukahebwa EM, Dunne DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kindgdom. 
cmf1000@cam.ac.uk

People in regions of Schistosoma mansoni endemicity slowly acquire immunity, but 
why this takes years to develop is still not clear. It has been associated with
increases in parasite-specific IgE, induced, some investigators propose, to
antigens exposed during the death of adult worms. These antigens include members 
of the tegumental-allergen-like protein family (TAL1 to TAL13). Previously, in a 
group of S. mansoni-infected Ugandan males, we showed that IgE responses to three
TALs expressed in worms (TAL1, -3, and -5) became more prevalent with age. Now,
in a subcohort we examined associations of these responses with resistance to
reinfection and use the data to propose a mechanism for the slow development of
immunity. IgE was measured 9 weeks posttreatment and at reinfection at 2 years (n
= 144). An anti-TAL5 IgE (herein referred to as TAL5 IgE) response was associated
with reduced reinfection even after adjusting for age using regression analysis
(geometric mean odds ratio, 0.24; P = 0.016). TAL5 IgE responders were a subset
of TAL3 IgE responders, themselves a subset of TAL1 responders. TAL3 IgE and TAL5
IgE were highly cross-reactive, with TAL3 the immunizing antigen and TAL5 the
cross-reactive antigen. Transcriptional and translational studies show that TAL3 
is most abundant in adult worms and that TAL5 is most abundant in infectious
larvae. We propose that in chronic schistosomiasis, older individuals have
repeatedly experienced IgE antigens exposed when adult worms die (e.g., TAL3) and
that this leads to increasing cross-reactivity with antigens of invading larvae
(e.g., TAL5). Progressive accumulation of worm/larvae cross-reactivity could
explain the age-dependent immunity observed in areas of endemicity.

PMCID: PMC3497412
PMID: 23006852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Nov-Dec;1819(11-12):1164-72. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.09.004. Epub 2012 Sep 19.

Suspected leukemia oncoproteins CREB1 and LYL1 regulate Op18/STMN1 expression.

San-Marina S(1), Han Y, Liu J, Minden MD.

Author information: 
(1)University Health Network, Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto ON, Canada.
s.san-marina@Biostatistix.com

Stathmin (STMN1) is a microtubule destabilizing protein with a key role in cell
cycle progression and cell migration that is up-regulated in several cancers and 
may contribute to the malignant phenotype. However, the factors that regulate its
expression are not well understood. Loss as well as gain-of-function p53
mutations up-regulate STMN1 and in acute myelogenous leukemia where p53 is
predominantly wild-type, STMN1 is also over-expressed. Here we show regulatory
control of STMN1 expression by the leucine zipper transcription factor (TF) CREB1
and the basic helix-loop-helix TF LYL1. By ChIP-chip experiments we demonstrate
in vivo the presence of LYL1 and CREB1 in close proximity on the STMN1 promoter
and using promoter assays we reveal co-regulation of STMN1 by CREB1 and LYL1. By 
contrast, TAL1, another suspected oncoprotein in leukemia and close relative of
LYL1, exerts no regulatory effect on the STMN1 promoter. NLI, LMO2 and GATA2 are 
previously described co-activators of Tal1/Lyl1-E47 transcriptional complexes and
potentiate Lyl1 activation of the STMN1 promoter while having no effect on TAL1
transactivation. Promoter mutations that abrogate CREB1 proximal binding or
mutations of the DNA-binding domain of CREB1 abolish LYL1 transcriptional
activation. These results show that CRE and Ebox sites function as coordinated
units and support previous evidence of joint CREB1-and LYL1 transcription events 
activating an aberrant subset of promoters in leukemia. CREB1 or LYL1 shRNA
knock-down down-regulate STMN1 expression. Because down-regulation of STMN1 has
been shown to have anti-proliferative effects, while CREB1 and LYL1 are suspected
oncoproteins, interference with CREB1-LYL1 interactions may complement standard
chemotherapy and yield additional beneficial effects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23000483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(7):3349-55.

Prognostically significant fusion oncogenes in Pakistani patients with adult
acute lymphoblastic leukemia and their association with disease biology and
outcome.

Sabir N(1), Iqbal Z, Aleem A, Awan T, Naeem T, Asad S, Tahir AH, Absar M,
Hasanato RM, Basit S, Chishti MA, Faiyaz Ul-Haque M, Khalid AM, Sabar MF, Rasool 
M, Karim S, Khan M, Samreen B, Akram AM, Siddiqi MH, Shahzadi S, Shahbaz S, Ali
AS, Mahmood A, Akram M, Saeed T, Saleem A, Mohsin D, Shah IH, Khalid M, Asif M,
Iqbal M, Akhtar T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biological Sciences, Department of Zoology, University of the
Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Chromosomal abnormalities play an important role in
genesis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and have prognostic implications.
Five major risk stratifying fusion genes in ALL are BCR-ABL, MLL-AF4,
ETV6-RUNX11, E2A-PBX1 and SIL-TAL1. This work aimed to detect common chromosomal 
translocations and associated fusion oncogenes in adult ALL patients and study
their relationship with clinical features and treatment outcome.
METHODS: We studied fusion oncogenes in 104 adult ALL patients using RT-PCR and
interphase-FISH at diagnosis and their association with clinical characteristics 
and treatment outcome.
RESULTS: Five most common fusion genes i.e. BCR-ABL (t 9; 22), TCF3-PBX1 (t 1;
19), ETV6-RUNX1 (t 12; 21), MLL-AF4 (t 4; 11) and SIL-TAL1 (Del 1p32) were found 
in 82/104 (79%) patients. TCF3-PBX1 fusion gene was associated with
lymphadenopathy, SIL-TAL positive patients had frequent organomegaly and usually 
presented with a platelets count of less than 50 x10(9)/l. Survival of patients
with fusion gene ETV6-RUNX1 was better when compared to patients harboring other 
genes. MLL-AF4 and BCR-ABL positivity characterized a subset of adult ALL
patients with aggressive clinical behaviour and a poor outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study from Pakistan which investigated the
frequency of 5 fusion oncogenes in adult ALL patients, and their association with
clinical features, treatment response and outcome. Frequencies of some of the
oncogenes were different from those reported elsewhere and they appear to be
associated with distinct clinical characteristics and treatment outcome. This
information will help in the prognostic stratification and risk adapted
management of adult ALL patients.

PMID: 22994759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 26;287(44):36720-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.378398. Epub
2012 Sep 16.

T-cell acute leukemia 1 (TAL1) regulation of erythropoietin receptor and
association with excessive erythrocytosis.

Rogers H(1), Wang L, Yu X, Alnaeeli M, Cui K, Zhao K, Bieker JJ, Prchal J, Huang 
S, Weksler B, Noguchi CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Branch, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-1822, USA.

During erythropoiesis, erythropoietin stimulates induction of erythroid
transcription factors that activate expression of erythroid genes including the
erythropoietin receptor (EPO-R) that results in increased sensitivity to
erythropoietin. DNA binding of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor,
TAL1/SCL, is required for normal erythropoiesis. A link between elevated TAL1 and
excessive erythrocytosis is suggested by erythroid progenitor cells from a
patient that exhibits unusually high sensitivity to erythropoietin with
concomitantly elevated TAL1 and EPO-R expression. We found that TAL1 regulates
EPO-R expression mediated via three conserved E-box binding motifs (CAGCTG) in
the EPO-R 5' untranslated transcribed region. TAL1 increases association of the
GATA-1·TAL1·LMO2·LDB1 transcription activation complex to the region that
includes the transcription start site and the 5' GATA and 3' E-box motifs
flanking the EPO-R transcription start site suggesting that TAL1 promotes
accessibility of this region. Nucleosome shifting has been demonstrated to
facilitate TAL1 but not GATA-1 binding to regulate target gene expression.
Accordingly, we observed that with induced expression of EPO-R in hemotopoietic
progenitor cells, nucleosome phasing shifts to increase the linker region
containing the EPO-R transcription start site and TAL1 binds to the flanking 5'
GATA and 3' E-box regions of the promoter. These data suggest that TAL1 binds to 
the EPO-R promoter to activate EPO-R expression and provides a potential link to 
elevated EPO-R expression leading to hypersensitivity to erythropoietin and the
resultant excessive erythrocytosis.

PMCID: PMC3481276
PMID: 22982397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;33(6):453-6.

[The effect of knockdown of transcription factor SCL/TAL-1 gene on the erythroid 
differentiation in EPO-induced K562 cell line].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou RQ(1), Gong YP, Guo Y, Shan QQ, Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China
Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of transcript factor SCL/TAL-1 gene in the
erythroid differentiation through the knockdown of SCL/TAL-1 mRNA by RNA
interference.
METHODS: The plasmid of pTRIP-dU3-RNAiTALh-EF1a-GFP with SCL/TAL1 shRNA was
transfected into EPO-induced K562 cell line with erythroid differentiation via
lentiviral vector system and the expression of SCL/TAL-1 mRNA decreased. The
plasmid pTRIP-dU3- RNAiluc-EF1-GFP expressing EGFP gene was as control. The mRNA 
levels of SCL/TAL-1 and erythroid related RhD, GPA, CD47 in the cell lines were
detected by RT-PCR, and erythroid antigen CD71, CD235a were examined by flow
cytometry.
RESULTS: (1) After 48 h of transfect, more than 95% of K562 cells were GFP
positive, indicating the infection rate of the plasmids in the K562 cells more
than 95%. (2) The results of RT-PCR showed SCL/TAL-1 mRNA expression in the K562 
cell line of knockdown of SCL/TAL-1 was significantly lower than that in the
control (P < 0.05). The mRNA levels of CD47 and RhD were also significantly
lower, however, GPA decreased slightly in comparison with the control. (3) The
expressions of CD71 and CD235a markedly reduced in the K562 cell line of
knockdown of SCL/TAL-1 with positive rates as 10.4% and 76.5%, while the positive
rates in the control as 94.3% and 83.6%.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggested that transcription factor SCL/TAL-1 might play
an positive role in erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 22967379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cell. 2012 Aug 17;150(4):725-37. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.038.

Tissue-specific mitotic bookmarking by hematopoietic transcription factor GATA1.

Kadauke S(1), Udugama MI, Pawlicki JM, Achtman JC, Jain DP, Cheng Y, Hardison RC,
Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

Tissue-specific transcription patterns are preserved throughout cell divisions to
maintain lineage fidelity. We investigated whether transcription factor GATA1
plays a role in transmitting hematopoietic gene expression programs through
mitosis when transcription is transiently silenced. Live-cell imaging revealed
that a fraction of GATA1 is retained focally within mitotic chromatin. ChIP-seq
of highly purified mitotic cells uncovered that key hematopoietic regulatory
genes are occupied by GATA1 in mitosis. The GATA1 coregulators FOG1 and TAL1
dissociate from mitotic chromatin, suggesting that GATA1 functions as platform
for their postmitotic recruitment. Mitotic GATA1 target genes tend to reactivate 
more rapidly upon entry into G1 than genes from which GATA1 dissociates.
Mitosis-specific destruction of GATA1 delays reactivation selectively of genes
that retain GATA1 during mitosis. These studies suggest a requirement of mitotic 
"bookmarking" by GATA1 for the faithful propagation of cell-type-specific
transcription programs through cell division.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3425057
PMID: 22901805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Cancer Cell. 2012 Aug 14;22(2):209-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.06.007.

Core transcriptional regulatory circuit controlled by the TAL1 complex in human T
cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Sanda T(1), Lawton LN, Barrasa MI, Fan ZP, Kohlhammer H, Gutierrez A, Ma W,
Tatarek J, Ahn Y, Kelliher MA, Jamieson CH, Staudt LM, Young RA, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The oncogenic transcription factor TAL1/SCL is aberrantly expressed in over 40%
of cases of human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), emphasizing its
importance in the molecular pathogenesis of T-ALL. Here we identify the core
transcriptional regulatory circuit controlled by TAL1 and its regulatory partners
HEB, E2A, LMO1/2, GATA3, and RUNX1. We show that TAL1 forms a positive
interconnected autoregulatory loop with GATA3 and RUNX1 and that the TAL1 complex
directly activates the MYB oncogene, forming a positive feed-forward regulatory
loop that reinforces and stabilizes the TAL1-regulated oncogenic program. One of 
the critical downstream targets in this circuitry is the TRIB2 gene, which is
oppositely regulated by TAL1 and E2A/HEB and is essential for the survival of
T-ALL cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3422504
PMID: 22897851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Nov;6(5):961-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.1034. Epub 2012 Aug 14.

Transcriptional regulatory networks in human lung adenocarcinoma.

Meng X(1), Lu P, Bai H, Xiao P, Fan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, PR China.

Lung adenocarcinoma (AC) is the most common histological subtype of lung cancer
worldwide and its absolute incidence is increasing markedly. Transcriptional
regulation is one of the most fundamental processes in lung AC development.
However, high-throughput functional analyses of multiple transcription factors
and their target genes in lung AC are rare. Thus, the objective of our study was 
to interpret the mechanisms of human AC through the regulatory network using the 
GSE2514 microarray data. Our results identified the genes peroxisome proliferator
activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPARG), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß (CEBPB), ets
variant 4 (ETV4), Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI1), T-cell acute
lymphocytic leukemia 1 (TAL1) and nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene 
enhancer in B-cells 1 (NFKB1) as hub nodes in the transcriptome network. Among
these genes, it appears that: PPARG promotes the PPAR signaling pathway via the
upregulation of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) expression, but suppresses the cell
cycle pathway via downregulation of growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible, <U+03B3>
(GADD45G) expression; ETV4 stimulates matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9) expression
to induce the bladder cancer pathway; FLI upregulates transforming growth factor,
ß receptor II (TGFBR2) expression to activate TGF-ß signaling and upregulates
cyclin D3 (CCND3) expression to promote the cell cycle pathway; NFKB1 upregulates
interleukin 1, ß (IL-1B) expression and initiates the prostate cancer pathway;
CEBPB upregulates IL-6 expression and promotes pathways in cancer; and TAL1
promotes kinase insert domain receptor (KDR) expression to promote the TGF-ß
signaling pathway. This transcriptional regulation analysis may provide an
improved understanding of the molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic
targets in the treatment of lung AC.

PMID: 22895549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cell. 2012 Aug 3;150(3):590-605. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.026.

Scl represses cardiomyogenesis in prospective hemogenic endothelium and
endocardium.

Van Handel B(1), Montel-Hagen A, Sasidharan R, Nakano H, Ferrari R, Boogerd CJ,
Schredelseker J, Wang Y, Hunter S, Org T, Zhou J, Li X, Pellegrini M, Chen JN,
Orkin SH, Kurdistani SK, Evans SM, Nakano A, Mikkola HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Endothelium in embryonic hematopoietic tissues generates hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells; however, it is unknown how its unique potential is
specified. We show that transcription factor Scl/Tal1 is essential for both
establishing the hematopoietic transcriptional program in hemogenic endothelium
and preventing its misspecification to a cardiomyogenic fate. Scl(-/-) embryos
activated a cardiac transcriptional program in yolk sac endothelium, leading to
the emergence of CD31+Pdgfra+ cardiogenic precursors that generated spontaneously
beating cardiomyocytes. Ectopic cardiogenesis was also observed in Scl(-/-)
hearts, where the disorganized endocardium precociously differentiated into
cardiomyocytes. Induction of mosaic deletion of Scl in Scl(fl/fl)Rosa26Cre-ER(T2)
embryos revealed a cell-intrinsic, temporal requirement for Scl to prevent
cardiomyogenesis from endothelium. Scl(-/-) endothelium also upregulated the
expression of Wnt antagonists, which promoted rapid cardiomyocyte differentiation
of ectopic cardiogenic cells. These results reveal unexpected plasticity in
embryonic endothelium such that loss of a single master regulator can induce
ectopic cardiomyogenesis from endothelial cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3624753
PMID: 22863011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40747. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040747. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Transcriptional activation of prostate specific homeobox gene NKX3-1 in subsets
of T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL).

Nagel S(1), Ehrentraut S, Tomasch J, Lienenklaus S, Schneider B, Geffers R, Meyer
C, Kaufmann M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ-German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.
sna@dsmz.de

Homeobox genes encode transcription factors impacting key developmental processes
including embryogenesis, organogenesis, and cell differentiation. Reflecting
their tight transcriptional control, homeobox genes are often embedded in large
non-coding, cis-regulatory regions, containing tissue specific elements. In
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) homeobox genes are frequently
deregulated by chromosomal aberrations, notably translocations adding T-cell
specific activatory elements. NKX3-1 is a prostate specific homeobox gene
activated in T-ALL patients expressing oncogenic TAL1 or displaying immature
T-cell characteristics. After investigating regulation of NKX3-1 in primary cells
and cell lines, we report its ectopic expression in T-ALL cells independent of
chromosomal rearrangements. Using siRNAs and expression profiling, we exploited
NKX3-1 positive T-ALL cell lines as tools to investigate aberrant activatory
mechanisms. Our data confirmed NKX3-1 activation by TAL1/GATA3/LMO and identified
LYL1 as an alternative activator in immature T-ALL cells devoid of GATA3.
Moreover, we showed that NKX3-1 is directly activated by early T-cell homeodomain
factor MSX2. These activators were regulated by MLL and/or by IL7-, BMP4- and
IGF2-signalling. Finally, we demonstrated homeobox gene SIX6 as a direct leukemic
target of NKX3-1 in T-ALL. In conclusion, we identified three major mechanisms of
NKX3-1 regulation in T-ALL cell lines which are represented by activators TAL1,
LYL1 and MSX2, corresponding to particular T-ALL subtypes described in patients. 
These results may contribute to the understanding of leukemic transcriptional
networks underlying disturbed T-cell differentiation in T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC3407137
PMID: 22848398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Genome Res. 2012 Dec;22(12):2385-98. doi: 10.1101/gr.135707.111. Epub 2012 Jul
26.

Novel roles for KLF1 in erythropoiesis revealed by mRNA-seq.

Tallack MR(1), Magor GW, Dartigues B, Sun L, Huang S, Fittock JM, Fry SV, Glazov 
EA, Bailey TL, Perkins AC.

Author information: 
(1)Mater Medical Research Institute, Mater Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland 4101,
Australia.

KLF1 (formerly known as EKLF) regulates the development of erythroid cells from
bi-potent progenitor cells via the transcriptional activation of a diverse set of
genes. Mice lacking Klf1 die in utero prior to E15 from severe anemia due to the 
inadequate expression of genes controlling hemoglobin production, cell membrane
and cytoskeletal integrity, and the cell cycle. We have recently described the
full repertoire of KLF1 binding sites in vivo by performing KLF1 ChIP-seq in
primary erythroid tissue (E14.5 fetal liver). Here we describe the KLF1-dependent
erythroid transcriptome by comparing mRNA-seq from Klf1(+/+) and Klf1(-/-)
erythroid tissue. This has revealed novel target genes not previously obtainable 
by traditional microarray technology, and provided novel insights into the
function of KLF1 as a transcriptional activator. We define a cis-regulatory
module bound by KLF1, GATA1, TAL1, and EP300 that coordinates a core set of
erythroid genes. We also describe a novel set of erythroid-specific promoters
that drive high-level expression of otherwise ubiquitously expressed genes in
erythroid cells. Our study has identified two novel lncRNAs that are dynamically 
expressed during erythroid differentiation, and discovered a role for KLF1 in
directing apoptotic gene expression to drive the terminal stages of erythroid
maturation.

PMCID: PMC3514668
PMID: 22835905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Oct;32(19):3814-22. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05938-11. Epub 2012 Jul 
16.

A novel complex, RUNX1-MYEF2, represses hematopoietic genes in erythroid cells.

van Riel B(1), Pakozdi T, Brouwer R, Monteiro R, Tuladhar K, Franke V, Bryne JC, 
Jorna R, Rijkers EJ, van Ijcken W, Andrieu-Soler C, Demmers J, Patient R, Soler
E, Lenhard B, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Center for Biomedical Genetics, Erasmus Medical
Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

RUNX1 is known to be an essential transcription factor for generating
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC), but much less is known about its role in the
downstream process of hematopoietic differentiation. RUNX1 has been shown to be
part of a large transcription factor complex, together with LDB1, GATA1, TAL1,
and ETO2 (N. Meier et al., Development 133:4913-4923, 2006) in erythroid cells.
We used a tagging strategy to show that RUNX1 interacts with two novel protein
partners, LSD1 and MYEF2, in erythroid cells. MYEF2 is bound in undifferentiated 
cells and is lost upon differentiation, whereas LSD1 is bound in differentiated
cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) and
microarray expression analysis were used to show that RUNX1 binds approximately
9,000 target sites in erythroid cells and is primarily active in the
undifferentiated state. Functional analysis shows that a subset of the target
genes is suppressed by RUNX1 via the newly identified partner MYEF2. Knockdown of
Myef2 expression in developing zebrafish results in a reduced number of HSC.

PMCID: PMC3457535
PMID: 22801375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40484. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040484. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

Angiopoietin-2 is a direct transcriptional target of TAL1, LYL1 and LMO2 in
endothelial cells.

Deleuze V(1), El-Hajj R, Chalhoub E, Dohet C, Pinet V, Couttet P, Mathieu D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier UMR 5535 CNRS, Montpellier,
France.

The two related basic helix-loop-helix, TAL1 and LYL1, and their cofactor
LIM-only-2 protein (LMO2) are present in blood and endothelial cells. While their
crucial role in early hematopoiesis is well established, their function in
endothelial cells and especially in angiogenesis is less understood. Here, we
identified ANGIOPOIETIN-2 (ANG-2), which encodes a major regulator of
angiogenesis, as a direct transcriptional target of TAL1, LYL1 and LMO2.
Knockdown of any of the three transcription factors in human blood and lymphatic 
endothelial cells caused ANG-2 mRNA and protein down-regulation. Transient
transfections showed that the full activity of the ANG-2 promoter required the
integrity of a highly conserved Ebox-GATA composite element. Accordingly,
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that TAL1, LYL1, LMO2 and GATA2
occupied this region of ANG-2 promoter in human endothelial cells. Furthermore,
we showed that LMO2 played a central role in assembling TAL1-E47, LYL1-LYL1
or/and LYL1-TAL1 dimers with GATA2. The resulting complexes were able to activate
endogenous ANG-2 expression in endothelial cells as well as in non-endothelial
cells. Finally, we showed that ANG-2 gene activation during angiogenesis
concurred with the up-regulation of TAL1 and LMO2. Altogether, we identified
ANG-2 as a bona fide target gene of LMO2-complexes with TAL1 and/or LYL1,
highlighting a new function of the three hematopoietic factors in the endothelial
lineage.

PMCID: PMC3391236
PMID: 22792348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 31;287(36):30157-69. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.376640. Epub
2012 Jul 7.

GATA-binding protein 4 (GATA-4) and T-cell acute leukemia 1 (TAL1) regulate
myogenic differentiation and erythropoietin response via cross-talk with Sirtuin1
(Sirt1).

Wang L(1), Jia Y, Rogers H, Wu YP, Huang S, Noguchi CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Branch, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892-1822, USA.

Erythropoietin (EPO), the cytokine required for erythrocyte production,
contributes to muscle progenitor cell proliferation and delay myogenic
differentiation. However, the underlying mechanism is not yet fully understood.
Here, we report that EPO changes the skeletal myogenic regulatory factor
expression program and delays differentiation via induction of GATA-4 and the
basic helix-loop-helix TAL1 and that knockdown of both factors promotes
differentiation. EPO increases the Sirt1 level, a NAD(+)-dependent deacetylase,
and also induces the NAD(+)/NADH ratio that further increases Sirt1 activity.
Sirt1 knockdown reduced GATA-4 and TAL1 expression, impaired EPO effect on
delayed myogenic differentiation, and the Sirt1 knockdown effect was abrogated
when combined with overexpression of GATA-4 or TAL1. GATA-4 interacts with Sirt1 
and targets Sirt1 to the myogenin promoter and represses myogenin expression,
whereas TAL1 inhibits myogenin expression by decreasing MyoD binding to and
activation of the myogenin promoter. Sirt1 was found to bind to the GATA-4
promoter to directly regulate GATA-4 expression and GATA-4 binds to the TAL1
promoter to regulate TAL1 expression positively. These data suggest that GATA-4, 
TAL1, and Sirt1 cross-talk each other to regulate myogenic differentiation and
mediate EPO activity during myogenic differentiation with Sirt1 playing a role
upstream of GATA-4 and TAL1. Taken together, our findings reveal a novel role for
GATA-4 and TAL1 to affect skeletal myogenic differentiation and EPO response via 
cross-talk with Sirt1.

PMCID: PMC3436270
PMID: 22773876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Dec 10;21(18):3381-90. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0100. Epub 2012
Jul 25.

Inhibition of Lnk in mouse induced pluripotent stem cells promotes hematopoietic 
cell generation.

Tashiro K(1), Omori M, Kawabata K, Hirata N, Yamaguchi T, Sakurai F, Takaki S,
Mizuguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Regulation, National Institute of Biomedical
Innovation, Osaka, Japan.

Embryonic stem (ES) cell- and induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell-derived
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) are considered as an unlimited source
for HSPC transplantation. However, production of immature hematopoietic cells,
especially HSPCs, from ES and iPS cells has been challenging. The adaptor protein
Lnk has been shown to negatively regulate HSPC function via the inhibition of
thrombopoietin (TPO) and stem cell factor signaling, and Lnk-deficient HSPCs show
an enhanced self-renewal and repopulation capacity. In this study, we examined
the role of Lnk on the hematopoietic differentiation from mouse ES and iPS cells 
by the inhibition of Lnk using a dominant-negative mutant of the Lnk (DN-Lnk)
gene. We generated mouse ES and iPS cells stably expressing a DN-Lnk, and found
that enforced expression of a DN-Lnk in ES and iPS cells led to an enhanced
generation of Flk-1-positive mesodermal cells, thereby could increase in the
expression of hematopoietic transcription factors, including Scl and Runx1. We
also showed that the number of both total hematopoietic cells and immature
hematopoietic cells with colony-forming potential in DN-Lnk-expressing cells was 
significantly increased in comparison with that in control cells. Furthermore,
Lnk inhibition by the overexpression of the DN-Lnk gene augmented the TPO-induced
phosphorylation of Erk1/2 and Akt, indicating the enhanced sensitivity to TPO.
Adenovirus vector-mediated transient DN-Lnk gene expression in ES and iPS cells
could also increase the hematopoietic cell production. Our data clearly showed
that the inhibition of Lnk in ES and iPS cells could result in the efficient
generation and expansion of hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 22738147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Exp Hematol. 2012 Oct;40(10):837-46. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.06.007. Epub 2012
Jun 19.

Effect of endoglin overexpression during embryoid body development.

Baik J(1), Borges L, Magli A, Thatava T, Perlingeiro RC.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Increasing evidence points to endoglin (Eng), an accessory receptor for the
transforming growth factor-ß superfamily commonly associated with the endothelial
lineage, as an important regulator of the hematopoietic lineage. We have shown
that lack of Eng results in reduced numbers of primitive erythroid colonies as
well as downregulation of key hematopoietic genes. To determine the effect of Eng
overexpression in hematopoietic development, we generated a doxycycline-inducible
embryonic stem cell line. Our results demonstrate that induction of Eng during
embryoid body differentiation leads to a significant increase in the frequency of
hematopoietic progenitors, in particular, the erythroid lineage, which correlated
with upregulation of Scl, Gata1, Runx1, and embryonic globin. Interestingly,
activation of the hematopoietic program happened at the expense of endothelial
and cardiac cells, as differentiation into these mesoderm lineages was
compromised. Eng-induced enhanced erythroid activity was accompanied by high
levels of Smad1 phosphorylation. This effect was attenuated by addition of a bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling inhibitor to these cultures. Among the
BMPs, BMP4 is well known for its role in hematopoietic specification from
mesoderm by promoting expression of several hematopoietic genes, including Scl.
Because Scl is considered the master regulator of the hematopoietic program, we
investigated whether Scl would be capable of rescuing the defective hematopoietic
phenotype observed in Eng(-/-) embryonic stem cells. Scl expression in
Eng-deficient embryonic stem cells resulted in increased erythroid colony-forming
activity and upregulation of Gata1 and Gata2, positioning Eng upstream of Scl.
Taken together, these findings support the premise that Eng modulates the
hematopoietic transcriptional network, most likely through regulation of BMP4
signaling.

Copyright © 2012 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3447113
PMID: 22728030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012 Aug;78(16):5708-16. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01419-12. Epub 
2012 Jun 8.

Directed evolution of xylose isomerase for improved xylose catabolism and
fermentation in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Lee SM(1), Jellison T, Alper HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
Texas, USA.

The heterologous expression of a highly functional xylose isomerase pathway in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae would have significant advantages for ethanol yield,
since the pathway bypasses cofactor requirements found in the traditionally used 
oxidoreductase pathways. However, nearly all reported xylose isomerase-based
pathways in S. cerevisiae suffer from poor ethanol productivity, low xylose
consumption rates, and poor cell growth compared with an oxidoreductase pathway
and, additionally, often require adaptive strain evolution. Here, we report on
the directed evolution of the Piromyces sp. xylose isomerase (encoded by xylA)
for use in yeast. After three rounds of mutagenesis and growth-based screening,
we isolated a variant containing six mutations (E15D, E114G, E129D, T142S, A177T,
and V433I) that exhibited a 77% increase in enzymatic activity. When expressed in
a minimally engineered yeast host containing a gre3 knockout and tal1 and XKS1
overexpression, the strain expressing this mutant enzyme improved its aerobic
growth rate by 61-fold and both ethanol production and xylose consumption rates
by nearly 8-fold. Moreover, the mutant enzyme enabled ethanol production by these
yeasts under oxygen-limited fermentation conditions, unlike the wild-type enzyme.
Under microaerobic conditions, the ethanol production rates of the strain
expressing the mutant xylose isomerase were considerably higher than previously
reported values for yeast harboring a xylose isomerase pathway and were also
comparable to those of the strains harboring an oxidoreductase pathway.
Consequently, this study shows the potential to evolve a xylose isomerase pathway
for more efficient xylose utilization.

PMCID: PMC3406111
PMID: 22685138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Development. 2012 Jul;139(13):2360-70. doi: 10.1242/dev.076380. Epub 2012 May 23.

Distinct developmental origins and regulatory mechanisms for GABAergic neurons
associated with dopaminergic nuclei in the ventral mesodiencephalic region.

Achim K(1), Peltopuro P, Lahti L, Li J, Salminen M, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, PO Box 56, Viikinkaari 5, FIN00014-University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

GABAergic neurons in the ventral mesodiencephalic region are highly important for
the function of dopaminergic pathways that regulate multiple aspects of behavior.
However, development of these neurons is poorly understood. We recently showed
that molecular regulation of differentiation of the GABAergic neurons associated 
with the dopaminergic nuclei in the ventral midbrain (VTA and SNpr) is distinct
from the rest of midbrain, but the reason for this difference remained elusive.
Here, we have analyzed the developmental origin of the VTA and SNpr GABAergic
neurons by genetic fate mapping. We demonstrate that the majority of these
GABAergic neurons originate outside the midbrain, from rhombomere 1, and move
into the ventral midbrain only as postmitotic neuronal precursors. We further
show that Gata2, Gata3 and Tal1 define a subpopulation of GABAergic precursors in
ventral rhombomere 1. A failure in GABAergic neuron differentiation in this
region correlates with loss of VTA and SNpr GABAergic neurons in Tal1 mutant
mice. In contrast to midbrain, GABAergic neurons of the anterior SNpr in the
diencephalon are not derived from the rhombomere 1. These results suggest unique 
migratory pathways for the precursors of important GABAergic neuron
subpopulations, and provide the basis for understanding diversity within midbrain
GABAergic neurons.

PMID: 22627282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Haematologica. 2012 Nov;97(11):1708-12. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.064485. Epub
2012 May 11.

Clinical, immunophenotypic, cytogenetic, and molecular genetic features in 117
adult patients with mixed-phenotype acute leukemia defined by WHO-2008
classification.

Yan L(1), Ping N, Zhu M, Sun A, Xue Y, Ruan C, Drexler HG, Macleod RA, Wu D, Chen
S.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis
of Ministry of Health, the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, PR China. yanmiz@vip.sohu.net

Among 4,780 consecutive adult acute lymphoblastic/myeloblastic leukemia patients,
we identified 117 (2.4%) patients with mixed-phenotype acute leukemia fulfilling 
WHO 2008 criteria; these were classified as: Blymphoid+ myeloid (n=64),
T-lymphoid+myeloid (n=38), B+T-lymphoid (n=14) and trilineage (n=1). Of 92
patients karyotyped, 59 were abnormal and were classified as: complex (22 of 92),
t(9;22)(q34;q11) (14 of 92), monosomy 7 (7 of 92), polysomy 21 (7 of 92),
t(v;11q23) (4 of 92), t(10;11)(p15;q21) (3 of 92), while STIL-TAL1 fusion was
detected in one (T+My) patient. After investigating common acute leukemia-related
mutations in 17 genes, 12 of 31 (39%) patients were found to have at least one
mutation, classified with: IKZF1 deletion (4 of 31), and EZH2 (3 of 31), ASXL1 (3
of 31), ETV6 (2 of 31), NOTCH1 (1 of 31), and TET2 (1 of 31) mutations. Array-CGH
revealed genomic deletions of CDKN2A (4 of 12), IKZF1 (3 of 12), MEF2C (2 of 12),
BTG1 (2 of 12), together with BCOR, EBF1, K-RAS, LEF1, MBNL1, PBX3, and RUNX1
(one of 12 each). Our results indicate that mixed-phenotype acute leukemia is a
complex entity with heterogeneous clinical, immunophenotypic, cytogenetic, and
molecular genetic features.

PMCID: PMC3487445
PMID: 22581002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Enzyme Microb Technol. 2012 Jun 10;51(1):16-25. doi:
10.1016/j.enzmictec.2012.03.008. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Characterization of non-oxidative transaldolase and transketolase enzymes in the 
pentose phosphate pathway with regard to xylose utilization by recombinant
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Matsushika A(1), Goshima T, Fujii T, Inoue H, Sawayama S, Yano S.

Author information: 
(1)Biomass Technology Research Center-BTRC, National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology-AIST, 3-11-32 Kagamiyama, Higashi-hiroshima,
Hiroshima 739-0046, Japan. a-matsushika@aist.go.jp

The activity of transaldolase and transketolase, key enzymes in the non-oxidative
pentose phosphate pathway, is rate-limiting for xylose utilization in recombinant
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Overexpression of TAL1 and TKL1, the major
transaldolase and transketolase genes, increases the flux from the pentose
phosphate pathway into the glycolytic pathway. However, the functional roles of
NQM1 and TKL2, the secondary transaldolase and transketolase genes, especially in
xylose utilization, remain unclear. This study focused on characterization of
NQM1 and TKL2, together with TAL1 and TKL1, regarding their roles in xylose
utilization and fermentation. Knockout or overexpression of these four genes on
the phenotype of xylose-utilizing S. cerevisiae strains was also examined.
Transcriptional analysis indicated that the expression of TAL1, NQM1, and TKL1
was up-regulated in the presence of xylose. A significant decrease in both growth
on xylose and xylose-fermenting ability in tal1<U+0394> and tkl1<U+0394> mutants confirmed that
TAL1 and TKL1 are essential for xylose assimilation and fermentation. Gene
disruption analysis using a tkl1<U+0394> mutant revealed that TKL1 is also required for 
utilization of glucose. Growth on xylose and xylose-fermenting ability were
slightly influenced by deletion of NQM1 or TKL2 when xylose was used as the sole 
carbon source. Moreover, the rate of xylose consumption and ethanol production
was slightly impaired in TKL1- and TKL2-overexpressing strains. NQM1 and TKL2 may
thus play a physiological role via an effect on the non-oxidative pentose
phosphate pathway in the xylose metabolic pathway, although their roles in xylose
utilization and fermentation are less important than those of TAL1 and TKL1.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22579386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Ann Lab Med. 2012 May;32(3):220-4. doi: 10.3343/alm.2012.32.3.220. Epub 2012 Apr 
18.

Simultaneous translocation of both TCR Loci (14q11) with rare partner loci (Xq22 
and 12p13) in a case of T-lymphoblastic leukemia.

Kang DH(1), Kim SH, Jun JW, Lee YW, Shin HB, Ahn JY, Hong DS, Lee YK, Jeon BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Genetics, Soonchunhyang University
College of Medicine, Bucheon, Korea.

The most common recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities in T-lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia [T-ALL]) involve T-cell receptor (TCR) loci and a
variety of partner genes, including HOX11, HOX11L2, MYC, and TAL1. In this
report, we present a rare case involving simultaneous translocation of the TCR
a/d loci with different partner loci (Xq22 and 12p13); this resulted in a poor
prognosis. Chromosomal analysis showed
46,Y,t(X;14)(q22;q11.2),t(12;14)(p13;q11.2) and FISH analysis by using a T-cell
receptor alpha delta DNA probe, Split Signal (DakoCytomation, Denmark), showed
translocations at the same TCR a/d locus on both chromosomes. FISH with 2
bacterial artificial chromosome clones showed break apart signal, which suggests 
involvement of the IRS4 gene. To our knowledge, this is the first report of T-ALL
in which both TCR a/d loci were translocated with different partner loci, and 1
of the partner loci, Xq22, was a rare translocation partner locus that included
IRS4 gene.

PMCID: PMC3339304
PMID: 22563559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Dev Biol. 2012 Jun 15;366(2):404-19. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.03.024. Epub 2012 
Apr 21.

The transcriptional programme controlled by Runx1 during early embryonic blood
development.

Tanaka Y(1), Joshi A, Wilson NK, Kinston S, Nishikawa S, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
Kobe, Japan.

Transcription factors have long been recognised as powerful regulators of
mammalian development yet it is largely unknown how individual key regulators
operate within wider regulatory networks. Here we have used a combination of
global gene expression and chromatin-immunoprecipitation approaches during the
early stages of haematopoietic development to define the transcriptional
programme controlled by Runx1, an essential regulator of blood cell
specification. Integrated analysis of these complementary genome-wide datasets
allowed us to construct a global regulatory network model, which suggested that
key regulators are activated sequentially during blood specification, but will
ultimately collaborate to control many haematopoietically expressed genes. Using 
the CD41/integrin alpha 2b gene as a model, cellular and in vivo studies showed
that CD41 is controlled by both Scl/Tal1 and Runx1 in fully specified blood
cells, and initiation of CD41 expression in E7.5 embryos is severely compromised 
in the absence of Runx1. Taken together, this study represents the first global
analysis of the transcriptional programme controlled by any key haematopoietic
regulator during the process of early blood cell specification. Moreover, the
concept of interplay between sequentially deployed core regulators is likely to
represent a design principle widely applicable to the transcriptional control of 
mammalian development.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3430866
PMID: 22554697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35175. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035175. Epub 2012 Apr 17.

Methylcap-seq reveals novel DNA methylation markers for the diagnosis and
recurrence prediction of bladder cancer in a Chinese population.

Zhao Y(1), Guo S, Sun J, Huang Z, Zhu T, Zhang H, Gu J, He Y, Wang W, Ma K, Wang 
J, Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: There is a need to supplement or supplant the conventional diagnostic
tools, namely, cystoscopy and B-type ultrasound, for bladder cancer (BC). We
aimed to identify novel DNA methylation markers for BC through genome-wide
profiling of BC cell lines and subsequent methylation-specific PCR (MSP)
screening of clinical urine samples.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The methyl-DNA binding domain (MBD) capture technique,
methylCap/seq, was performed to screen for specific hypermethylated CpG islands
in two BC cell lines (5637 and T24). The top one hundred hypermethylated targets 
were sequentially screened by MSP in urine samples to gradually narrow the target
number and optimize the composition of the diagnostic panel. The diagnostic
performance of the obtained panel was evaluated in different clinical scenarios.
RESULTS: A total of 1,627 hypermethylated promoter targets in the BC cell lines
was identified by Illumina sequencing. The top 104 hypermethylated targets were
reduced to eight genes (VAX1, KCNV1, ECEL1, TMEM26, TAL1, PROX1, SLC6A20, and
LMX1A) after the urine DNA screening in a small sample size of 8 normal control
and 18 BC subjects. Validation in an independent sample of 212 BC patients
enabled the optimization of five methylation targets, including VAX1, KCNV1,
TAL1, PPOX1, and CFTR, which was obtained in our previous study, for BC diagnosis
with a sensitivity and specificity of 88.68% and 87.25%, respectively. In
addition, the methylation of VAX1 and LMX1A was found to be associated with BC
recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a promising diagnostic marker panel for early
non-invasive detection and subsequent BC surveillance.

PMCID: PMC3328468
PMID: 22529986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Blood. 2012 Jun 7;119(23):5478-91. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-403154. Epub 2012
Apr 19.

Identification of LMO2 transcriptome and interactome in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.

Cubedo E(1), Gentles AJ, Huang C, Natkunam Y, Bhatt S, Lu X, Jiang X,
Romero-Camarero I, Freud A, Zhao S, Bacchi CE, Martínez-Climent JA,
Sánchez-García I, Melnick A, Lossos IS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of Miami, Sylvester Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

LMO2 regulates gene expression by facilitating the formation of multipartite
DNA-binding complexes. In B cells, LMO2 is specifically up-regulated in the
germinal center (GC) and is expressed in GC-derived non-Hodgkin lymphomas. LMO2
is one of the most powerful prognostic indicators in diffuse large B-cell (DLBCL)
patients. However, its function in GC B cells and DLBCL is currently unknown. In 
this study, we characterized the LMO2 transcriptome and transcriptional complex
in DLBCL cells. LMO2 regulates genes implicated in kinetochore function,
chromosome assembly, and mitosis. Overexpression of LMO2 in DLBCL cell lines
results in centrosome amplification. In DLBCL, the LMO2 complex contains some of 
the traditional partners, such as LDB1, E2A, HEB, Lyl1, ETO2, and SP1, but not
TAL1 or GATA proteins. Furthermore, we identified novel LMO2 interacting
partners: ELK1, nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFATc1), and lymphoid
enhancer-binding factor1 (LEF1) proteins. Reporter assays revealed that LMO2
increases transcriptional activity of NFATc1 and decreases transcriptional
activity of LEF1 proteins. Overall, our studies identified a novel LMO2
transcriptome and interactome in DLBCL and provides a platform for future
elucidation of LMO2 function in GC B cells and DLBCL pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3369683
PMID: 22517897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mol Ther. 2012 Jul;20(7):1443-53. doi: 10.1038/mt.2012.49. Epub 2012 Apr 10.

SCL/TAL1 regulates hematopoietic specification from human embryonic stem cells.

Real PJ(1), Ligero G, Ayllon V, Ramos-Mejia V, Bueno C, Gutierrez-Aranda I,
Navarro-Montero O, Lako M, Menendez P.

Author information: 
(1)Pfizer-Universidad de Granada-Junta de Andalucia Centre for Genomics and
Oncological Research (GENyO), Granada, Spain. pedro.real@genyo.es

Determining the molecular regulators/pathways responsible for the specification
of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) into hematopoietic precursors has
far-reaching implications for potential cell therapies and disease modeling.
Mouse models lacking SCL/TAL1 (stem cell leukemia/T-cell acute lymphocytic
leukemia 1) do not survive beyond early embryogenesis because of complete absence
of hematopoiesis, indicating that SCL is a master early hematopoietic regulator. 
SCL is commonly found rearranged in human leukemias. However, there is barely
information on the role of SCL on human embryonic hematopoietic development.
Differentiation and sorting assays show that endogenous SCL expression parallels 
hematopoietic specification of hESCs and that SCL is specifically expressed in
hematoendothelial progenitors (CD45(-)CD31(+)CD34(+)) and, to a lesser extent, on
CD45(+) hematopoietic cells. Enforced expression of SCL in hESCs accelerates the 
emergence of hematoendothelial progenitors and robustly promotes subsequent
differentiation into primitive (CD34(+)CD45(+)) and total (CD45(+)) blood cells
with higher clonogenic potential. Short-hairpin RNA-based silencing of endogenous
SCL abrogates hematopoietic specification of hESCs, confirming the early
hematopoiesis-promoting effect of SCL. Unfortunately, SCL expression on its own
is not sufficient to confer in vivo engraftment to hESC-derived hematopoietic
cells, suggesting that additional yet undefined master regulators are required to
orchestrate the stepwise hematopoietic developmental process leading to the
generation of definitive in vivo functional hematopoiesis from hESCs.

PMCID: PMC3392972
PMID: 22491213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Genes Dev. 2012 Apr 1;26(7):705-13. doi: 10.1101/gad.183871.111. Epub 2012 Mar
19.

Centromere-targeted de novo integrations of an LTR retrotransposon of Arabidopsis
lyrata.

Tsukahara S(1), Kawabe A, Kobayashi A, Ito T, Aizu T, Shin-i T, Toyoda A,
Fujiyama A, Tarutani Y, Kakutani T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Shizuoka
411-8540, Japan.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2012 Apr 1;26(7):638-40.

The plant genome evolves with rapid proliferation of LTR-type retrotransposons,
which is associated with their clustered accumulation in gene-poor regions, such 
as centromeres. Despite their major role for plant genome evolution, no mobile
LTR element with targeted integration into gene-poor regions has been identified 
in plants. Here, we report such targeted integrations de novo. We and others have
previously shown that an ATCOPIA93 family retrotransposon in Arabidopsis thaliana
is mobilized when the DNA methylation machinery is compromised. Although
ATCOPIA93 family elements are low copy number in the wild-type A. thaliana
genome, high-copy-number related elements are found in the wild-type Arabidopsis 
lyrata genome, and they show centromere-specific localization. To understand the 
mechanisms for the clustered accumulation of the A. lyrata elements directly, we 
introduced one of them, named Tal1 (Transposon of Arabidopsis lyrata 1), into A. 
thaliana by transformation. The introduced Tal1 was retrotransposed in A.
thaliana, and most of the retrotransposed copies were found in centromeric
repeats of A. thaliana, suggesting targeted integration. The targeted integration
is especially surprising because the centromeric repeat sequences differ
considerably between A. lyrata and A. thaliana. Our results revealed unexpectedly
dynamic controls for evolution of the transposon-rich heterochromatic regions.

PMCID: PMC3323881
PMID: 22431508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Exp Hematol. 2012 Jul;40(7):588-598.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.02.006. Epub
2012 Mar 5.

Deletion of the Scl +19 enhancer increases the blood stem cell compartment
without affecting the formation of mature blood lineages.

Spensberger D(1), Kotsopoulou E, Ferreira R, Broccardo C, Scott LM, Fourouclas N,
Ottersbach K, Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

The stem cell leukemia (Scl)/Tal1 gene is essential for normal blood and
endothelial development, and is expressed in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs),
progenitors, erythroid, megakaryocytic, and mast cells. The Scl +19 enhancer is
active in HSCs and progenitor cells, megakaryocytes, and mast cells, but not
mature erythroid cells. Here we demonstrate that in vivo deletion of the Scl +19 
enhancer (Scl(<U+0394>19/<U+0394>19)) results in viable mice with normal Scl expression in
mature hematopoietic lineages. By contrast, Scl expression is reduced in the
stem/progenitor compartment and flow cytometry analysis revealed that the HSC and
megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor populations are enlarged in Scl(<U+0394>19/<U+0394>19) mice.
The increase in HSC numbers contributed to enhanced expansion in bone marrow
transplantation assays, but did not affect multilineage repopulation or stress
responses. These results affirm that the Scl +19 enhancer plays a key role in the
development of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, but is not necessary for
mature hematopoietic lineages. Moreover, active histone marks across the Scl
locus were significantly reduced in Scl(<U+0394>19/<U+0394>19) fetal liver cells without major 
changes in steady-state messenger RNA levels, suggesting post-transcriptional
compensation for loss of a regulatory element, a result that might be widely
relevant given the frequent observation of mild phenotypes after deletion of
regulatory elements.

Copyright © 2012 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3387379
PMID: 22401818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e31484. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031484. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Mapping and functional characterisation of a CTCF-dependent insulator element at 
the 3' border of the murine Scl transcriptional domain.

Follows GA(1), Ferreira R, Janes ME, Spensberger D, Cambuli F, Chaney AF, Kinston
SJ, Landry JR, Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. gf246@cam.ac.uk

The Scl gene encodes a transcription factor essential for haematopoietic
development. Scl transcription is regulated by a panel of cis-elements spread
over 55 kb with the most distal 3' element being located downstream of the
neighbouring gene Map17, which is co-regulated with Scl in haematopoietic cells. 
The Scl/Map17 domain is flanked upstream by the ubiquitously expressed Sil gene
and downstream by a cluster of Cyp genes active in liver, but the mechanisms
responsible for delineating the domain boundaries remain unclear. Here we report 
identification of a DNaseI hypersensitive site at the 3' end of the Scl/Map17
domain and 45 kb downstream of the Scl transcription start site. This element is 
located at the boundary of active and inactive chromatin, does not function as a 
classical tissue-specific enhancer, binds CTCF and is both necessary and
sufficient for insulator function in haematopoietic cells in vitro. Moreover, in 
a transgenic reporter assay, tissue-specific expression of the Scl promoter in
brain was increased by incorporation of 350 bp flanking fragments from the +45
element. Our data suggests that the +45 region functions as a boundary element
that separates the Scl/Map17 and Cyp transcriptional domains, and raise the
possibility that this element may be useful for improving tissue-specific
expression of transgenic constructs.

PMCID: PMC3291548
PMID: 22396734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32944. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032944. Epub 2012 Feb 29.

Enhanced Notch activation is advantageous but not essential for T cell
lymphomagenesis in Id1 transgenic mice.

Wang HC(1), Peng V, Zhao Y, Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America.

T cell lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is known to be associated with chromosomal 
abnormalities that lead to aberrant expression of a number of transcription
factors such as TAL1, which dimerizes with basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) E
proteins and inhibits their function. Activated Notch receptors also efficiently 
induce T cell leukemogenesis in mouse models. Interestingly, gain-of-function
mutations or cryptic transcription initiation of the Notch1 gene have been
frequently found in both human and mouse T-ALL. However, the correlations between
these alterations and overall Notch activities or leukemogenesis have not been
thoroughly evaluated. Therefore, we made use of our collection of T cell
lymphomas developed in transgenic mice expressing Id1, which like TAL1, inhibits 
E protein function. By comparing expression levels of Notch target genes in
Id1-expressing tumors to those in tumors induced by a constitutively active form 
of Notch1, N1C, we were able to assess the overall activities of Notch pathways
and conclude that the majority of Id1-expressing tumors had elevated Notch
function to a varying degree. However, 26% of the Id1-expressing tumors had no
evidence of enhanced Notch activation, but that did not delay the onset of
tumorigenesis. Furthermore, we examined the genetic or epigenetic alterations
thought to contribute to ligand-independent activation or protein stabilization
of Notch1 and found that some of the Id1-expressing tumors acquired these
changes, but they are not uniformly associated with elevated Notch activities in 
Id1 tumor samples. In contrast, N1C-expressing tumors do not harbor any PEST
domain mutations nor exhibit intragenic transcription initiation. Taken together,
it appears that Notch activation provides Id1-expressing tumor cells with
selective advantages in growth and survival. However, this may not be absolutely 
essential for lymphomagenesis in Id1 transgenic mice and additional factors could
also cooperate with Id1 to induce T cell lymphoma. Therefore, a broad approach is
necessary in designing T-ALL therapy.

PMCID: PMC3290631
PMID: 22393458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Mar 6;109(10):3832-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1121019109. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

A core erythroid transcriptional network is repressed by a master regulator of
myelo-lymphoid differentiation.

Wontakal SN(1), Guo X, Smith C, MacCarthy T, Bresnick EH, Bergman A, Snyder MP,
Weissman SM, Zheng D, Skoultchi AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA.

Two mechanisms that play important roles in cell fate decisions are control of a 
"core transcriptional network" and repression of alternative transcriptional
programs by antagonizing transcription factors. Whether these two mechanisms
operate together is not known. Here we report that GATA-1, SCL, and Klf1 form an 
erythroid core transcriptional network by co-occupying >300 genes. Importantly,
we find that PU.1, a negative regulator of terminal erythroid differentiation, is
a highly integrated component of this network. GATA-1, SCL, and Klf1 act to
promote, whereas PU.1 represses expression of many of the core network genes.
PU.1 also represses the genes encoding GATA-1, SCL, Klf1, and important GATA-1
cofactors. Conversely, in addition to repressing PU.1 expression, GATA-1 also
binds to and represses >100 PU.1 myelo-lymphoid gene targets in erythroid
progenitors. Mathematical modeling further supports that this dual mechanism of
repressing both the opposing upstream activator and its downstream targets
provides a synergistic, robust mechanism for lineage specification. Taken
together, these results amalgamate two key developmental principles, namely,
regulation of a core transcriptional network and repression of an alternative
transcriptional program, thereby enhancing our understanding of the mechanisms
that establish cellular identity.

PMCID: PMC3309740
PMID: 22357756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Cell Sci. 2012 Mar 1;125(Pt 5):1353-62. doi: 10.1242/jcs.104109. Epub 2012 Feb 
20.

STIL is required for centriole duplication in human cells.

Vulprecht J(1), David A, Tibelius A, Castiel A, Konotop G, Liu F, Bestvater F,
Raab MS, Zentgraf H, Izraeli S, Krämer A.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Cooperation Unit Molecular Hematology/Oncology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ) and Dept. of Internal Medicine V, University of
Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Centrioles are key structural elements of centrosomes and primary cilia. In
mammals, only a few proteins including PLK4, CPAP (CENPJ), SAS6, CEP192, CEP152
and CEP135 have thus far been identified to be required for centriole
duplication. STIL (SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus, also known as SIL) is a
centrosomal protein that is essential for mouse and zebrafish embryonic
development and mutated in primary microcephaly. Here, we show that STIL
localizes to the pericentriolar material surrounding parental centrioles. Its
overexpression results in excess centriole formation. siRNA-mediated depletion of
STIL leads to loss of centrioles and abrogates PLK4-induced centriole
overduplication. Additionally, we show that STIL is necessary for SAS6
recruitment to centrioles, suggesting that it is essential for daughter centriole
formation, interacts with the centromere protein CPAP and rapidly shuttles
between the cytoplasm and centrioles. Consistent with the requirement of
centrioles for cilia formation, Stil(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts lack
primary cilia--a phenotype that can be reverted by restoration of STIL
expression. These findings demonstrate that STIL is an essential component of the
centriole replication machinery in mammalian cells.

PMID: 22349705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Oncogene. 2012 Nov 29;31(48):5007-18. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.8. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

Dynamic interaction between TAL1 oncoprotein and LSD1 regulates TAL1 function in 
hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis.

Li Y(1), Deng C, Hu X, Patel B, Fu X, Qiu Y, Brand M, Zhao K, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.

TAL1/SCL is a hematopoietic-specific oncogene and its activity is regulated by
associated transcriptional co-activators and corepressors. Dysregulation of TAL1 
activity has been associated with T-cell leukemogenesis. However, it remains
unclear how the interactions between TAL1 and corepressors versus co-activators
are properly regulated. Here, we reported that protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated
phosphorylation regulates TAL1 interaction with the lysine-specific demethylase
(LSD1) that removes methyl group from methylated Lys 4 on histone H3 tails.
Phosphorylation of serine 172 in TAL1 specifically destabilizes the TAL1-LSD1
interaction leading to promoter H3K4 hypermethylation and activation of target
genes that have been suppressed in normal and malignant hematopoiesis. Knockdown 
of TAL1 or LSD1 led to a derepression of the TAL1 target genes in T-cell acute
lymphoblast leukemia (T-ALL) Jurkat cells, which is accompanied by elevating
promoter H3K4 methylation. Similarly, treatment of PKA activator forskolin
resulted in derepression of target genes by reducing its interaction with LSD1
while PKA inhibitor H89 represses them by suppressing H3K4 methylation levels.
Consistent with the dual roles of TAL1 in transcription, TAL1-associated LSD1 is 
decreased while recruitment of hSET1 is increased at the TAL1 targets during
erythroid differentiation. This process is accompanied by a dramatic increase in 
H3K4 methylation. Thus, our data revealed a novel interplay between PKA
phosphorylation and TAL1-mediated epigenetic regulation that regulates
hematopoietic transcription and differentiation programs during hematopoiesis and
leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3510314
PMID: 22310283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Leuk Res. 2012 Jun;36(6):704-8. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2011.12.003. Epub 2012 Jan
5.

RT-PCR diagnosis of recurrent rearrangements in pediatric acute lymphoblastic
leukemia in Argentina.

Alonso CN(1), Gallego MS, Rossi JG, Medina A, Rubio PL, Bernasconi AR,
Zubizarreta PA, Felice MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Hospital Nacional de Pediatría Prof.
Dr. Juan P. Garrahan, Buenos Aires, Argentina. crisalon9@yahoo.com.ar

The present study was performed to establish the prevalence of the recurrent
fusion transcripts in Argentinean pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL). A total of 380 newly diagnosed children (including 50 infants and
44 T-ALL) were screened by RT-PCR; the incidence of recurrent rearrangements was:
ETV6-RUNX1, 12.9%; TCF3-PBX1, 5.0%; BCR-ABL1, 1.6%; and MLL rearrangements,
10.5%. STIL-TAL1 was detected in 22.7% of T-ALL cases. In B-ALL cases, the pEFS
was significantly influenced by the presence of genetic alterations. RT-PCR
studies improved patients' stratification and also the overall outcome of
children treated in a pediatric hospital from a developing country.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22226019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. BMC Cancer. 2012 Jan 6;12:9. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-9.

Impact of complex NOTCH1 mutations on survival in paediatric T-cell leukaemia.

Mansur MB(1), Hassan R, Barbosa TC, Splendore A, Jotta PY, Yunes JA, Wiemels JL, 
Pombo-de-Oliveira MS.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Haematology-Oncology Program, Research Centre, Instituto Nacional
de Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Molecular alterations occur frequently in T-ALL and the potential
impact of those abnormalities on outcome is still controversial. The current
study aimed to test whether NOTCH1 mutations and additional molecular
abnormalities would impact T-ALL outcome in a series of 138 T-ALL paediatric
cases.
METHODS: T-ALL subtypes, status of SIL-TAL1 fusion, ectopic expression of TLX3,
and mutations in FBXW7, KRAS, PTEN and NOTCH1 were assessed as overall survival
(OS) and event-free survival (EFS) prognostic factors. OS and EFS were determined
using the Kaplan-Meier method and compared using the log-rank test.
RESULTS: The frequencies of mutations were 43.5% for NOTCH1, while FBXW7, KRAS
and PTEN exhibited frequencies of 19.1%, 9.5% and 9.4%, respectively. In 78.3% of
cases, the coexistence of NOTCH1 mutations and other molecular alterations was
observed. In multivariate analysis no statistical association was revealed
between NOTCH1 mutations and any other variable analyzed. The mean length of the 
follow-up was 68.4 months and the OS was 50.7%. SIL-TAL1 was identified as an
adverse prognostic factor. NOTCH1 mutation status was not associated with
outcome, while the presence of NOTCH1 complex mutations (indels) were associated 
with a longer overall survival (p = 0.031) than point mutations.
CONCLUSION: NOTCH1 mutations alone or in combination with FBXW7 did not impact
T-ALL prognosis. Nevertheless, complex NOTCH1 mutations appear to have a positive
impact on OS and the SIL-TAL1 fusion was validated as a negative prognostic
marker in our series of T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC3305583
PMID: 22225590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. FEBS Open Bio. 2012 Sep 25;2:285-93. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2012.09.003. Print 2012.

In silico prediction of a disease-associated STIL mutant and its affect on the
recruitment of centromere protein J (CENPJ).

Kumar A(1), Rajendran V, Sethumadhavan R, Purohit R.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Division, School of Bio Sciences and Technology, Vellore
Institute of Technology University, Vellore 632014, Tamil Nadu, India.

Human STIL (SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus) protein maintains centriole stability
and spindle pole localisation. It helps in recruitment of CENPJ (Centromere
protein J)/CPAP (centrosomal P4.1-associated protein) and other centrosomal
proteins. Mutations in STIL protein are reported in several disorders, especially
in deregulation of cell cycle cascades. In this work, we examined the
non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) reported in STIL protein 
for their disease association. Different SNP prediction tools were used to
predict disease-associated nsSNPs. Our evaluation technique predicted rs147744459
(R242C) as a highly deleterious disease-associated nsSNP and its interaction
behaviour with CENPJ protein. Molecular modelling, docking and molecular dynamics
simulation were conducted to examine the structural consequences of the predicted
disease-associated mutation. By molecular dynamic simulation we observed
structural consequences of R242C mutation which affects interaction of STIL and
CENPJ functional domains. The result obtained in this study will provide a
biophysical insight into future investigations of pathological nsSNPs using a
computational platform.

PMCID: PMC3678130
PMID: 23772360  [PubMed]


213. EMBO J. 2012 Feb 15;31(4):986-99. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.450. Epub 2011 Dec 13.

Dynamic long-range chromatin interactions control Myb proto-oncogene
transcription during erythroid development.

Stadhouders R(1), Thongjuea S, Andrieu-Soler C, Palstra RJ, Bryne JC, van den
Heuvel A, Stevens M, de Boer E, Kockx C, van der Sloot A, van den Hout M, van
Ijcken W, Eick D, Lenhard B, Grosveld F, Soler E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The key haematopoietic regulator Myb is essential for coordinating proliferation 
and differentiation. ChIP-Sequencing and Chromosome Conformation Capture
(3C)-Sequencing were used to characterize the structural and protein-binding
dynamics of the Myb locus during erythroid differentiation. In proliferating
cells expressing Myb, enhancers within the Myb-Hbs1l intergenic region were shown
to form an active chromatin hub (ACH) containing the Myb promoter and first
intron. This first intron was found to harbour the transition site from
transcription initiation to elongation, which takes place around a conserved CTCF
site. Upon erythroid differentiation, Myb expression is downregulated and the ACH
destabilized. We propose a model for Myb activation by distal enhancers
dynamically bound by KLF1 and the GATA1/TAL1/LDB1 complex, which primarily
function as a transcription elongation element through chromatin looping.

PMCID: PMC3280550
PMID: 22157820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Cell Sci. 2011 Nov 15;124(Pt 22):3884-93. doi: 10.1242/jcs.089888. Epub 2011
Nov 18.

Spindle positioning in human cells relies on proper centriole formation and on
the microcephaly proteins CPAP and STIL.

Kitagawa D(1), Kohlmaier G, Keller D, Strnad P, Balestra FR, Flückiger I, Gönczy 
P.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life
Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland.

Patients with MCPH (autosomal recessive primary microcephaly) exhibit impaired
brain development, presumably due to the compromised function of neuronal
progenitors. Seven MCPH loci have been identified, including one that encodes
centrosome protein 4.1 associated protein (CPAP; also known as centromere protein
J, CENPJ). CPAP is a large coiled-coil protein enriched at the centrosome, a
structure that comprises two centrioles and surrounding pericentriolar material
(PCM). CPAP depletion impairs centriole formation, whereas CPAP overexpression
results in overly long centrioles. The mechanisms by which CPAP MCPH patient
mutations affect brain development are not clear. Here, we identify CPAP protein 
domains crucial for its centriolar localization, as well as for the elongation
and the formation of centrioles. Furthermore, we demonstrate that conditions that
resemble CPAP MCPH patient mutations compromise centriole formation in tissue
culture cells. Using adhesive micropatterns, we reveal that such defects
correlate with a randomization of spindle position. Moreover, we demonstrate that
the MCPH protein SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus (STIL) is also essential for
centriole formation and for proper spindle position. Our findings are compatible 
with the notion that mutations in CPAP and STIL cause MCPH because of aberrant
spindle positioning in progenitor cells during brain development.

PMID: 22100914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Haematologica. 2012 Feb;97(2):258-61. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.051722. Epub
2011 Nov 4.

Characterization of a pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia patient with 
simultaneous LYL1 and LMO2 rearrangements.

Homminga I(1), Vuerhard MJ, Langerak AW, Buijs-Gladdines J, Pieters R, Meijerink 
JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus MC/Sophia Childrens
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Translocation of the LYL1 oncogene are rare in T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, whereas the homologous TAL1 gene is rearranged in approximately 20% of 
patients. Previous gene-expression studies have identified an immature T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia subgroup with high LYL1 expression in the absence of
chromosomal aberrations. Molecular characterization of a t(7;19)(q34;p13) in a
pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia patient led to the identification
of a translocation between the TRB@ and LYL1 loci. Similar to incidental T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia cases with synergistic, double translocations
affecting TAL1/2 and LMO1/2 oncogenes, this LYL1-translocated patient also had an
LMO2 rearrangement pointing to oncogenic cooperation between LYL1 and LMO2. In
hierarchical cluster analyses based on gene-expression data, this sample
consistently clustered along with cases having TAL1 or LMO2 rearrangements.
Therefore, LYL1-rearranged cases are not necessarily associated with immature
T-cell development, despite high LYL1 levels, but elicit a TALLMO expression
signature.

PMCID: PMC3269487
PMID: 22058201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Blood. 2011 Dec 1;118(23):6200-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-363101. Epub 2011
Oct 18.

Distinct Ldb1/NLI complexes orchestrate <U+03B3>-globin repression and reactivation
through ETO2 in human adult erythroid cells.

Kiefer CM(1), Lee J, Hou C, Dale RK, Lee YT, Meier ER, Miller JL, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The Ldb1/GATA-1/TAL1/LMO2 complex mediates long-range interaction between the
ß-globin locus control region (LCR) and gene in adult mouse erythroid cells, but 
whether this complex mediates chromatin interactions at other developmental
stages or in human cells is unknown. We investigated NLI (Ldb1 homolog) complex
occupancy and chromatin conformation of the ß-globin locus in human erythroid
cells. In addition to the LCR, we found robust NLI complex occupancy at a site
downstream of the (A)<U+03B3>-globin gene within sequences of BGL3, an intergenic RNA
transcript. In cells primarily transcribing ß-globin, BGL3 is not transcribed and
BGL3 sequences are occupied by NLI core complex members, together with
corepressor ETO2 and by <U+03B3>-globin repressor BCL11A. The LCR and ß-globin gene
establish proximity in these cells. In contrast, when <U+03B3>-globin transcription is
reactivated in these cells, ETO2 participation in the NLI complex at BGL3 is
diminished, as is BCL11A occupancy, and both BGL3 and <U+03B3>-globin are transcribed.
In these cells, proximity between the BGL3/<U+03B3>-globin region and the LCR is
established. We conclude that alternative NLI complexes mediate <U+03B3>-globin
transcription or silencing through long-range LCR interactions involving an
intergenic site of noncoding RNA transcription and that ETO2 is critical to this 
process.

PMCID: PMC3234672
PMID: 22010104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. FASEB J. 2012 Feb;26(2):523-32. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-190850. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

Tal1 regulates osteoclast differentiation through suppression of the master
regulator of cell fusion DC-STAMP.

Courtial N(1), Smink JJ, Kuvardina ON, Leutz A, Göthert JR, Lausen J.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Biomedical Research, Frankfurt, Germany.

The balance between bone-forming osteoblasts and bone-resorbing osteoclasts is
crucial to bone homeostasis, an equilibrium that is disturbed in many bone
diseases. The transcription factor Tal1 is involved in the establishment of
hematopoietic stem cells in the embryo and is a master regulator of hematopoietic
gene expression in the adult. Here, we show that Tal1 is expressed in osteoclasts
and that loss of Tal1 in osteoclast progenitors leads to altered expression of
>1200 genes. We found that DC-STAMP, a key regulator of osteoclast cell fusion,
is a direct target gene of Tal1 and show that Tal1 represses DC-STAMP expression 
by counteracting the activating function of the transcription factors PU.1 and
MITF. The identification of Tal1 as a factor involved in cell fusion contributes 
to the understanding of osteoclast-associated diseases, including osteoporosis.

PMID: 21990371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Dec 15;20(24):4932-46. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr431. Epub 2011 Sep
21.

Large-scale transcriptional profiling and functional assays reveal important
roles for Rho-GTPase signalling and SCL during haematopoietic differentiation of 
human embryonic stem cells.

Yung S(1), Ledran M, Moreno-Gimeno I, Conesa A, Montaner D, Dopazo J, Dimmick I, 
Slater NJ, Marenah L, Real PJ, Paraskevopoulou I, Bisbal V, Burks D,
Santibanez-Koref M, Moreno R, Mountford J, Menendez P, Armstrong L, Lako M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Understanding the transcriptional cues that direct differentiation of human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and human-induced pluripotent stem cells to defined 
and functional cell types is essential for future clinical applications. In this 
study, we have compared transcriptional profiles of haematopoietic progenitors
derived from hESCs at various developmental stages of a feeder- and serum-free
differentiation method and show that the largest transcriptional changes occur
during the first 4 days of differentiation. Data mining on the basis of molecular
function revealed Rho-GTPase signalling as a key regulator of differentiation.
Inhibition of this pathway resulted in a significant reduction in the numbers of 
emerging haematopoietic progenitors throughout the differentiation window,
thereby uncovering a previously unappreciated role for Rho-GTPase signalling
during human haematopoietic development. Our analysis indicated that SCL was the 
11th most upregulated transcript during the first 4 days of the hESC
differentiation process. Overexpression of SCL in hESCs promoted differentiation 
to meso-endodermal lineages, the emergence of haematopoietic and
erythro-megakaryocytic progenitors and accelerated erythroid differentiation.
Importantly, intrasplenic transplantation of SCL-overexpressing hESC-derived
haematopoietic cells enhanced recovery from induced acute anaemia without
significant cell engraftment, suggesting a paracrine-mediated effect.

PMID: 21937587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24680. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024680. Epub 2011 Sep 13.

Identification of hub genes related to the recovery phase of irradiation injury
by microarray and integrated gene network analysis.

Zhang J(1), Yang Y, Wang Y, Zhang J, Wang Z, Yin M, Shen X.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Irradiation commonly causes long-term bone marrow injury
charactertized by defective HSC self-renewal and a decrease in HSC reserve.
However, the effect of high-dose IR on global gene expression during bone marrow 
recovery remains unknown.
METHODOLOGY: Microarray analysis was used to identify differentially expressed
genes that are likely to be critical for bone marrow recovery. Multiple
bioinformatics analyses were conducted to identify key hub genes, pathways and
biological processes.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: 1) We identified 1302 differentially expressed genes in
murine bone marrow at 3, 7, 11 and 21 days after irradiation. Eleven of these
genes are known to be HSC self-renewal associated genes, including Adipoq, Ccl3, 
Ccnd1, Ccnd2, Cdkn1a, Cxcl12, Junb, Pten, Tal1, Thy1 and Tnf; 2) These 1302
differentially expressed genes function in multiple biological processes of
immunity, including hematopoiesis and response to stimuli, and cellular processes
including cell proliferation, differentiation, adhesion and signaling; 3) Dynamic
Gene Network analysis identified a subgroup of 25 core genes that participate in 
immune response, regulation of transcription and nucleosome assembly; 4) A
comparison of our data with known irradiation-related genes extracted from
literature showed 42 genes that matched the results of our microarray analysis,
thus demonstrated consistency between studies; 5) Protein-protein interaction
network and pathway analyses indicated several essential protein-protein
interactions and signaling pathways, including focal adhesion and several
immune-related signaling pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: Comparisons to other gene array datasets indicate that global gene
expression profiles of irradiation damaged bone marrow show significant
differences between injury and recovery phases. Our data suggest that immune
response (including hematopoiesis) can be considered as a critical biological
process in bone marrow recovery. Several critical hub genes that are key members 
of significant pathways or gene networks were identified by our comprehensive
analysis.

PMCID: PMC3172286
PMID: 21931809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Blood. 2011 Oct 27;118(17):e139-48. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-355107. Epub 2011 
Sep 6.

Genome-wide ChIP-Seq reveals a dramatic shift in the binding of the transcription
factor erythroid Kruppel-like factor during erythrocyte differentiation.

Pilon AM(1), Ajay SS, Kumar SA, Steiner LA, Cherukuri PF, Wincovitch S, Anderson 
SM; NISC Comparative Sequencing Center, Mullikin JC, Gallagher PG, Hardison RC,
Margulies EH, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Erythropoiesis is dependent on the activity of transcription factors, including
the erythroid-specific erythroid Kruppel-like factor (EKLF). ChIP followed by
massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-Seq) is a powerful, unbiased method to map
trans-factor occupancy. We used ChIP-Seq to study the interactome of EKLF in
mouse erythroid progenitor cells and more differentiated erythroblasts. We
correlated these results with the nuclear distribution of EKLF, RNA-Seq analysis 
of the transcriptome, and the occupancy of other erythroid transcription factors.
In progenitor cells, EKLF is found predominantly at the periphery of the nucleus,
where EKLF primarily occupies the promoter regions of genes and acts as a
transcriptional activator. In erythroblasts, EKLF is distributed throughout the
nucleus, and erythroblast-specific EKLF occupancy is predominantly in intragenic 
regions. In progenitor cells, EKLF modulates general cell growth and cell cycle
regulatory pathways, whereas in erythroblasts EKLF is associated with repression 
of these pathways. The EKLF interactome shows very little overlap with the
interactomes of GATA1, GATA2, or TAL1, leading to a model in which EKLF directs
programs that are independent of those regulated by the GATA factors or TAL1.

PMCID: PMC3208289
PMID: 21900194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Haematologica. 2011 Dec;96(12):1808-14. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.043083. Epub
2011 Aug 31.

Mutations of PHF6 are associated with mutations of NOTCH1, JAK1 and rearrangement
of SET-NUP214 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Wang Q(1), Qiu H, Jiang H, Wu L, Dong S, Pan J, Wang W, Ping N, Xia J, Sun A, Wu 
D, Xue Y, Drexler HG, Macleod RA, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Jiangsu province, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the PHF6 gene were recently described in patients with
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and in those with acute myeloid leukemia. The
present study was designed to determine the prevalence of PHF6 gene alterations
in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed the incidence and prognostic value of PHF6
mutations in 96 Chinese patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. PHF6
deletions were screened by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction and
array-based comparative genomic hybridization. Patients were also investigated
for NOTCH1, FBXW7, WT1, and JAK1 mutations together with CALM-AF10, SET-NUP214,
and SIL-TAL1 gene rearrangements.
RESULTS: PHF6 mutations were identified in 11/59 (18.6%) adult and 2/37 (5.4%)
pediatric cases of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, these incidences being
significantly lower than those recently reported. Although PHF6 is X-linked and
mutations have been reported to occur almost exclusively in male patients, we
found no sex difference in the incidences of PHF6 mutations in Chinese patients
with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. PHF6 deletions were detected in 2/79
(2.5%) patients analyzed. NOTCH1 mutations, FBXW7 mutations, WT1 mutations, JAK1 
mutations, SIL-TAL1 fusions, SET-NUP214 fusions and CALM-AF10 fusions were
present in 44/96 (45.8%), 9/96 (9.4%), 4/96 (4.1%), 3/49 (6.1%), 9/48 (18.8%),
3/48 (6.3%) and 0/48 (0%) of patients, respectively. The molecular genetic
markers most frequently associated with PHF6 mutations were NOTCH1 mutations
(P=0.003), SET-NUP214 rearrangements (P=0.002), and JAK1 mutations (P=0.005). No 
differences in disease-free survival and overall survival between T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia patients with and without PHF6 mutations were observed in 
a short-term follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these results indicate that, in T-cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia, PHF6 mutations are a recurrent genetic abnormality associated with
mutations of NOTCH1, JAK1 and rearrangement of SET-NUP214.

PMCID: PMC3232263
PMID: 21880637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Blood. 2011 Oct 13;118(15):4169-73. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-11-318873. Epub 2011 
Aug 30.

The BCL11B tumor suppressor is mutated across the major molecular subtypes of
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Gutierrez A(1), Kentsis A, Sanda T, Holmfeldt L, Chen SC, Zhang J, Protopopov A, 
Chin L, Dahlberg SE, Neuberg DS, Silverman LB, Winter SS, Hunger SP, Sallan SE,
Zha S, Alt FW, Downing JR, Mullighan CG, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA.

The BCL11B transcription factor is required for normal T-cell development, and
has recently been implicated in the pathogenesis of T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL) induced by TLX overexpression or Atm deficiency. To
comprehensively assess the contribution of BCL11B inactivation to human T-ALL, we
performed DNA copy number and sequencing analyses of T-ALL diagnostic specimens, 
revealing monoallelic BCL11B deletions or missense mutations in 9% (n = 10 of
117) of cases. Structural homology modeling revealed that several of the BCL11B
mutations disrupted the structure of zinc finger domains required for this
transcription factor to bind DNA. BCL11B haploinsufficiency occurred across each 
of the major molecular subtypes of T-ALL, including early T-cell precursor,
HOXA-positive, LEF1-inactivated, and TAL1-positive subtypes, which have
differentiation arrest at diverse stages of thymocyte development. Our findings
provide compelling evidence that BCL11B is a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor
that collaborates with all major T-ALL oncogenic lesions in human thymocyte
transformation.

PMCID: PMC3204734
PMID: 21878675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 30;108(35):14443-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1105898108. Epub 2011 Aug 15.

Structural basis of simultaneous recruitment of the transcriptional regulators
LMO2 and FOG1/ZFPM1 by the transcription factor GATA1.

Wilkinson-White L(1), Gamsjaeger R, Dastmalchi S, Wienert B, Stokes PH, Crossley 
M, Mackay JP, Matthews JM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, New South Wales, 2006
Sydney, Australia.

The control of red blood cell and megakaryocyte development by the regulatory
protein GATA1 is a paradigm for transcriptional regulation of gene expression in 
cell lineage differentiation and maturation. Most GATA1-regulated events require 
GATA1 to bind FOG1, and essentially all GATA1-activated genes are cooccupied by a
TAL1/E2A/LMO2/LDB1 complex; however, it is not known whether FOG1 and
TAL1/E2A/LMO2/LDB1 are simultaneously recruited by GATA1. Our structural data
reveal that the FOG1-binding domain of GATA1, the N finger, can also directly
contact LMO2 and show that, despite the small size (< 50 residues) of the GATA1 N
finger, both FOG1 and LMO2 can simultaneously bind this domain. LMO2 in turn can 
simultaneously contact both GATA1 and the DNA-binding protein TAL1/E2A at
bipartite E-box/WGATAR sites. Taken together, our data provide the first
structural snapshot of multiprotein complex formation at GATA1-dependent genes
and support a model in which FOG1 and TAL1/E2A/LMO2/LDB1 can cooccupy
E-box/WGATAR sites to facilitate GATA1-mediated activation of gene activation.

PMCID: PMC3167507
PMID: 21844373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Genome Res. 2011 Oct;21(10):1659-71. doi: 10.1101/gr.125088.111. Epub 2011 Jul
27.

Dynamics of the epigenetic landscape during erythroid differentiation after GATA1
restoration.

Wu W(1), Cheng Y, Keller CA, Ernst J, Kumar SA, Mishra T, Morrissey C, Dorman CM,
Chen KB, Drautz D, Giardine B, Shibata Y, Song L, Pimkin M, Crawford GE, Furey
TS, Kellis M, Miller W, Taylor J, Schuster SC, Zhang Y, Chiaromonte F, Blobel GA,
Weiss MJ, Hardison RC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Interplays among lineage-specific nuclear proteins, chromatin modifying enzymes, 
and the basal transcription machinery govern cellular differentiation, but their 
dynamics of action and coordination with transcriptional control are not fully
understood. Alterations in chromatin structure appear to establish a permissive
state for gene activation at some loci, but they play an integral role in
activation at other loci. To determine the predominant roles of chromatin states 
and factor occupancy in directing gene regulation during differentiation, we
mapped chromatin accessibility, histone modifications, and nuclear factor
occupancy genome-wide during mouse erythroid differentiation dependent on the
master regulatory transcription factor GATA1. Notably, despite extensive changes 
in gene expression, the chromatin state profiles (proportions of a gene in a
chromatin state dominated by activating or repressive histone modifications) and 
accessibility remain largely unchanged during GATA1-induced erythroid
differentiation. In contrast, gene induction and repression are strongly
associated with changes in patterns of transcription factor occupancy. Our
results indicate that during erythroid differentiation, the broad features of
chromatin states are established at the stage of lineage commitment, largely
independently of GATA1. These determine permissiveness for expression, with
subsequent induction or repression mediated by distinctive combinations of
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3202283
PMID: 21795386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Genome Res. 2011 Oct;21(10):1650-8. doi: 10.1101/gr.121145.111. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Regulation of nucleosome landscape and transcription factor targeting at
tissue-specific enhancers by BRG1.

Hu G(1), Schones DE, Cui K, Ybarra R, Northrup D, Tang Q, Gattinoni L, Restifo
NP, Huang S, Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Enhancers of transcription activate transcription via binding of
sequence-specific transcription factors to their target sites in chromatin. In
this report, we identify GATA1-bound distal sites genome-wide and find a global
reorganization of the nucleosomes at these potential enhancers during
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) to erythrocytes. We show that 
the catalytic subunit BRG1 of BAF complexes localizes to these distal sites
during differentiation and generates a longer nucleosome linker region
surrounding the GATA1 sites by shifting the flanking nucleosomes away.
Intriguingly, we find that the nucleosome shifting specifically facilitates
binding of TAL1 but not GATA1 and is linked to subsequent transcriptional
regulation of target genes.

PMCID: PMC3202282
PMID: 21795385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Vis Exp. 2011 Jul 16;(53). pii: 2813. doi: 10.3791/2813.

Lentiviral-mediated knockdown during ex vivo erythropoiesis of human
hematopoietic stem cells.

Palii CG(1), Pasha R, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)The Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative Medicine Program,
Ottawa Hospital Research Institute.

Erythropoiesis is a commonly used model system to study cell differentiation.
During erythropoiesis, pluripotent adult human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
differentiate into oligopotent progenitors, committed precursors and mature red
blood cells. This process is regulated for a large part at the level of gene
expression, whereby specific transcription factors activate lineage-specific
genes while concomitantly repressing genes that are specific to other cell types.
Studies on transcription factors regulating erythropoiesis are often performed
using human and murine cell lines that represent, to some extent, erythroid cells
at given stages of differentiation. However transformed cell lines can only
partially mimic erythroid cells and most importantly they do not allow one to
comprehensibly study the dynamic changes that occur as cells progress through
many stages towards their final erythroid fate. Therefore, a current challenge
remains the development of a protocol to obtain relatively homogenous populations
of primary HSCs and erythroid cells at various stages of differentiation in
quantities that are sufficient to perform genomics and proteomics experiments.
Here we describe an ex vivo cell culture protocol to induce erythroid
differentiation from human hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells that have been
isolated from either cord blood, bone marrow, or adult peripheral blood mobilized
with G-CSF (leukapheresis). This culture system, initially developed by the Douay
laboratory, uses cytokines and co-culture on mesenchymal cells to mimic the bone 
marrow microenvironment. Using this ex vivo differentiation protocol, we observe 
a strong amplification of erythroid progenitors, an induction of differentiation 
exclusively towards the erythroid lineage and a complete maturation to the stage 
of enucleated red blood cells. Thus, this system provides an opportunity to study
the molecular mechanism of transcriptional regulation as hematopoietic stem cells
progress along the erythroid lineage. Studying erythropoiesis at the
transcriptional level also requires the ability to over-express or knockdown
specific factors in primary erythroid cells. For this purpose, we use a
lentivirus-mediated gene delivery system that allows for the efficient infection 
of both dividing and non-dividing cells. Here we show that we are able to
efficiently knockdown the transcription factor TAL1 in primary human erythroid
cells. In addition, GFP expression demonstrates an efficiency of lentiviral
infection close to 90%. Thus, our protocol provides a highly useful system for
characterization of the regulatory network of transcription factors that control 
erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3168199
PMID: 21785407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Blood. 2011 Aug 11;118(6):1579-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-300343. Epub 2011
Jun 13.

Notch1 inhibition targets the leukemia-initiating cells in a Tal1/Lmo2 mouse
model of T-ALL.

Tatarek J(1), Cullion K, Ashworth T, Gerstein R, Aster JC, Kelliher MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, USA.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is an aggressive malignancy largely
caused by aberrant activation of the TAL1/SCL, LMO1/2, and NOTCH1 oncogenes.
Approximately 30% of T-ALL patients relapse, and evidence is emerging that
relapse may result from a failure to eliminate leukemia-initiating cells (LICs). 
Thymic expression of the Tal1 and Lmo2 oncogenes in mice results in rapid
development of T-ALL; and similar to T-ALL patients, more than half the leukemic 
mice develop spontaneous mutations in Notch1. Using this mouse model, we
demonstrate that mouse T-ALLs are immunophenotypically and functionally
heterogeneous with approximately 1 of 10,000 leukemic cells capable of initiating
disease on transplantation. Our preleukemic studies reveal expansion of
Notch-active double-negative thymic progenitors, and we find the leukemic DN3
population enriched in disease potential. To examine the role of Notch1 in LIC
function, we measured LIC activity in leukemic mice treated with vehicle or with 
a <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor. In 4 of 5 leukemias examined, Notch inhibition
significantly reduced or eliminated LICs and extended survival. Remarkably, in 2 
mice, <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor treatment reduced LIC frequency below the limits of
detection of this assay, and all transplanted mice failed to develop disease.
These data support the continued development of Notch1 therapeutics as
antileukemia agents.

PMCID: PMC3156046
PMID: 21670468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Leukemia. 2011 Oct;25(10):1578-86. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.140. Epub 2011 Jun 7.

TAL1/SCL is downregulated upon histone deacetylase inhibition in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia cells.

Cardoso BA(1), de Almeida SF, Laranjeira AB, Carmo-Fonseca M, Yunes JA, Coffer
PJ, Barata JT.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Unit, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.

The transcription factor T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia (TAL)-1 is a major
T-cell oncogene associated with poor prognosis in T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL). TAL1 binds histone deacetylase 1 and incubation with histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACis) promotes apoptosis of leukemia cells obtained
from TAL1 transgenic mice. Here, we show for the first time that TAL1 protein
expression is strikingly downregulated upon histone deacetylase inhibition in
T-ALL cells. This is due to decreased TAL1 gene transcription in cells with
native TAL1 promoter, and due to impaired TAL1 mRNA translation in cells that
harbor the TAL1(d) microdeletion and consequently express TAL1 under the control 
of the SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus (SIL) promoter. Notably, HDACi-triggered
apoptosis of T-ALL cells is significantly reversed by TAL1 forced overexpression.
Our results indicate that the HDACi-mediated apoptotic program in T-ALL cells is 
partially dependent on their capacity to downregulate TAL1 and provide support
for the therapeutic use of HDACi in T-ALL.

PMID: 21647153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Oct 1;92(1):132-40. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr161. Epub 2011 Jun
2.

Direct and differential effects of stem cell factor on the neovascularization
activity of endothelial progenitor cells.

Kim KL(1), Meng Y, Kim JY, Baek EJ, Suh W.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Ajou University, San 5, Woncheon-Dong, Yeongtong-Gu,
Suwon 443-749, Korea.

AIMS: Previous studies on the role of stem cell factor (SCF) in endothelial
progenitor cell (EPC)-mediated neovascularization have focused on the EPC
mobilization and homing process. However, the direct effects of SCF on
neovascularization activity of EPCs have not been characterized. We sought to
determine whether SCF regulates the neovascularization ability of EPCs by
comparing its roles in mature endothelial cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In vitro and in vivo assays revealed that SCF substantially 
increased the neovascularization activity of human EPCs through the c-Kit
receptor. Notably, the SCF-induced increase in neovascularization activity was
substantially greater in EPCs than that in human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs). SCF-induced phosphorylation of c-Kit and downstream signalling
molecules was consistently found to be more potent and longer-lasting in EPCs
than in HUVECs. This high responsiveness of EPCs to SCF was explained by the
finding that the cell-surface expression of c-Kit is far higher in EPCs than in
HUVECs. A c-Kit promoter assay revealed that the increased expression of c-Kit in
EPCs could be attributed to the greater expression of stem cell leukaemia,
LIM-only 2, and GATA-binding protein 2.
CONCLUSION: In addition to its documented role in the mobilization and
recruitment of EPCs, our findings show that SCF directly enhances the
neovascularization activity of EPCs. Furthermore, the present study provides
further evidence that EPCs exhibit differentially greater responsiveness to
hypoxia-inducible cytokines, including SCF, than mature endothelial cells,
suggesting that EPCs in ischaemic tissues function differently from mature
endothelial cells, although they exhibit very similar phenotypes.

PMID: 21636540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Blood. 2011 Jul 21;118(3):723-35. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-328765. Epub 2011
May 19.

SCL-mediated regulation of the cell-cycle regulator p21 is critical for murine
megakaryopoiesis.

Chagraoui H(1), Kassouf M, Banerjee S, Goardon N, Clark K, Atzberger A, Pearce
AC, Skoda RC, Ferguson DJ, Watson SP, Vyas P, Porcher C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

Megakaryopoiesis is a complex process that involves major cellular and nuclear
changes and relies on controlled coordination of cellular proliferation and
differentiation. These mechanisms are orchestrated in part by transcriptional
regulators. The key hematopoietic transcription factor stem cell leukemia
(SCL)/TAL1 is required in early hematopoietic progenitors for specification of
the megakaryocytic lineage. These early functions have, so far, prevented full
investigation of its role in megakaryocyte development in loss-of-function
studies. Here, we report that SCL critically controls terminal megakaryocyte
maturation. In vivo deletion of Scl specifically in the megakaryocytic lineage
affects all key attributes of megakaryocyte progenitors (MkPs), namely,
proliferation, ploidization, cytoplasmic maturation, and platelet release.
Genome-wide expression analysis reveals increased expression of the cell-cycle
regulator p21 in Scl-deleted MkPs. Importantly, p21 knockdown-mediated rescue of 
Scl-mutant MkPs shows full restoration of cell-cycle progression and partial
rescue of the nuclear and cytoplasmic maturation defects. Therefore, SCL-mediated
transcriptional control of p21 is essential for terminal maturation of MkPs. Our 
study provides a mechanistic link between a major hematopoietic transcriptional
regulator, cell-cycle progression, and megakaryocytic differentiation.

PMID: 21596846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Dev Cell. 2011 May 17;20(5):597-609. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.04.008.

Genome-wide analysis of simultaneous GATA1/2, RUNX1, FLI1, and SCL binding in
megakaryocytes identifies hematopoietic regulators.

Tijssen MR(1), Cvejic A, Joshi A, Hannah RL, Ferreira R, Forrai A, Bellissimo DC,
Oram SH, Smethurst PA, Wilson NK, Wang X, Ottersbach K, Stemple DL, Green AR,
Ouwehand WH, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.

Hematopoietic differentiation critically depends on combinations of
transcriptional regulators controlling the development of individual lineages.
Here, we report the genome-wide binding sites for the five key hematopoietic
transcription factors--GATA1, GATA2, RUNX1, FLI1, and TAL1/SCL--in primary human 
megakaryocytes. Statistical analysis of the 17,263 regions bound by at least one 
factor demonstrated that simultaneous binding by all five factors was the most
enriched pattern and often occurred near known hematopoietic regulators. Eight
genes not previously appreciated to function in hematopoiesis that were bound by 
all five factors were shown to be essential for thrombocyte and/or erythroid
development in zebrafish. Moreover, one of these genes encoding the PDZK1IP1
protein shared transcriptional enhancer elements with the blood stem cell
regulator TAL1/SCL. Multifactor ChIP-Seq analysis in primary human cells coupled 
with a high-throughput in vivo perturbation screen therefore offers a powerful
strategy to identify essential regulators of complex mammalian differentiation
processes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3145975
PMID: 21571218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Blood. 2011 Jun 30;117(26):7079-89. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-317990. Epub 2011 
May 2.

ERG promotes T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia and is transcriptionally regulated in
leukemic cells by a stem cell enhancer.

Thoms JA(1), Birger Y, Foster S, Knezevic K, Kirschenbaum Y, Chandrakanthan V,
Jonquieres G, Spensberger D, Wong JW, Oram SH, Kinston SJ, Groner Y, Lock R,
MacKenzie KL, Göttgens B, Izraeli S, Pimanda JE.

Author information: 
(1)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

The Ets-related gene (ERG) is an Ets-transcription factor required for normal
blood stem cell development. ERG expression is down-regulated during early
T-lymphopoiesis but maintained in T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), where
it is recognized as an independent risk factor for adverse outcome. However, it
is unclear whether ERG is directly involved in the pathogenesis of T-ALL and how 
its expression is regulated. Here we demonstrate that transgenic expression of
ERG causes T-ALL in mice and that its knockdown reduces the proliferation of
human MOLT4 T-ALL cells. We further demonstrate that ERG expression in primary
human T-ALL cells is mediated by the binding of other T-cell oncogenes SCL/TAL1, 
LMO2, and LYL1 in concert with ERG, FLI1, and GATA3 to the ERG +85 enhancer. This
enhancer is not active in normal T cells but in transgenic mice targets
expression to fetal liver c-kit(+) cells, adult bone marrow stem/progenitors and 
early CD4(-)CD8(-) double-negative thymic progenitors. Taken together, these data
illustrate that ERG promotes T-ALL and that failure to extinguish activity of
stem cell enhancers associated with regulatory transcription factors such as ERG 
can contribute to the development of leukemia.

PMID: 21536859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Apr 8;8(4):412-25. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.02.005.

Adult hematopoiesis is regulated by TIF1<U+03B3>, a repressor of TAL1 and PU.1
transcriptional activity.

Kusy S(1), Gault N, Ferri F, Lewandowski D, Barroca V, Jaracz-Ros A, Losson R,
Romeo PH.

Author information: 
(1)Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique, DSV/iRCM/LRTS, 92265 Fontenay-aux-Roses
cedex, France.

Crosstalk between transcription factors and cytokines precisely regulates tissue 
homeostasis. Transcriptional intermediary factor 1<U+03B3> (TIF1<U+03B3>) regulates vertebrate 
hematopoietic development, can control transcription elongation, and is a
component of the TGF-ß signaling pathway. Here we show that deletion of TIF1<U+03B3> in 
adult hematopoiesis is compatible with life and long-term maintenance of
essential blood cell lineages. However, loss of TIF1<U+03B3> results in deficient
long-term hematopoietic stem cell (LT-HSC) transplantation activity, deficient
short-term HSC (ST-HSC) bone marrow retention, and priming ST-HSCs to
myelomonocytic lineage. These defects are hematopoietic cell-autonomous, and
priming of TIF1<U+03B3>-deficient ST-HSCs can be partially rescued by wild-type
hematopoietic cells. TIF1<U+03B3> can form complexes with TAL1 or PU.1-two essential
DNA-binding proteins in hematopoiesis-occupy specific subsets of their DNA
binding sites in vivo, and repress their transcriptional activity. These results 
suggest a regulation of adult hematopoiesis through TIF1<U+03B3>-mediated
transcriptional repression of TAL1 and PU.1 target genes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21474105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 24;6(3):e18223. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018223.

Leukocyte DNA methylation signature differentiates pancreatic cancer patients
from healthy controls.

Pedersen KS(1), Bamlet WR, Oberg AL, de Andrade M, Matsumoto ME, Tang H,
Thibodeau SN, Petersen GM, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
Minnesota, United States of America.

Comment in
    Biomark Med. 2011 Aug;5(4):423-5.

Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PaC) is one of most difficult tumors to treat. Much of
this is attributed to the late diagnosis. To identify biomarkers for early
detection, we examined DNA methylation differences in leukocyte DNA between PaC
cases and controls in a two-phase study. In phase I, we measured methylation
levels at 1,505 CpG sites in treatment-naïve leukocyte DNA from 132 never-smoker 
PaC patients and 60 never-smoker healthy controls. We found significant
differences in 110 CpG sites (false discovery rate <0.05). In phase II, we tested
and validated 88 of 96 phase I selected CpG sites in 240 PaC cases and 240
matched controls (p=0.05). Using penalized logistic regression, we built a
prediction model consisting of five CpG sites (IL10_P348, LCN2_P86, ZAP70_P220,
AIM2_P624, TAL1_P817) that discriminated PaC patients from controls
(C-statistic<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.85 in phase I; 0.76 in phase II). Interestingly, one CpG site
(LCN2_P86) alone could discriminate resectable patients from controls
(C-statistic=<U+200A>0.78 in phase I; 0.74 in phase II). We also performed methylation
quantitative trait loci (methQTL) analysis and identified three CpG sites
(AGXT_P180_F, ALOX12_E85_R, JAK3_P1075_R) where the methylation levels were
significantly associated with single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (false
discovery rate <0.05). Our results demonstrate that epigenetic variation in
easily obtainable leukocyte DNA, manifested by reproducible methylation
differences, may be used to detect PaC patients. The methylation differences at
certain CpG sites are partially attributable to genetic variation. This study
strongly supports future epigenome-wide association study using leukocyte DNA for
biomarker discovery in human diseases.

PMCID: PMC3063802
PMID: 21455317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Psychiatr Genet. 2012 Feb;22(1):50. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e328345464b.

Association between polymorphisms of TAL1 gene and schizophrenia in a Korean
population.

Bae JW, Kim HJ, Ban JY, Park HJ, Kim SK, Kang SW, Park JK, Kim JW, Chung JH.

PMID: 21407147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Med Sci (Paris). 2011 Feb;27(2):142-3. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2011272142. Epub 2011 
Mar 8.

[How a suppressor of tumor gets hooked of the leukaemic proliferation in man].

[Article in French]

Pflumio F, Kusy S, Gerby B, Roméo PH.

PMID: 21382322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 25;6(2):e14733. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014733.

Human pluripotent stem cells differentiated in fully defined medium generate
hematopoietic CD34- and CD34+ progenitors with distinct characteristics.

Chicha L(1), Feki A, Boni A, Irion O, Hovatta O, Jaconi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Geneva
University, Geneva, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Differentiation of pluripotent stem cells in vitro provides a
powerful means to investigate early developmental fates, including hematopoiesis.
In particular, the use of a fully defined medium (FDM) would avoid biases induced
by unidentified factors contained in serum, and would also allow key molecular
mediators involved in such a process to be identified. Our goal was to induce in 
vitro, the differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (ESC) and induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) into morphologically and phenotypically mature
leukocytes and erythrocytes, in the complete absence of serum and feeder cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: ESC and iPSC were sequentially induced in liquid 
cultures for 4 days with bone morphogenic protein-4, and for 4 days with
FLT3-ligand, stem cell factor, thrombopoietin and vascular endothelium growth
factor. Cell differentiation status was investigated by both mRNA expression and 
FACS expression profiles. Cells were further sorted and assayed for their
hematopoietic properties in colony-forming unit (CFU) assays. In liquid cultures,
cells progressively down-modulated Oct-4 expression while a sizeable cell
fraction expressed CD34 de novo. SCL/Tal1 and Runx1 transcripts were exclusively 
detected in CD34(+) cells. In clonal assays, both ESC and iPSC-derived cells
generated CFU, albeit with a 150-fold lower efficacy than cord blood (CB) CD34(+)
cells. ESC-derived CD34(+) cells generated myeloid and fully hemoglobinized
erythroid cells whereas CD34(-) cells almost exclusively generated small
erythroid colonies. Both ESC and iPSC-derived erythroid cells expressed embryonic
and fetal globins but were unable to synthesize adult ß-globin in contrast with
CB cells, suggesting that they had differentiated from primitive rather than from
definitive hematopoietic progenitors.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Short-term, animal protein-free culture conditions are 
sufficient to sustain the differentiation of human ESC and iPSC into primitive
hematopoietic progenitors, which, in turn, produce more mature blood cell types. 
However, additional factors have yet to be identified to allow their
differentiation into definitive erythroid cultures.

PMCID: PMC3045374
PMID: 21364915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Feb;19(1):174-9.

[Variant fusion transcripts and genomic DNA breakpoint of sil-tal1 in T-ALL
cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao XX(1), Liang LJ, Ding W, Li ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Center, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing 100045.

The aim of this study was to investigate the nucleotide sequence of one distinct 
fusion transcript of sil-tal1 in childhood T-ALL. The PCR product was cloned into
plasmid vector and then sequenced. Genomic DNA was analyzed with PCR using the
designed primer pairs representing distinct sequences. The product was sequenced 
and analyzed with database. The results indicated that 4 different fusion
transcripts were detected at cDNA level, in which a part of exons or introns of
sil are reserved respectively, and some additions and deletions existed. After
analyzing genomic DNA sequence of leukemic cells, the breakpoint in gene sil of
this case was proved to be different at DNA level from references. Hence, the
sil-tal1 rearrangement was defined to be a new type. It is concluded tal1
rearrangement of leukemic cells in this case is a new type, which expresses
classical and at least 3 variant fusion transcripts, presumably caused by
extraordinary mechanisms of splicing and transcription in leukemic stem cells.

PMID: 21362246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Apr 20;29(12):1643-9. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.30.2877. Epub 2011
Feb 28.

Late recurrence of childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia frequently
represents a second leukemia rather than a relapse: first evidence for genetic
predisposition.

Szczepanski T(1), van der Velden VH, Waanders E, Kuiper RP, Van Vlierberghe P,
Gruhn B, Eckert C, Panzer-Grümayer R, Basso G, Cavé H, Stadt UZ, Campana D,
Schrauder A, Sutton R, van Wering E, Meijerink JP, van Dongen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus Medical Center, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2011 May;8(5):254.

PURPOSE: Relapse of childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) often
occurs during treatment, but in some cases, leukemia re-emerges off therapy. On
the basis of previous analyses of T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangement
patterns, we hypothesized that some late recurrences of T-ALL might in fact
represent second leukemias.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In 22 patients with T-ALL who had late relapses (at least
2.5 years from diagnosis), we studied TCR gene rearrangement status at first and 
second presentation, NOTCH1 gene mutations, and the presence of the SIL-TAL1 gene
fusion. We performed genome-wide copy number and homozygosity analysis by using
oligonucleotide- and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) -based arrays.
RESULTS: We found evidence of a common clonal origin between diagnosis and
relapse in 14 patients (64%). This was based on concordant TCR gene
rearrangements (12 patients) or concordant genetic aberrations, as revealed by
genome-wide copy number analysis (two patients). In the remaining eight patients 
(36%), TCR gene rearrangement sequences had completely changed between diagnosis 
and relapse, and gene copy number analysis showed markedly different patterns of 
genomic aberrations, suggesting a second T-ALL rather than a resurgence of the
original clone. Moreover, NOTCH1 mutation patterns were different at diagnosis
and relapse in five of these eight patients. In one patient with a second T-ALL, 
SNP analysis revealed a germline del(11)(p12;p13), a known recurrent aberration
in T-ALL.
CONCLUSION: More than one third of late T-ALL recurrences are, in fact, second
leukemias. Germline genetic abnormalities might contribute to the susceptibility 
of some patients to develop T-ALL.

PMID: 21357790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Cancer Genet. 2011 Jan;204(1):26-38. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.10.007.

Implementation of high resolution single nucleotide polymorphism array analysis
as a clinical test for patients with hematologic malignancies.

Dougherty MJ(1), Wilmoth DM, Tooke LS, Shaikh TH, Gai X, Hakonarson H, Biegel JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital 
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Single nucleotide polymorphism-based oligonucleotide arrays have been used as a
research tool to detect genomic copy number changes and allelic imbalance in a
variety of hematologic malignancies and solid tumors. The high resolution,
genome-wide coverage, minimal DNA requirements, and relatively short turnaround
time are advantageous for use in a clinical setting. We validated the Illumina
HumanHap550 BeadChip array for clinical use by analyzing 127 pediatric leukemia
and lymphoma samples that had previously been characterized by means of standard 
cytogenetic analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization. A higher resolution 
Illumina HumanHap610 BeadChip array was ultimately used for clinical testing. To 
date, 180 samples from children with a suspected or confirmed hematologic
malignancy have been analyzed. Of the 180 clinical samples, 130 (72%) bone marrow
or lymphoma specimens had aberrations revealed by the array that were not seen in
the karyotypes. These typically included deletions in genes associated with B- or
T-cell malignancies, such as CDKN2A/B, PAX5, and IKZF1. There were also 75
regions of copy number neutral loss of heterozygosity (>5 Mb threshold) detected 
in 49 samples in this cohort, which could be categorized as constitutional or
acquired abnormalities. On the basis of our experience in the last 2 years, we
suggest that single nucleotide polymorphism arrays are a valuable addition to,
but not a replacement for, standard cytogenetic approaches for hematologic
malignancies.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21356189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2011 Feb 10;2(1):6. doi: 10.1186/scrt47.

Transcriptional regulation of haematopoietic transcription factors.

Wilson NK(1), Calero-Nieto FJ, Ferreira R, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK. bg200@cam.ac.uk

The control of differential gene expression is central to all metazoan biology.
Haematopoiesis represents one of the best understood developmental systems where 
multipotent blood stem cells give rise to a range of phenotypically distinct
mature cell types, all characterised by their own distinctive gene expression
profiles. Small combinations of lineage-determining transcription factors drive
the development of specific mature lineages from multipotent precursors. Given
their powerful regulatory nature, it is imperative that the expression of these
lineage-determining transcription factors is under tight control, a fact
underlined by the observation that their misexpression commonly leads to the
development of leukaemia. Here we review recent studies on the transcriptional
control of key haematopoietic transcription factors, which demonstrate that gene 
loci contain multiple modular regulatory regions within which specific regulatory
codes can be identified, that some modular elements cooperate to mediate
appropriate tissue-specific expression, and that long-range approaches will be
necessary to capture all relevant regulatory elements. We also explore how
changes in technology will impact on this area of research in the future.

PMCID: PMC3092146
PMID: 21345252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Blood. 2011 Apr 14;117(15):e142-50. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-323212. Epub 2011 
Feb 22.

Genome-wide analysis of target genes regulated by HoxB4 in hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells developing from embryonic stem cells.

Oshima M(1), Endoh M, Endo TA, Toyoda T, Nakajima-Takagi Y, Sugiyama F, Koseki H,
Kyba M, Iwama A, Osawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.

Forced expression of the transcription factor HoxB4 has been shown to enhance the
self-renewal capacity of mouse bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and
confer a long-term repopulating capacity to yolk sac and embryonic stem (ES)
cell-derived hematopoietic precursors. The fact that ES cell-derived precursors
do not repopulate bone marrow without HoxB4 underscores an important role for
HoxB4 in the maturation of ES-derived hematopoietic precursors into long-term
repopulating HSCs. However, the precise molecular mechanism underlying this
process is barely understood. In this study, we performed a genome-wide analysis 
of HoxB4 using ES cell-derived hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. The results
revealed many of the genes essential for HSC development to be direct targets of 
HoxB4, such as Runx1, Scl/Tal1, Gata2, and Gfi1. The expression profiling also
showed that HoxB4 indirectly affects the expression of several important genes,
such as Lmo2, Erg, Meis1, Pbx1, Nov, AhR, and Hemgn. HoxB4 tended to activate the
transcription, but the down-regulation of a significant portion of direct targets
suggested its function to be context-dependent. These findings indicate that
HoxB4 reprograms a set of key regulator genes to facilitate the maturation of
developing HSCs into repopulating cells. Our list of HoxB4 targets also provides 
novel candidate regulators for HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3296623
PMID: 21343615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Apr;31(7):1332-43. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01186-10. Epub 2011 Jan
31.

Role of helix-loop-helix proteins during differentiation of erythroid cells.

Anantharaman A(1), Lin IJ, Barrow J, Liang SY, Masannat J, Strouboulis J, Huang
S, Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
Genetics Institute, Center for Epigenetics, Shands Cancer Center, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610-0245, USA.

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins play a profound role in the process of
development and cellular differentiation. Among the HLH proteins expressed in
differentiating erythroid cells are the ubiquitous proteins Myc, USF1, USF2, and 
TFII-I, as well as the hematopoiesis-specific transcription factor Tal1/SCL. All 
of these HLH proteins exhibit distinct functions during the differentiation of
erythroid cells. For example, Myc stimulates the proliferation of erythroid
progenitor cells, while the USF proteins and Tal1 regulate genes that specify the
differentiated phenotype. This minireview summarizes the known activities of Myc,
USF, TFII-I, and Tal11/SCL and discusses how they may function sequentially,
cooperatively, or antagonistically in regulating expression programs during the
differentiation of erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC3135301
PMID: 21282467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Cell Sci. 2011 Feb 15;124(Pt 4):532-9. doi: 10.1242/jcs.079731. Epub 2011 Jan
18.

The Stil protein regulates centrosome integrity and mitosis through suppression
of Chfr.

Castiel A(1), Danieli MM, David A, Moshkovitz S, Aplan PD, Kirsch IR, Brandeis M,
Krämer A, Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)Sheba Cancer Research Center and Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital,
Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer 52621, Ramat Gan, Israel.

Stil (Sil, SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus) is a cytosolic and centrosomal protein
expressed in proliferating cells that is required for mouse and zebrafish neural 
development and is mutated in familial microcephaly. Recently the Drosophila
melanogaster ortholog of Stil was found to be important for centriole
duplication. Consistent with this finding, we report here that mouse embryonic
fibroblasts lacking Stil are characterized by slow growth, low mitotic index and 
absence of clear centrosomes. We hypothesized that Stil regulates mitosis through
the tumor suppressor Chfr, an E3 ligase that blocks mitotic entry in response to 
mitotic stress. Mouse fibroblasts lacking Stil by genomic or RNA interference
approaches, as well as E9.5 Stil(-/-) embryos, express high levels of the Chfr
protein and reduced levels of the Chfr substrate Plk1. Exogenous expression of
Stil, knockdown of Chfr or overexpression of Plk1 reverse the abnormal mitotic
phenotypes of fibroblasts lacking Stil. We further demonstrate that Stil
increases Chfr auto-ubiquitination and reduces its protein stability. Thus, Stil 
is required for centrosome organization, entry into mitosis and cell
proliferation, and these functions are at least partially mediated by Chfr and
its targets. This is the first identification of a negative regulator of the Chfr
mitotic checkpoint.

PMCID: PMC3031367
PMID: 21245198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2011;75(1):168-70. Epub 2011 Jan 7.

Heterologous expression of Aspergillus oryzae xylose reductase and xylitol
dehydrogenase genes facilitated xylose utilization in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae.

Kaneda J(1), Sasaki K, Gomi K, Shintani T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioindustrial Informatics and Genomics, Graduate School of
Agricultural Science, Tohoku University, 1-1 Tsutsumidori-Amamiyamachi, Aoba-ku, 
Sendai 981-8555, Japan.

The cDNA encoding a putative xylose reductase (xyrA) from Aspergillus oryzae was 
cloned and coexpressed in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae with A. oryzae
xylitol dehydrogenase cDNA (xdhA). XyrA exhibited NADPH-dependent xylose
reductase activity. The S. cerevisiae strain, overexpressing the xyrA, xdhA,
endogenous XKS1, and TAL1 genes, grew on xylose as sole carbon source, and
produced ethanol.

PMID: 21228482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2011 Mar;16(1):89-100. doi: 10.2478/s11658-010-0041-1. Epub
2010 Dec 27.

ZFAT is a critical molecule for cell survival in mouse embryonic fibroblasts.

Doi K(1), Fujimoto T, Koyanagi M, Tsunoda T, Tanaka Y, Yoshida Y, Takashima Y,
Kuroki M, Sasazuki T, Shirasawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, 7-45-1
Nanakuma, Jonan-ku, Fukuoka, 814-0180, Japan.

ZFAT was originally identified as an immune-related transcriptional regulator
containing 18 C2H2-type zinc-finger domains and one AT-hook. ZFAT is highly
conserved among species and functions as an anti-apoptotic molecule in the
lymphoblastic leukemia cell line, MOLT-4. We recently demonstrated that ZFAT is
an essential molecule for hematopoietic differentiation in blood islands through 
the direct regulation of particular transcriptional factors, including Tal1, for 
endothelial cell assembly, and for the branch point formation of capillary-like
structures. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the anti-apoptotic
function of ZFAT remain unknown. Here, we report that ZFAT knockdown by small
interfering RNA induced apoptosis in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). This
response had been similarly observed for MOLT-4 cells. To explore the molecular
mechanisms for ZFAT in anti-apoptotic function in both MEFs and MOLT-4 cells,
microarray expression analysis and quantitative RT-PCR were done. Of interest was
that Bcl-2 and Il6st were identified as commonly down-regulated genes by the
depletion of ZFAT for both MEFs and MOLT-4 cells. These results suggest that ZFAT
is a critical molecule for cell survival in MEFs and MOLT-4 cells at least in
part through the regulation of the apoptosis involved in the BCL-2- and
IL6st-mediated pathways. Further elucidation of the molecular functions for ZFAT 
might shed light on the cellular programs in the mesoderm-derived cells.

PMID: 21225468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. EMBO J. 2011 Feb 2;30(3):494-509. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.342. Epub 2010 Dec 21.

Differential genomic targeting of the transcription factor TAL1 in alternate
haematopoietic lineages.

Palii CG(1), Perez-Iratxeta C, Yao Z, Cao Y, Dai F, Davison J, Atkins H, Allan D,
Dilworth FJ, Gentleman R, Tapscott SJ, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)The Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Department of Regenerative Medicine,
Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

TAL1/SCL is a master regulator of haematopoiesis whose expression promotes
opposite outcomes depending on the cell type: differentiation in the erythroid
lineage or oncogenesis in the T-cell lineage. Here, we used a combination of ChIP
sequencing and gene expression profiling to compare the function of TAL1 in
normal erythroid and leukaemic T cells. Analysis of the genome-wide binding
properties of TAL1 in these two haematopoietic lineages revealed new insight into
the mechanism by which transcription factors select their binding sites in
alternate lineages. Our study shows limited overlap in the TAL1-binding profile
between the two cell types with an unexpected preference for ETS and RUNX motifs 
adjacent to E-boxes in the T-cell lineage. Furthermore, we show that TAL1
interacts with RUNX1 and ETS1, and that these transcription factors are
critically required for TAL1 binding to genes that modulate T-cell
differentiation. Thus, our findings highlight a critical role of the cellular
environment in modulating transcription factor binding, and provide insight into 
the mechanism by which TAL1 inhibits differentiation leading to oncogenesis in
the T-cell lineage.

PMCID: PMC3034015
PMID: 21179004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Biochem. 2011 Feb;149(2):117-9. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvq146. Epub 2010 Dec 20.

Roles of old players in the suppression of a new player: networks for the
transcriptional control of angiogenesis.

Watabe T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. t-watabe@umin.ac.jp

Comment on
    J Biochem. 2009 Feb;145(2):129-35.

During the formation of blood vessels, Id1, a member of the helix-loop-helix
(HLH) family, and TAL1/SCL, a basic HLH (bHLH) transcription factor, play
important roles in the activation of endothelial cells. Recent reports revealed
that E2-2, another bHLH transcription factor, inhibits angiogenesis in vitro and 
in vivo by suppressing the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 2 (VEGFR2). Id1 and TAL1/SCL dimerize with E2-2 and relieve the
E2-2-mediated down-regulation of VEGFR2 expression, leading to the activation of 
endothelial cells. These findings reveal a novel interplay between HLH
transcription factors that regulate angiogenesis.

PMID: 21172954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2010 Sep;23(3):307-18. doi:
10.1016/j.beha.2010.08.002. Epub 2010 Oct 30.

Genetic rearrangements in relation to immunophenotype and outcome in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Meijerink JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus MC Rotterdam-Sophia Children's Hospital, Dr. Molewaterplein 60, 3015
GJ, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. meijerink@erasmusmc.nl

Mutually exclusive oncogenic rearrangements may delineate specific T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL) subgroups, and so far at least 4
molecular-cytogenetic subgroups have been identified, i.e. the TAL/LMO, the
TLX1/HOX11, the TLX3/HOX11L2 and the HOXA subgroups. A fifth group with an
immature immunophenotype that can be predicted by an early T-cell precursor
signature has also been identified, and has been associated with poor outcome.
The association of these subgroups with the expression of specific
immunophenotypic markers reflecting arrest at specific T-cell developmental
stages will be reviewed. These strong associations urge the need to extensively
study oncogenic rearrangements and immunophenotypic markers in relation to
outcome for future treatment protocols, both for paediatric as well as adult
T-ALL patients.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21112032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Exp Med. 2010 Nov 22;207(12):2537-41. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102260.

Networking erythropoiesis.

Kerenyi MA(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston and the Dana
Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

A relatively small cadre of lineage-restricted transcription factors largely
orchestrates erythropoiesis, but how these nuclear factors interact to regulate
this complex biology is still largely unknown. However, recent technological
advances, such as chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) paired with massively
parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq), gene expression profiling, and comprehensive
bioinformatic analyses, offer new insights into the intricacies of red cell
molecular circuits.

PMCID: PMC2989762
PMID: 21098097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Blood. 2011 Feb 17;117(7):2146-56. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-293357. Epub 2010
Nov 12.

Structure of the leukemia oncogene LMO2: implications for the assembly of a
hematopoietic transcription factor complex.

El Omari K(1), Hoosdally SJ, Tuladhar K, Karia D, Vyas P, Patient R, Porcher C,
Mancini EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Structural Biology, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

The LIM only protein 2 (LMO2) is a key regulator of hematopoietic stem cell
development whose ectopic expression in T cells leads to the onset of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Through its LIM domains, LMO2 is thought to function as
the scaffold for a DNA-binding transcription regulator complex, including the
basic helix-loop-helix proteins SCL/TAL1 and E47, the zinc finger protein GATA-1,
and LIM-domain interacting protein LDB1. To understand the role of LMO2 in the
formation of this complex and ultimately to dissect its function in normal and
aberrant hematopoiesis, we solved the crystal structure of LMO2 in complex with
the LID domain of LDB1 at 2.4 Å resolution. We observe a largely unstructured
LMO2 kept in register by the LID binding both LIM domains. Comparison of
independently determined crystal structures of LMO2 reveals large movements
around a conserved hinge between the LIM domains. We demonstrate that such
conformational flexibility is necessary for binding of LMO2 to its partner
protein SCL/TAL1 in vitro and for the function of this complex in vivo. These
results, together with molecular docking and analysis of evolutionarily conserved
residues, yield the first structural model of the DNA-binding complex containing 
LMO2, LDB1, SCL/TAL1, and GATA-1.

PMID: 21076045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 14;286(2):1061-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.158709. Epub 2010 
Nov 10.

N-Myc and SP regulate phosphatidylserine synthase-1 expression in brain and glial
cells.

Tasseva G(1), Cole L, Vance JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2S2,
Canada.

Phosphatidylserine (PS) is an essential constituent of biological membranes and
plays critical roles in apoptosis and cell signaling. Because no information was 
available on transcriptional mechanisms that regulate PS biosynthesis in
mammalian cells, we investigated the regulation of expression of the mouse PS
synthase-1 (Pss1) gene. The Pss1 core promoter was characterized in vitro and in 
vivo through gel shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Transcription
factor-binding sites, such as a GC-box cluster that binds Sp1/Sp3/Sp4 and N-Myc, 
and a degenerate E-box motif that interacts with Tal1 and E47, were identified.
Pss1 transactivation was higher in brain of neonatal mice than in other tissues, 
consistent with brain being a major site of expression of Pss1 mRNA and PSS1
activity. Enzymatic assays revealed that PSS1 activity is enriched in primary
cortical astrocytes compared with primary cortical neurons. Site-directed
mutagenesis of binding sites within the Pss1 promoter demonstrated that Sp and
N-Myc synergistically activate Pss1 expression in astrocytes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation indicated that Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 interact with a common DNA
binding site on the promoter. Reduction in levels of Sp1, Sp3, or N-Myc proteins 
by RNA interference decreased promoter activity. In addition, disruption of
Sp/DNA binding with mithramycin significantly reduced Pss1 expression and PSS1
enzymatic activity, underscoring the essential contribution of Sp factors in
regulating PSS1 activity. These studies provide the first analysis of mechanisms 
that regulate expression of a mammalian Pss gene in brain.

PMCID: PMC3020713
PMID: 21068393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 23;107(47):20429-34. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1007804107. Epub 2010 Nov 8.

Building multifunctionality into a complex containing master regulators of
hematopoiesis.

Fujiwara T(1), Lee HY, Sanalkumar R, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research, University of Wisconsin Carbone
Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health,
Madison, WI 53705, USA.

Developmental control mechanisms often use multimeric complexes containing
transcription factors, coregulators, and additional non-DNA binding components.
It is challenging to ascertain how such components contribute to complex function
at endogenous loci. We analyzed the function of components of a complex
containing master regulators of hematopoiesis (GATA-1 and Scl/TAL1) and the
non-DNA binding components ETO2, the LIM domain protein LMO2, and the chromatin
looping factor LDB1. Surprisingly, we discovered that ETO2 and LMO2 regulate
distinct target-gene ensembles in erythroid cells. ETO2 commonly repressed GATA-1
function via suppressing histone H3 acetylation, although it also regulated
methylation of histone H3 at lysine 27 at select loci. Prior studies defined
multiple modes by which GATA-1 regulates target genes with or without the
coregulator Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1). LMO2 selectively repressed genes that
GATA-1 represses in a FOG-1-independent manner. As LMO2 controls hematopoiesis,
its dysregulation is leukemogenic, and its influence on GATA factor function is
unknown, this mechanistic link has important biological and pathophysiological
implications. The demonstration that ETO2 and LMO2 exert qualitatively distinct
functions at endogenous loci illustrates how components of complexes containing
master developmental regulators can impart the capacity to regulate unique
cohorts of target genes, thereby diversifying complex function.

PMCID: PMC2996669
PMID: 21059912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Oncogene. 2011 Mar 10;30(10):1252-60. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.495. Epub 2010 Nov 8.

A DNA-binding mutant of TAL1 cooperates with LMO2 to cause T cell leukemia in
mice.

Draheim KM(1), Hermance N, Yang Y, Arous E, Calvo J, Kelliher MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, UMass Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The most common translocation in childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL) involves the LMO2 locus, resulting in ectopic expression of the LMO2 gene
in human thymocytes. The LMO2 gene was also activated in patients with X-linked
Severe Combined Immune Deficiency treated with gene therapy because of retroviral
insertion in the LMO2 locus. The LMO2 insertions predisposed these children to
T-ALL, yet how LMO2 contributes to T cell transformation remains unclear. The LIM
(Lin 11, Isl-1, Mec-3) domain containing LMO2 protein regulates erythropoiesis as
part of a large transcriptional complex consisting of LMO2, TAL1, E47, GATA1 and 
LDB1 that recognizes bipartite E-box-GATA1 sites on target genes. Similarly, a
TAL1/E47/LMO2/LDB1 complex is observed in human T-ALL and Tal1 and Lmo2
expression in mice results in disease acceleration. To address the mechanism(s)
of Tal1/Lmo2 synergy in leukemia, we generated Lmo2 transgenic mice and mated
them with mice that express wild-type Tal1 or a DNA-binding mutant of TAL1.
Tal1/Lmo2 and MutTAL1/Lmo2 bitransgenic mice exhibit perturbations in thymocyte
development due to reduced E47/HEB transcriptional activity and develop leukemia 
with identical kinetics. These data demonstrate that the DNA-binding activity of 
Tal1 is not required to cooperate with Lmo2 to cause leukemia in mice and suggest
that Lmo2 may cooperate with Tal1 to interfere with E47/HEB function(s).

© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited

PMCID: PMC3691994
PMID: 21057528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2010 Nov 1;66(Pt 11):1466-9.
doi: 10.1107/S1744309110032872. Epub 2010 Oct 28.

Purification, crystallization and preliminary X-ray analysis of a fusion of the
LIM domains of LMO2 and the LID domain of Ldb1.

El Omari K(1), Porcher C, Mancini EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Structural Biology, The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, 
University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, England.

LMO2 (LIM domain only 2), also known as rhombotin-2, is a transcriptional
regulator that is essential for normal haematopoietic development. In malignant
haematopoiesis, its ectopic expression in T cells is involved in the pathogenesis
of leukaemia. LMO2 contains four zinc-finger domains and binds to the ubiquitous 
nuclear adaptor protein Ldb1 via the LIM-interaction domain (LID). Together, they
act as scaffolding proteins and bridge important haematopoietic transcription
factors such as SCL/Tal1, E2A and GATA-1. Solving the structure of the
LMO2:Ldb1-LID complex would therefore be a first step towards understanding how
haematopoietic specific protein complexes form and would also provide an
attractive target for drug development in anticancer therapy, especially for
T-cell leukaemia. Here, the expression, purification, crystallization and data
collection of a fusion protein consisting of the two LIM domains of LMO2 linked
to the LID domain of Ldb1 via a flexible linker is reported. The crystals
belonged to space group C2, with unit-cell parameters a = 179.9, b = 51.5, c =
114.7 Å, ß = 90.1°, and contained five molecules in the asymmetric unit.
Multiple-wavelength anomalous dispersion (MAD) data have been collected at the
zinc X-ray absorption edge to a resolution of 2.8 Å and the data were used to
solve the structure of the LMO2:Ldb1-LID complex. Refinement and analysis of the 
electron-density map is in progress.

PMCID: PMC3001649
PMID: 21045296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Dec;30(24):5741-51. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00870-10. Epub 2010 Oct 
18.

cis-Regulatory remodeling of the SCL locus during vertebrate evolution.

Göttgens B(1), Ferreira R, Sanchez MJ, Ishibashi S, Li J, Spensberger D, Lefevre 
P, Ottersbach K, Chapman M, Kinston S, Knezevic K, Hoogenkamp M, Follows GA,
Bonifer C, Amaya E, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Development progresses through a sequence of cellular identities which are
determined by the activities of networks of transcription factor genes.
Alterations in cis-regulatory elements of these genes play a major role in
evolutionary change, but little is known about the mechanisms responsible for
maintaining conserved patterns of gene expression. We have studied the evolution 
of cis-regulatory mechanisms controlling the SCL gene, which encodes a key
transcriptional regulator of blood, vasculature, and brain development and
exhibits conserved function and pattern of expression throughout vertebrate
evolution. SCL cis-regulatory elements are conserved between frog and chicken but
accrued alterations at an accelerated rate between 310 and 200 million years ago,
with subsequent fixation of a new cis-regulatory pattern at the beginning of the 
mammalian radiation. As a consequence, orthologous elements shared by mammals and
lower vertebrates exhibit functional differences and binding site turnover
between widely separated cis-regulatory modules. However, the net effect of these
alterations is constancy of overall regulatory inputs and of expression pattern. 
Our data demonstrate remarkable cis-regulatory remodelling across the SCL locus
and indicate that stable patterns of expression can mask extensive regulatory
change. These insights illuminate our understanding of vertebrate evolution.

PMCID: PMC3004278
PMID: 20956563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Cell Stem Cell. 2010 Oct 8;7(4):532-44. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2010.07.016.

Combinatorial transcriptional control in blood stem/progenitor cells: genome-wide
analysis of ten major transcriptional regulators.

Wilson NK(1), Foster SD, Wang X, Knezevic K, Schütte J, Kaimakis P, Chilarska PM,
Kinston S, Ouwehand WH, Dzierzak E, Pimanda JE, de Bruijn MF, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK.

Combinatorial transcription factor (TF) interactions control cellular phenotypes 
and, therefore, underpin stem cell formation, maintenance, and differentiation.
Here, we report the genome-wide binding patterns and combinatorial interactions
for ten key regulators of blood stem/progenitor cells (SCL/TAL1, LYL1, LMO2,
GATA2, RUNX1, MEIS1, PU.1, ERG, FLI-1, and GFI1B), thus providing the most
comprehensive TF data set for any adult stem/progenitor cell type to date.
Genome-wide computational analysis of complex binding patterns, followed by
functional validation, revealed the following: first, a previously unrecognized
combinatorial interaction between a heptad of TFs (SCL, LYL1, LMO2, GATA2, RUNX1,
ERG, and FLI-1). Second, we implicate direct protein-protein interactions between
four key regulators (RUNX1, GATA2, SCL, and ERG) in stabilizing complex binding
to DNA. Third, Runx1(+/-)::Gata2(+/-) compound heterozygous mice are not viable
with severe hematopoietic defects at midgestation. Taken together, this study
demonstrates the power of genome-wide analysis in generating novel functional
insights into the transcriptional control of stem and progenitor cells.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20887958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Cell. 2010 Oct 1;143(1):46-58. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.09.001.

Long noncoding RNAs with enhancer-like function in human cells.

Ørom UA(1), Derrien T, Beringer M, Gumireddy K, Gardini A, Bussotti G, Lai F,
Zytnicki M, Notredame C, Huang Q, Guigo R, Shiekhattar R.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2010 Oct 19;19(4):485-6.
    Nat Methods. 2010 Dec;7(12):947.

While the long noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) constitute a large portion of the
mammalian transcriptome, their biological functions has remained elusive. A few
long ncRNAs that have been studied in any detail silence gene expression in
processes such as X-inactivation and imprinting. We used a GENCODE annotation of 
the human genome to characterize over a thousand long ncRNAs that are expressed
in multiple cell lines. Unexpectedly, we found an enhancer-like function for a
set of these long ncRNAs in human cell lines. Depletion of a number of ncRNAs led
to decreased expression of their neighboring protein-coding genes, including the 
master regulator of hematopoiesis, SCL (also called TAL1), Snai1 and Snai2. Using
heterologous transcription assays we demonstrated a requirement for the ncRNAs in
activation of gene expression. These results reveal an unanticipated role for a
class of long ncRNAs in activation of critical regulators of development and
differentiation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4108080
PMID: 20887892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Leukemia. 2010 Dec;24(12):2014-22. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.204. Epub 2010 Sep 23.

NOTCH1 and/or FBXW7 mutations predict for initial good prednisone response but
not for improved outcome in pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
patients treated on DCOG or COALL protocols.

Zuurbier L(1), Homminga I, Calvert V, te Winkel ML, Buijs-Gladdines JG, Kooi C,
Smits WK, Sonneveld E, Veerman AJ, Kamps WA, Horstmann M, Petricoin EF 3rd,
Pieters R, Meijerink JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Sophia Children's Hospital,
Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2010 Dec;24(12):2003-4.

Aberrant activation of the NOTCH1 pathway by inactivating and activating
mutations in NOTCH1 or FBXW7 is a frequent phenomenon in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). We retrospectively investigated the relevance of 
NOTCH1/FBXW7 mutations for pediatric T-ALL patients enrolled on Dutch Childhood
Oncology Group (DCOG) ALL7/8 or ALL9 or the German Co-Operative Study Group for
Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia study (COALL-97) protocols.
NOTCH1-activating mutations were identified in 63% of patients. NOTCH1 mutations 
affected the heterodimerization, the juxtamembrane and/or the PEST domains, but
not the RBP-J-<U+03BA>-associated module, the ankyrin repeats or the transactivation
domain. Reverse-phase protein microarray data confirmed that NOTCH1 and FBXW7
mutations resulted in increased intracellular NOTCH1 levels in primary T-ALL
biopsies. Based on microarray expression analysis, NOTCH1/FBXW7 mutations were
associated with activation of NOTCH1 direct target genes including HES1, DTX1,
NOTCH3, PTCRA but not cMYC. NOTCH1/FBXW7 mutations were associated with TLX3
rearrangements, but were less frequently identified in TAL1- or LMO2-rearranged
cases. NOTCH1-activating mutations were less frequently associated with mature
T-cell developmental stage. Mutations were associated with a good initial in vivo
prednisone response, but were not associated with a superior outcome in the DCOG 
and COALL cohorts. Comparing our data with other studies, we conclude that the
prognostic significance for NOTCH1/FBXW7 mutations is not consistent and may
depend on the treatment protocol given.

PMID: 20861909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Exp Med. 2010 Sep 27;207(10):2141-56. doi: 10.1084/jem.20100745. Epub 2010 Sep 
20.

NKX3.1 is a direct TAL1 target gene that mediates proliferation of
TAL1-expressing human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Kusy S(1), Gerby B, Goardon N, Gault N, Ferri F, Gérard D, Armstrong F, Ballerini
P, Cayuela JM, Baruchel A, Pflumio F, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de recherche sur la Réparation et la Transcription dans les
cellules Souches, Direction des Sciences du Vivant, Commissariat à l'Energie
Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives, 92265 Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.

TAL1 (also known as SCL) is expressed in >40% of human T cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemias (T-ALLs). TAL1 encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
that can interfere with the transcriptional activity of E2A and HEB during T cell
leukemogenesis; however, the oncogenic pathways directly activated by TAL1 are
not characterized. In this study, we show that, in human TAL1-expressing T-ALL
cell lines, TAL1 directly activates NKX3.1, a tumor suppressor gene required for 
prostate stem cell maintenance. In human T-ALL cell lines, NKX3.1 gene activation
is mediated by a TAL1-LMO-Ldb1 complex that is recruited by GATA-3 bound to an
NKX3.1 gene promoter regulatory sequence. TAL1-induced NKX3.1 activation is
associated with suppression of HP1-a (heterochromatin protein 1 a) binding and
opening of chromatin on the NKX3.1 gene promoter. NKX3.1 is necessary for T-ALL
proliferation, can partially restore proliferation in TAL1 knockdown cells, and
directly regulates miR-17-92. In primary human TAL1-expressing leukemic cells,
the NKX3.1 gene is expressed independently of the Notch pathway, and its
inactivation impairs proliferation. Finally, TAL1 or NKX3.1 knockdown abrogates
the ability of human T-ALL cells to efficiently induce leukemia development in
mice. These results suggest that tumor suppressor or oncogenic activity of NKX3.1
depends on tissue expression.

PMCID: PMC2947082
PMID: 20855495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 10;5(9). pii: e12667. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012667.

Claudin 13, a member of the claudin family regulated in mouse stress induced
erythropoiesis.

Thompson PD(1), Tipney H, Brass A, Noyes H, Kemp S, Naessens J, Tassabehji M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunogenetics, University of Manchester, St Mary's Hospital,
Manchester, United Kingdom.

Mammals are able to rapidly produce red blood cells in response to stress. The
molecular pathways used in this process are important in understanding responses 
to anaemia in multiple biological settings. Here we characterise the novel gene
Claudin 13 (Cldn13), a member of the Claudin family of tight junction proteins
using RNA expression, microarray and phylogenetic analysis. We present evidence
that Cldn13 appears to be co-ordinately regulated as part of a stress induced
erythropoiesis pathway and is a mouse-specific gene mainly expressed in tissues
associated with haematopoietic function. CLDN13 phylogenetically groups with its 
genomic neighbour CLDN4, a conserved tight junction protein with a putative role 
in epithelial to mesenchymal transition, suggesting a recent duplication event.
Mechanisms of mammalian stress erythropoiesis are of importance in anaemic
responses and expression microarray analyses demonstrate that Cldn13 is the most 
abundant Claudin in spleen from mice infected with Trypanosoma congolense. In
mice prone to anaemia (C57BL/6), its expression is reduced compared to strains
which display a less severe anaemic response (A/J and BALB/c) and is
differentially regulated in spleen during disease progression. Genes clustering
with Cldn13 on microarrays are key regulators of erythropoiesis (Tal1, Trim10,
E2f2), erythrocyte membrane proteins (Rhd and Gypa), associated with red cell
volume (Tmcc2) and indirectly associated with erythropoietic pathways (Cdca8,
Cdkn2d, Cenpk). Relationships between genes appearing co-ordinately regulated
with Cldn13 post-infection suggest new insights into the molecular regulation and
pathways involved in stress induced erythropoiesis and suggest a novel,
previously unreported role for claudins in correct cell polarisation and protein 
partitioning prior to erythroblast enucleation.

PMCID: PMC2937028
PMID: 20844758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Basic Microbiol. 2010 Oct;50(5):494-8. doi: 10.1002/jobm.200900391.

Transcription factor Stb5p is essential for acetaldehyde tolerance in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Matsufuji Y(1), Nakagawa T, Fujimura S, Tani A, Nakagawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology, Faculty of Bioindustry, Tokyo
University of Agriculture, Abashiri, Hokkaido, Japan.

Transcription factor Stb5p, previously known as one of the multidrug resistance
gene regulators in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, was shown here to play an essential 
role in acetaldehyde tolerance. A mutant strain, <U+0394>stb5 exhibited increased
acetaldehyde sensitivity, and failed to induce genes such as GND1, TKL1 and TAL1 
involved in the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) upon acetaldehyde stress. Using
this strain it was revealed that Stb5p acts as a repressor for PGI1 encoding
glucose-6-phosphate isomerase under acetaldehyde stress. In reverse,
over-expression of Stb5p reinforced acetaldehyde tolerance to the yeast.
Furthermore, various deletion mutants of the genes involved in glycolysis showed 
increased acetaldehyde tolerance compared to the wild-type strain. From these
results, it was suggested that Stb5p participates in acetaldehyde tolerance by
regulating expression of the PPP genes and PGI1, and that down-regulation of
glycolytic pathway may lead to vitalization of PPP and to increased acetaldehyde 
tolerance.

PMID: 20806246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2011 May;38(5):617-26. doi:
10.1007/s10295-010-0806-6. Epub 2010 Aug 17.

A genetic overhaul of Saccharomyces cerevisiae 424A(LNH-ST) to improve xylose
fermentation.

Bera AK(1), Ho NW, Khan A, Sedlak M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Renewable Resources Engineering, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

Robust microorganisms are necessary for economical bioethanol production.
However, such organisms must be able to effectively ferment both hexose and
pentose sugars present in lignocellulosic hydrolysate to ethanol. Wild type
Saccharomyces cerevisiae can rapidly ferment hexose, but cannot ferment pentose
sugars. Considerable efforts were made to genetically engineer S. cerevisiae to
ferment xylose. Our genetically engineered S cerevisiae yeast, 424A(LNH-ST),
expresses NADPH/NADH xylose reductase (XR) that prefer NADPH and NAD(+)-dependent
xylitol dehydrogenase (XD) from Pichia stipitis, and overexpresses endogenous
xylulokinase (XK). This strain is able to ferment glucose and xylose, as well as 
other hexose sugars, to ethanol. However, the preference for different cofactors 
by XR and XD might lead to redox imbalance, xylitol excretion, and thus might
reduce ethanol yield and productivity. In the present study, genes responsible
for the conversion of xylose to xylulose with different cofactor specificity (1) 
XR from N. crassa (NADPH-dependent) and C. parapsilosis (NADH-dependent), and (2)
mutant XD from P. stipitis (containing three mutations D207A/I208R/F209S) were
overexpressed in wild type yeast. To increase the NADPH pool, the fungal GAPDH
enzyme from Kluyveromyces lactis was overexpressed in the 424A(LNH-ST) strain.
Four pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) genes, TKL1, TAL1, RKI1 and RPE1 from S.
cerevisiae, were also overexpressed in 424A(LNH-ST). Overexpression of GAPDH
lowered xylitol production by more than 40%. However, other strains carrying
different combinations of XR and XD, as well as new strains containing the
overexpressed PPP genes, did not yield any significant improvement in xylose
fermentation.

PMID: 20714780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Aug;12(8):605-8.

[Biological characteristics of T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia in 23
children].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiong H(1), Zhang YD, Hu Q, Sun Y, Liu SY, Zhang LQ, Liu AG, Wang GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
Technology and Science University, Wuhan 430030, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the biological characteristics of childhood T-lineage
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and their clinical significance.
METHODS: Immunophenotyping was performed by three-color flow cytometry analysis
using CD45 /SSC gating in 23 children with newly diagnosed T-ALL. Meanwhile
cytogenetic analysis was performed.
RESULTS: CD3(+) expression of T-lineage antigens was apparently higher than
CD7(+) and CD5(+) expression. CD19(+) expression of B-lineage antigens was
apparently higher than CD22(+), CD10(+) and CD20(+) expression. Myeloid antigen
was expressed in 4 cases (17%). CD34(+) and HLA-DR(+) were observed in 4 cases
(17%) and 5 cases (22%), respectively. cCD3(+) and cCD79(+) were expressed in 23 
cases (100%) and 22 cases (96%), respectively. The chromosome detection in 8
cases with T-ALL showed hyperdiploid or Ph(+) chromosome (one case each). The
fusion gene detection in 5 cases showed MLL rearrangements in two cases and
positive SIL/TAL1 fusion gene in one case. CD3 expression was related with the
complete remission rate.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunophenotyping is an important tool for diagnosis of T-ALL.
However, the immunophenotype of T-ALL is heterogeneous. So, immunophenotyping
along with cytogenetic and molecular genetic analysis is needed in the treatment 
and prognosis evaluation of T-ALL.

PMID: 20704789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 10;107(32):14199-204. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1002494107. Epub 2010 Jul 26.

Immune-related zinc finger gene ZFAT is an essential transcriptional regulator
for hematopoietic differentiation in blood islands.

Tsunoda T(1), Takashima Y, Tanaka Y, Fujimoto T, Doi K, Hirose Y, Koyanagi M,
Yoshida Y, Okamura T, Kuroki M, Sasazuki T, Shirasawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, and Center for Advanced
Molecular Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan.

TAL1 plays pivotal roles in vascular and hematopoietic developments through the
complex with LMO2 and GATA1. Hemangioblasts, which have a differentiation
potential for both endothelial and hematopoietic lineages, arise in the primitive
streak and migrate into the yolk sac to form blood islands, where primitive
hematopoiesis occurs. ZFAT (a zinc-finger gene in autoimmune thyroid disease
susceptibility region/an immune-related transcriptional regulator containing 18
C(2)H(2)-type zinc-finger domains and one AT-hook) was originally identified as
an immune-related transcriptional regulator containing 18 C(2)H(2)-type
zinc-finger domains and one AT-hook, and is highly conserved among species. ZFAT 
is thought to be a critical transcription factor involved in immune-regulation
and apoptosis; however, developmental roles for ZFAT remain unknown. Here we show
that Zfat-deficient (Zfat(-/-)) mice are embryonic-lethal, with impaired
differentiation of hematopoietic progenitor cells in blood islands, where ZFAT is
exactly expressed. Expression levels of Tal1, Lmo2, and Gata1 in Zfat(-/-) yolk
sacs are much reduced compared with those of wild-type mice, and ChIP-PCR
analysis revealed that ZFAT binds promoter regions for these genes in vivo.
Furthermore, profound reduction in TAL1, LMO2, and GATA1 protein expressions are 
observed in Zfat(-/-) blood islands. Taken together, these results suggest that
ZFAT is indispensable for mouse embryonic development and functions as a critical
transcription factor for primitive hematopoiesis through direct-regulation of
Tal1, Lmo2, and Gata1. Elucidation of ZFAT functions in hematopoiesis might lead 
to a better understanding of transcriptional networks in differentiation and
cellular programs of hematopoietic lineage and provide useful information for
applied medicine in stem cell therapy.

PMCID: PMC2922575
PMID: 20660741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Blood. 2010 Nov 4;116(18):3622-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-05-283648. Epub 2010
Jul 23.

FLT3 internal tandem duplication associates with adverse outcome and gene- and
microRNA-expression signatures in patients 60 years of age or older with primary 
cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia: a Cancer and Leukemia Group B
study.

Whitman SP(1), Maharry K, Radmacher MD, Becker H, Mrózek K, Margeson D, Holland
KB, Wu YZ, Schwind S, Metzeler KH, Wen J, Baer MR, Powell BL, Carter TH, Kolitz
JE, Wetzler M, Moore JO, Stone RM, Carroll AJ, Larson RA, Caligiuri MA, Marcucci 
G, Bloomfield CD.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH, USA.

The clinical impact of FLT3-internal tandem duplications (ITDs), an adverse
prognostic marker in adults aged < 60 years with primary cytogenetically normal
acute myeloid leukemia (CN-AML), requires further investigation in older
patients. In CN-AML patients aged = 60 years treated on Cancer and Leukemia Group
B frontline trials, we found that FLT3-ITD remained associated with shorter
disease-free survival (P < .001; hazard ratio = 2.10) and overall survival (P <
.001; hazard ratio = 1.97) in multivariable analyses. This impact on shorter
disease-free survival and overall survival was in patients aged 60-69 (P < .001, 
each) rather than in those aged = 70 years. An FLT3-ITD-associated
gene-expression signature revealed overexpression of FLT3, homeobox genes (MEIS1,
PBX3, HOXB3), and immunotherapeutic tar-gets (WT1, CD33) and underexpression of
leukemia-associated (MLLT3, TAL1) and erythropoiesis-associated (GATA3, EPOR,
ANK1, HEMGN) genes. An FLT3-ITD-associated microRNA-expression signature included
overexpressed miR-155 and underexpressed miR-144 and miR-451. FLT3-ITD identifies
older CN-AML patients with molecular high risk and is associated with gene- and
microRNA-expression signatures that provide biologic insights for novel
therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC2981481
PMID: 20656931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Blood. 2010 Oct 21;116(16):2921-31. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-262964. Epub 2010 
Jul 1.

RapGEF2 is essential for embryonic hematopoiesis but dispensable for adult
hematopoiesis.

Satyanarayana A(1), Gudmundsson KO, Chen X, Coppola V, Tessarollo L, Keller JR,
Hou SX.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute-Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.

RapGEF2 is one of many guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) that
specifically activate Rap1. Here, we generated RapGEF2 conditional knockout mice 
and studied its role in embryogenesis and fetal as well as adult hematopoietic
stem cell (HSC) regulation. RapGEF2 deficiency led to embryonic lethality at ~
E11.5 due to severe yolk sac vascular defects. However, a similar number of
Flk1(+) cells were present in RapGEF2(+/+) and RapGEF2(-/-) yolk sacs indicating 
that the bipotential early progenitors were in fact generated in the absence of
RapGEF2. Further analysis of yolk sacs and embryos revealed a significant
reduction of CD41 expressing cells in RapGEF2(-/-) genotype, suggesting a defect 
in the maintenance of definitive hematopoiesis. RapGEF2(-/-) cells displayed
defects in proliferation and migration, and the in vitro colony formation ability
of hematopoietic progenitors was also impaired. At the molecular level, Rap1
activation was impaired in RapGEF2(-/-) cells that in turn lead to defective
B-raf/ERK signaling. Scl/Gata transcription factor expression was significantly
reduced, indicating that the defects observed in RapGEF2(-/-) cells could be
mediated through Scl/Gata deregulation. Inducible deletion of RapGEF2 during late
embryogenesis in RapGEF2(cko/cko)ER(cre) mice leads to defective fetal liver
erythropoiesis. Conversely, inducible deletion in the adult bone marrow, or
specific deletion in B cells, T cells, HSCs, and endothelial cells has no impact 
on hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2974602
PMID: 20595512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Blood. 2010 Sep 30;116(13):2356-64. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-03-272252. Epub 2010 
Jun 22.

Multiple functions of Ldb1 required for beta-globin activation during erythroid
differentiation.

Song SH(1), Kim A, Ragoczy T, Bender MA, Groudine M, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Ldb1 and erythroid partners SCL, GATA-1, and LMO2 form a complex that is required
to establish spatial proximity between the ß-globin locus control region and gene
and for transcription activation during erythroid differentiation. Here we show
that Ldb1 controls gene expression at multiple levels. Ldb1 stabilizes its
erythroid complex partners on ß-globin chromatin, even though it is not one of
the DNA-binding components. In addition, Ldb1 is necessary for enrichment of key 
transcriptional components in the locus, including P-TEFb, which phosphorylates
Ser2 of the RNA polymerase C-terminal domain for efficient elongation.
Furthermore, reduction of Ldb1 results in the inability of the locus to migrate
away from the nuclear periphery, which is necessary to achieve robust
transcription of ß-globin in nuclear transcription factories. Ldb1 contributes
these critical functions at both embryonic and adult stages of globin gene
expression. These results implicate Ldb1 as a factor that facilitates nuclear
relocation for transcription activation.

PMCID: PMC2953839
PMID: 20570862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Genome Res. 2010 Aug;20(8):1064-83. doi: 10.1101/gr.104935.110. Epub 2010 Jun 21.

Genome-wide identification of TAL1's functional targets: insights into its
mechanisms of action in primary erythroid cells.

Kassouf MT(1), Hughes JR, Taylor S, McGowan SJ, Soneji S, Green AL, Vyas P,
Porcher C.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University, Oxford OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

Coordination of cellular processes through the establishment of tissue-specific
gene expression programs is essential for lineage maturation. The basic
helix-loop-helix hemopoietic transcriptional regulator TAL1 (formerly SCL) is
required for terminal differentiation of red blood cells. To gain insight into
TAL1 function and mechanisms of action in erythropoiesis, we performed
ChIP-sequencing and gene expression analyses from primary fetal liver erythroid
cells. We show that TAL1 coordinates expression of genes in most known red
cell-specific processes. The majority of TAL1's genomic targets require direct
DNA-binding activity. However, one-fifth of TAL1's target sequences, mainly among
those showing high affinity for TAL1, can recruit the factor independently of its
DNA binding activity. An unbiased DNA motif search of sequences bound by TAL1
identified CAGNTG as TAL1-preferred E-box motif in erythroid cells. Novel motifs 
were also characterized that may help distinguish activated from repressed genes 
and suggest a new mechanism by which TAL1 may be recruited to DNA. Finally,
analysis of recruitment of GATA1, a protein partner of TAL1, to sequences
occupied by TAL1 suggests that TAL1's binding is necessary prior or simultaneous 
to that of GATA1. This work provides the framework to study regulatory networks
leading to erythroid terminal maturation and to model mechanisms of action of
tissue-specific transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2909570
PMID: 20566737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Sep;42(9):1517-24. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.05.009. Epub 2010 Jun 1.

Sequential changes in chromatin structure during transcriptional activation in
the beta globin LCR and its target gene.

Kim K(1), Kim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Pusan 609-735, Republic of Korea.

Chromatin structure is modulated during transcriptional activation. The changes
include the association of transcriptional activators, formation of
hypersensitive sites and covalent modifications of histones. To understand the
order of the various changes accompanying transcriptional activation, we analyzed
the mouse beta globin gene, which is transcriptionally inducible in erythroid MEL
cells over a time course of HMBA treatment. Transcription of the globin genes
requires the locus control region (LCR) consisting of several hypersensitive
sites (HSs). Erythroid specific transcriptional activators such as NF-E2, GATA-1,
TAL1 and EKLF were associated with the LCR in the uninduced state before
transcriptional activation. The HSs of the LCR were formed in this state as
revealed by high sensitivity to DNase I and MNase attack. However the binding of 
transcriptional activators and the depletion of histones were observed in the
promoter of the beta globin gene only after transcriptional activation. In
addition, various covalent histone modifications were sequentially detected in
lysine residues of histone H3 during the activation. Acetylation of K9, K36 and
K27 was notable in both LCR HSs and gene after induction but before
transcriptional initiation. Inactive histone marks such as K9me2, K36me2 and
K27me2 were removed coincident with transcriptional initiation in the gene
region. Taken together, these results indicate that LCR has a substantially
active structure in the uninduced state while transcriptional activation serially
adds active marks, including histone modifications, and removes inactive marks in
the target gene of the LCR.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20561915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Oct;38(19):6363-74. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq490. Epub 2010
Jun 4.

Transcriptional regulation of Elf-1: locus-wide analysis reveals four distinct
promoters, a tissue-specific enhancer, control by PU.1 and the importance of
Elf-1 downregulation for erythroid maturation.

Calero-Nieto FJ(1), Wood AD, Wilson NK, Kinston S, Landry JR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK. fjc28@cam.ac.uk

Ets transcription factors play important roles during the development and
maintenance of the haematopoietic system. One such factor, Elf-1 (E74-like factor
1) controls the expression of multiple essential haematopoietic regulators
including Scl/Tal1, Lmo2 and PU.1. However, to integrate Elf-1 into the wider
regulatory hierarchies controlling haematopoietic development and
differentiation, regulatory elements as well as upstream regulators of Elf-1 need
to be identified. Here, we have used locus-wide comparative genomic analysis
coupled with chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP-chip) assays which resulted in
the identification of five distinct regulatory regions directing expression of
Elf-1. Further, ChIP-chip assays followed by functional validation demonstrated
that the key haematopoietic transcription factor PU.1 is a major upstream
regulator of Elf-1. Finally, overexpression studies in a well-characterized
erythroid differentiation assay from primary murine fetal liver cells
demonstrated that Elf-1 downregulation is necessary for terminal erythroid
differentiation. Given the known activation of PU.1 by Elf-1 and our newly
identified reciprocal activation of Elf-1 by PU.1, identification of an
inhibitory role for Elf-1 has significant implications for our understanding of
how PU.1 controls myeloid-erythroid differentiation. Our findings therefore not
only represent the first report of Elf-1 regulation but also enhance our
understanding of the wider regulatory networks that control haematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2965225
PMID: 20525788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Aug;30(15):3853-63. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00032-10. Epub 2010 Jun 
1.

Gfi1 expression is controlled by five distinct regulatory regions spread over 100
kilobases, with Scl/Tal1, Gata2, PU.1, Erg, Meis1, and Runx1 acting as upstream
regulators in early hematopoietic cells.

Wilson NK(1), Timms RT, Kinston SJ, Cheng YH, Oram SH, Landry JR, Mullender J,
Ottersbach K, Gottgens B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

The growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1) gene was originally discovered in the
hematopoietic system, where it functions as a key regulator of stem cell
homeostasis, as well as neutrophil and T-cell development. Outside the blood
system, Gfi1 is essential for inner-ear hair and intestinal secretory cell
differentiation. To understand the regulatory hierarchies within which Gfi1
operates to control these diverse biological functions, we used a combination of 
comparative genomics, locus-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, functional
validation in cell lines, and extensive transgenic mouse assays to identify and
characterize the complete ensemble of Gfi1 regulatory elements. This concerted
effort identified five distinct regulatory elements spread over 100kb each
driving expression in transgenic mice to a subdomain of endogenous Gfi1. Detailed
characterization of an enhancer 35 kb upstream of Gfi1 demonstrated activity in
the dorsal aorta region and fetal liver in transgenic mice, which was bound by
key stem cell transcription factors Scl/Tal1, PU.1/Sfpi1, Runx1, Erg, Meis1, and 
Gata2. Taken together, our results reveal the regulatory regions responsible for 
Gfi1 expression and importantly establish that Gfi1 expression at the sites of
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) emergence is controlled by key HSC regulators, thus
integrating Gfi1 into the wider HSC regulatory networks.

PMCID: PMC2916401
PMID: 20516218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Genes Dev. 2010 Jun 1;24(11):1093-105. doi: 10.1101/gad.1897910.

Modeling T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia induced by the SCL and LMO1
oncogenes.

Tremblay M(1), Tremblay CS, Herblot S, Aplan PD, Hébert J, Perreault C, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Research in Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal,
Montréal, Québec H3C3J7, Canada.

Deciphering molecular events required for full transformation of normal cells
into cancer cells remains a challenge. In T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL), the genes encoding the TAL1/SCL and LMO1/2 transcription factors are
recurring targets of chromosomal translocations, whereas NOTCH1 is activated in
>50% of samples. Here we show that the SCL and LMO1 oncogenes collaborate to
expand primitive thymocyte progenitors and inhibit later stages of
differentiation. Together with pre-T-cell antigen receptor (pre-TCR) signaling,
these oncogenes provide a favorable context for the acquisition of activating
Notch1 mutations and the emergence of self-renewing leukemia-initiating cells in 
T-ALL. All tumor cells harness identical and specific Notch1 mutations and
Tcrbeta clonal signature, indicative of clonal dominance and concurring with the 
observation that Notch1 gain of function confers a selective advantage to
SCL-LMO1 transgenic thymocytes. Accordingly, a hyperactive Notch1 allele
accelerates leukemia onset induced by SCL-LMO1 and bypasses the requirement for
pre-TCR signaling. Finally, the time to leukemia induced by the three transgenes 
corresponds to the time required for clonal expansion from a single leukemic stem
cell, suggesting that SCL, LMO1, and Notch1 gain of function, together with an
active pre-TCR, might represent the minimum set of complementing events for the
transformation of susceptible thymocytes.

PMCID: PMC2878648
PMID: 20516195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Blood. 2010 Sep 23;116(12):2046-56. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-11-252635. Epub 2010 
May 28.

Hey2 acts upstream of Notch in hematopoietic stem cell specification in zebrafish
embryos.

Rowlinson JM(1), Gering M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, School of Biology, University of Nottingham, Queen's
Medical Centre, Nottingham, UK.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are essential for homeostasis and injury-induced 
regeneration of the vertebrate blood system. Although HSC transplantations
constitute the most common type of stem cell therapy applied in the clinic, we
know relatively little about the molecular programming of HSCs during vertebrate 
embryogenesis. In vertebrate embryos, HSCs form in close association with the
ventral wall of the dorsal aorta. We have shown previously that in zebrafish, HSC
formation depends on the presence of a signaling cascade that involves Hedgehog, 
vascular endothelial growth factor, and Notch signaling. Here, we reveal that
Hey2, a hairy/enhancer-of-split-related basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor often believed to act downstream of Notch, is also required for HSC
formation. In dorsal aorta progenitors, Hey2 expression is induced downstream of 
cloche and the transcription factor Scl/Tal1, and is maintained by Hedgehog and
vascular endothelial growth factor signaling. Whereas knockdown of Hey2
expression results in a loss of Notch receptor expression in dorsal aorta
angioblasts, activation of Notch signaling in hey2 morphants rescues HSC
formation in zebrafish embryos. These results establish an essential role for
Hey2 upstream of Notch in HSC formation.

PMID: 20511544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Blood. 2010 Jun 24;115(25):5270-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-03-275651. Epub 2010
Apr 23.

LYL1 activity is required for the maturation of newly formed blood vessels in
adulthood.

Pirot N(1), Deleuze V, El-Hajj R, Dohet C, Sablitzky F, Couttet P, Mathieu D,
Pinet V.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, Unite Mixte de Recherche
5535, Centre Nationale de la Recherche Scientifique, Montpellier, France.

The 2 related basic helix loop helix genes, LYL1 and TAL-1 are active in
hematopoietic and endothelial lineages. While Tal-1 is essential for both
hematopoietic and vascular development, the role of Lyl1 appears to be distinct
as deficient mice are viable and display modest hematopoietic defects. Here, we
reveal a role for Lyl1 as a major regulator of adult neovascularization. Tumors
implanted into Lyl1-deficient mice showed higher proliferation and angiogenesis, 
as evidenced by enlarged lumens, reduced pericyte coverage and increased
permeability, compared with wild type littermates. Of note, Lyl1-deficient tumor 
vessels exhibited an up-regulation of Tal-1, the VE-Cadherin target gene, as well
as Angiopoietin-2, 3 major actors in angiogenesis. Hematopoietic reconstitution
experiments demonstrated that this sustained tumor angiogenesis was of
endothelial origin. Moreover, the angiogenic phenotype observed in the absence of
Lyl1 function was not tumor-restricted as microvessels forming in Matrigel or
originating from aortic explants were also more numerous and larger than their
wild-type counterparts. Finally, LYL1 depletion in human endothelial cells
revealed that LYL1 controls the expression of molecules involved in the
stabilization of vascular structures. Together, our data show a role for LYL1 in 
the postnatal maturation of newly formed blood vessels.

PMID: 20418284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Blood. 2010 Jul 15;116(2):201-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-249557. Epub 2010 Apr
21.

Interaction of retinoic acid and scl controls primitive blood development.

de Jong JL(1), Davidson AJ, Wang Y, Palis J, Opara P, Pugach E, Daley GQ, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital
Boston and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Hematopoietic development during embryogenesis involves the interaction of
extrinsic signaling pathways coupled to an intrinsic cell fate that is regulated 
by cell-specific transcription factors. Retinoic acid (RA) has been linked to
stem cell self-renewal in adults and also participates in yolk sac blood island
formation. Here, we demonstrate that RA decreases gata1 expression and blocks
primitive hematopoiesis in zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos, while increasing
expression of the vascular marker, fli1. Treatment with an inhibitor of RA
biosynthesis or a retinoic acid receptor antagonist increases gata1(+) erythroid 
progenitors in the posterior mesoderm of wild-type embryos and anemic cdx4(-/-)
mutants, indicating a link between the cdx-hox signaling pathway and RA.
Overexpression of scl, a DNA binding protein necessary for hematopoietic
development, rescues the block of hematopoiesis induced by RA. We show that these
effects of RA and RA pathway inhibitors are conserved during primitive
hematopoiesis in murine yolk sac explant cultures and embryonic stem cell assays.
Taken together, these data indicate that RA inhibits the commitment of mesodermal
cells to hematopoietic fates, functioning downstream of cdx4 and upstream of scl.
Our studies establish a new connection between RA and scl during development that
may participate in stem cell self-renewal and hematopoietic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2910607
PMID: 20410509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Blood. 2010 Jul 8;116(1):81-4. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-247437. Epub 2010 Apr
20.

Rac2 GTPase deficiency depletes BCR-ABL+ leukemic stem cells and progenitors in
vivo.

Sengupta A(1), Arnett J, Dunn S, Williams DA, Cancelas JA.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Program, Division of Experimental Hematology & Cancer
Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, OH;

Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a clonal myeloproliferative disease (MPD)
initiated by p210-BCR-ABL-mediated transformation of hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs). Inhibition of the ABL kinase alone is not sufficient to eradicate
leukemic stem cells (LSCs). We have previously shown that the deficiency of Rac2 
GTPase signaling, but not Rac1, in p210-BCR-ABL-transduced hematopoietic cells
prolonged survival of mice with MPD. Here we demonstrate that absence of Rac2
GTPase prolongs survival of HSC-initiated, inducible Scl/p210-BCR-ABL (Scl/p210) 
binary transgenic mice, it induces apoptosis, and, unlike in normal HSC and
progenitor (HSC/P), impairs LSC and progenitor (LSC/P) proliferation in vivo. As 
a result, Rac2 deficiency causes functional exhaustion of the LSC pool in vivo.
This defect is not due to impaired interaction with the hematopoietic
microenvironment as reflected by its unaltered adhesion, migration, and homing to
recipient organs. In summary, Rac2 deficiency exhausts the LSC pool in vivo
through impairment of oncogene-induced proliferation and survival signals.

PMCID: PMC2904584
PMID: 20407032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 May;30(9):2181-92. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01441-09. Epub 2010 Mar
1.

The TAL1/SCL transcription factor regulates cell cycle progression and
proliferation in differentiating murine bone marrow monocyte precursors.

Dey S(1), Curtis DJ, Jane SM, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Room 777, Preston Research Building,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Monocytopoiesis involves the stepwise differentiation in the bone marrow (BM) of 
common myeloid precursors (CMPs) to monocytes. The basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor TAL1/SCL plays a critical role in other hematopoietic
lineages, and while it had been reported to be expressed by BM-derived
macrophages, its role in monocytopoiesis had not been elucidated. Using cell
explant models of monocyte/macrophage (MM) differentiation, one originating with 
CMPs and the other from more committed precursors, we characterized the
phenotypic and molecular consequences of inactivation of Tal1 expression ex vivo.
While Tal1 knockout had minimal effects on cell survival and slightly accelerated
terminal differentiation, it profoundly inhibited cell proliferation and
decreased entry into and traversal of the G(1) and S phases. In conjunction,
steady-state levels of p16(Ink4a) mRNA were increased and those of Gata2 mRNA
decreased. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated the association of
Tal1 and E47, one of its E protein DNA-binding partners, with an E box-GATA
sequence element in intron 4 of the Gata2 gene and with three E boxes upstream of
p16(Ink4a). Finally, wild-type Tal1, but not a DNA binding-defective mutant,
rescued the proliferative defect in Tal1-null MM precursors. These results
document the importance of this transcription factor in cell cycle progression
and proliferation during monocytopoiesis and the requirement for direct DNA
binding in these processes.

PMCID: PMC2863590
PMID: 20194619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Blood. 2010 Jul 1;115(26):5338-46. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-09-244640. Epub 2010
Feb 25.

Scl isoforms act downstream of etsrp to specify angioblasts and definitive
hematopoietic stem cells.

Ren X(1), Gomez GA, Zhang B, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation, Center of
Developmental Biology and Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, 
Ministry of Education, China.

Recent lineage studies suggest that hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) may be
derived from endothelial cells. However, the genetic hierarchy governing the
emergence of HSCs remains elusive. We report here that zebrafish ets1-related
protein (etsrp), which is essential for vascular endothelial development, also
plays a critical role in the initiation of definitive hematopoiesis by
controlling the expression of 2 stem cell leukemia (scl) isoforms (scl-alpha and 
scl-beta) in angioblasts. In etsrp morphants, which are deficient in endothelial 
and HSC development, scl-alpha alone partially rescues angioblast specification, 
arterial-venous differentiation, and the expression of HSC markers, runx1 and
c-myb, whereas scl-beta requires angioblast rescue by fli1a to restore runx1
expression. Interestingly, when vascular endothelial growth factor (Vegf)
signaling is inhibited, HSC marker expression can still be restored by scl-alpha 
in etsrp morphants, whereas the rescue of arterial ephrinb2a expression is
blocked. Furthermore, both scl isoforms partially rescue runx1 but not ephrinb2a 
expression in embryos deficient in Vegf signaling. Our data suggest that
downstream of etsrp, scl-alpha and fli1a specify the angioblasts, whereas
scl-beta further initiates HSC specification from this angioblast population, and
that Vegf signaling acts upstream of scl-beta during definitive hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2902133
PMID: 20185582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 5;5(2):e9059. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009059.

Genomic approaches uncover increasing complexities in the regulatory landscape at
the human SCL (TAL1) locus.

Dhami P(1), Bruce AW, Jim JH, Dillon SC, Hall A, Cooper JL, Bonhoure N, Chiang K,
Ellis PD, Langford C, Andrews RM, Vetrie D.

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.

The SCL (TAL1) transcription factor is a critical regulator of haematopoiesis and
its expression is tightly controlled by multiple cis-acting regulatory elements. 
To elaborate further the DNA elements which control its regulation, we used
genomic tiling microarrays covering 256 kb of the human SCL locus to perform a
concerted analysis of chromatin structure and binding of regulatory proteins in
human haematopoietic cell lines. This approach allowed us to characterise further
or redefine known human SCL regulatory elements and led to the identification of 
six novel elements with putative regulatory function both up and downstream of
the SCL gene. They bind a number of haematopoietic transcription factors (GATA1, 
E2A LMO2, SCL, LDB1), CTCF or components of the transcriptional machinery and are
associated with relevant histone modifications, accessible chromatin and low
nucleosomal density. Functional characterisation shows that these novel elements 
are able to enhance or repress SCL promoter activity, have endogenous promoter
function or enhancer-blocking insulator function. Our analysis opens up several
areas for further investigation and adds new layers of complexity to our
understanding of the regulation of SCL expression.

PMCID: PMC2816701
PMID: 20140202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Blood. 2010 Apr 8;115(14):2845-51. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-234377. Epub 2010
Feb 1.

Inactivation of LEF1 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Gutierrez A(1), Sanda T, Ma W, Zhang J, Grebliunaite R, Dahlberg S, Neuberg D,
Protopopov A, Winter SS, Larson RS, Borowitz MJ, Silverman LB, Chin L, Hunger SP,
Jamieson C, Sallan SE, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

To further unravel the molecular pathogenesis of T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL), we performed high-resolution array comparative genomic
hybridization on diagnostic specimens from 47 children with T-ALL and identified 
monoallelic or biallelic LEF1 microdeletions in 11% (5 of 47) of these primary
samples. An additional 7% (3 of 44) of the cases harbored nonsynonymous sequence 
alterations of LEF1, 2 of which produced premature stop codons. Gene expression
microarrays showed increased expression of MYC and MYC targets in cases with LEF1
inactivation, as well as differentiation arrest at an early cortical stage of
thymocyte development characterized by expression of CD1B, CD1E, and CD8, with
absent CD34 expression. LEF1 inactivation was associated with a younger age at
the time of T-ALL diagnosis, as well as activating NOTCH1 mutations, biallelic
INK4a/ARF deletions, and PTEN loss-of-function mutations or activating mutations 
of PI3K or AKT genes. These cases generally lacked overexpression of the TAL1,
HOX11, HOX11L2, or the HOXA cluster genes, which have been used to define
separate molecular pathways leading to T-ALL. Our findings suggest that LEF1
inactivation is an important step in the molecular pathogenesis of T-ALL in a
subset of young children.

PMCID: PMC2854430
PMID: 20124220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Genes Dev. 2010 Feb 1;24(3):277-89. doi: 10.1101/gad.551810.

The genome-wide dynamics of the binding of Ldb1 complexes during erythroid
differentiation.

Soler E(1), Andrieu-Soler C, de Boer E, Bryne JC, Thongjuea S, Stadhouders R,
Palstra RJ, Stevens M, Kockx C, van Ijcken W, Hou J, Steinhoff C, Rijkers E,
Lenhard B, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, 3015GE Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. e.soler@erasmusmc.nl

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2010 Mar 15;24(6):623.

One of the complexes formed by the hematopoietic transcription factor Gata1 is a 
complex with the Ldb1 (LIM domain-binding protein 1) and Tal1 proteins. It is
known to be important for the development and differentiation of the erythroid
cell lineage and is thought to be implicated in long-range interactions. Here,
the dynamics of the composition of the complex-in particular, the binding of the 
negative regulators Eto2 and Mtgr1-are studied, in the context of their
genome-wide targets. This shows that the complex acts almost exclusively as an
activator, binding a very specific combination of sequences, with a positioning
relative to transcription start site, depending on the type of the core promoter.
The activation is accompanied by a net decrease in the relative binding of Eto2
and Mtgr1. A Chromosome Conformation Capture sequencing (3C-seq) assay also shows
that the binding of the Ldb1 complex marks genomic interaction sites in vivo.
This establishes the Ldb1 complex as a positive regulator of the final steps of
erythroid differentiation that acts through the shedding of negative regulators
and the active interaction between regulatory sequences.

PMCID: PMC2811829
PMID: 20123907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Haematologica. 2010 Jan;95(1):79-86. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.010413.

Combined interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization elucidates the genetic
heterogeneity of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia in adults.

Gorello P(1), La Starza R, Varasano E, Chiaretti S, Elia L, Pierini V, Barba G,
Brandimarte L, Crescenzi B, Vitale A, Messina M, Grammatico S, Mancini M,
Matteucci C, Bardi A, Guarini A, Martelli MF, Foà R, Mecucci C.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, University of Perugia,
Perugia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Molecular lesions in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias affect
regulators of cell cycle, proliferation, differentiation, survival and apoptosis 
in multi-step pathogenic pathways. Full genetic characterization is needed to
identify events concurring in the development of these leukemias.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We designed a combined interphase fluorescence in situ
hybridization strategy to study 25 oncogenes/tumor suppressor genes in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemias and applied it in 23 adult patients for whom
immunophenotyping, karyotyping, molecular studies, and gene expression profiling 
data were available. The results were confirmed and integrated with those of
multiplex-polymerase chain reaction analysis and gene expression profiling in
another 129 adults with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias.
RESULTS: The combined hybridization was abnormal in 21/23 patients (91%), and
revealed multiple genomic changes in 13 (56%). It found abnormalities known to be
associated with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias, i.e. CDKN2A-B/9p21 and
GRIK2/6q16 deletions, TCR and TLX3 rearrangements, SIL-TAL1, CALM-AF10,
MLL-translocations, del(17)(q12)/NF1 and other cryptic genomic imbalances, i.e.
9q34, 11p, 12p, and 17q11 duplication, del(5)(q35), del(7)(q34), del(9)(q34),
del(12)(p13), and del(14)(q11). It revealed new cytogenetic mechanisms for
TCRB-driven oncogene activation and C-MYB duplication. In two cases with cryptic 
del(9)(q34), fluorescence in situ hybridization and reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction detected the TAF_INUP214 fusion and gene expression
profiling identified a signature characterized by HOXA and NUP214 upregulation
and TAF_I, FNBP1, C9orf78, and USP20 down-regulation. Multiplex-polymerase chain 
reaction analysis and gene expression profiling of 129 further cases found five
additional cases of TAF_I-NUP214-positive T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
CONCLUSIONS: Our combined interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization strategy 
greatly improved the detection of genetic abnormalities in adult T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemias. It identified new tumor suppressor genes/oncogenes
involved in leukemogenesis and highlighted concurrent involvement of genes. The
estimated incidence of TAF_I-NUP214, a new recurrent fusion in adult T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemias, was 4.6% (7/152).

PMCID: PMC2805748
PMID: 20065082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 19;285(8):5338-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.030296. Epub 2009 
Dec 22.

Targets of the Tal1 transcription factor in erythrocytes: E2 ubiquitin conjugase 
regulation by Tal1.

Lausen J(1), Pless O, Leonard F, Kuvardina ON, Koch B, Leutz A.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Biomedical Research, D-60596 Frankfurt
(Main), Germany. lausen@em.uni-frankfurt.de

The Tal1 transcription factor is essential for the development of the
hematopoietic system and plays a role during definitive erythropoiesis in the
adult. Despite the importance of Tal1 in erythropoiesis, only a small number of
erythroid differentiation target genes are known. A chromatin precipitation and
cloning approach was established to uncover novel Tal1 target genes in
erythropoiesis. The BirA tag/BirA ligase biotinylation system in combination with
streptavidin chromatin precipitation (Strep-CP) was used to co-precipitate
genomic DNA bound to Tal1. Tal1 was found to bind in the vicinity of 31 genes
including the E2-ubiquitin conjugase UBE2H gene. Binding of Tal1 to UBE2H was
confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. UBE2H expression is increased during 
erythroid differentiation of hCD34(+) cells. Tal1 expression activated UBE2H
expression, whereas Tal1 knock-down reduced UBE2H expression and ubiquitin
transfer activity. This study identifies parts of the ubiquitinylation machinery 
as a cellular target downstream of the transcription factor Tal1 and provides
novel insights into Tal1-regulated erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2820762
PMID: 20028976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Mol Cell. 2009 Nov 25;36(4):682-95. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.11.002.

Insights into GATA-1-mediated gene activation versus repression via genome-wide
chromatin occupancy analysis.

Yu M(1), Riva L, Xie H, Schindler Y, Moran TB, Cheng Y, Yu D, Hardison R, Weiss
MJ, Orkin SH, Bernstein BE, Fraenkel E, Cantor AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston and
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-1 is required for terminal erythroid maturation and
functions as an activator or repressor depending on gene context. Yet its in vivo
site selectivity and ability to distinguish between activated versus repressed
genes remain incompletely understood. In this study, we performed GATA-1 ChIP-seq
in erythroid cells and compared it to GATA-1-induced gene expression changes.
Bound and differentially expressed genes contain a greater number of GATA-binding
motifs, a higher frequency of palindromic GATA sites, and closer occupancy to the
transcriptional start site versus nondifferentially expressed genes. Moreover, we
show that the transcription factor Zbtb7a occupies GATA-1-bound regions of some
direct GATA-1 target genes, that the presence of SCL/TAL1 helps distinguish
transcriptional activation versus repression, and that polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) is involved in epigenetic silencing of a subset of
GATA-1-repressed genes. These data provide insights into GATA-1-mediated gene
regulation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2800995
PMID: 19941827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Mol Cell. 2009 Nov 25;36(4):667-81. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.11.001.

Discovering hematopoietic mechanisms through genome-wide analysis of GATA factor 
chromatin occupancy.

Fujiwara T(1), O'Geen H, Keles S, Blahnik K, Linnemann AK, Kang YA, Choi K,
Farnham PJ, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Wisconsin
Institutes for Medical Research, Madison, 53705, USA.

GATA factors interact with simple DNA motifs (WGATAR) to regulate critical
processes, including hematopoiesis, but very few WGATAR motifs are occupied in
genomes. Given the rudimentary knowledge of mechanisms underlying this
restriction and how GATA factors establish genetic networks, we used ChIP-seq to 
define GATA-1 and GATA-2 occupancy genome-wide in erythroid cells. Coupled with
genetic complementation analysis and transcriptional profiling, these studies
revealed a rich collection of targets containing a characteristic binding motif
of greater complexity than WGATAR. GATA factors occupied loci encoding multiple
components of the Scl/TAL1 complex, a master regulator of hematopoiesis and
leukemogenic target. Mechanistic analyses provided evidence for crossregulatory
and autoregulatory interactions among components of this complex, including
GATA-2 induction of the hematopoietic corepressor ETO-2 and an ETO-2-negative
autoregulatory loop. These results establish fundamental principles underlying
GATA factor mechanisms in chromatin and illustrate a complex network of
considerable importance for the control of hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2784893
PMID: 19941826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Prog Neurobiol. 2010 Mar;90(3):363-83. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2009.11.002. Epub
2009 Dec 2.

Many roads lead to primary autosomal recessive microcephaly.

Kaindl AM(1), Passemard S, Kumar P, Kraemer N, Issa L, Zwirner A, Gerard B,
Verloes A, Mani S, Gressens P.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U676, Paris, France. angela.kaindl@charite.de

Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH), historically referred to as
Microcephalia vera, is a genetically and clinically heterogeneous disease.
Patients with MCPH typically exhibit congenital microcephaly as well as mental
retardation, but usually no further neurological findings or malformations. Their
microcephaly with grossly preserved macroscopic organization of the brain is a
consequence of a reduced brain volume, which is evident particularly within the
cerebral cortex and thus results to a large part from a reduction of grey matter.
Some patients with MCPH further provide evidence of neuronal heterotopias,
polymicrogyria or cortical dysplasia suggesting an associated neuronal migration 
defect. Genetic causes of MCPH subtypes 1-7 include mutations in genes encoding
microcephalin, cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulatory associated protein 2
(CDK5RAP2), abnormal spindle-like, microcephaly associated protein (ASPM),
centromeric protein J (CENPJ), and SCL/TAL1-interrupting locus (STIL) as well as 
linkage to the two loci 19q13.1-13.2 and 15q15-q21. Here, we provide a timely
overview of current knowledge on mechanisms leading to microcephaly in humans
with MCPH and abnormalities in cell division/cell survival in corresponding
animal models. Understanding the pathomechanisms leading to MCPH is of high
importance not only for our understanding of physiologic brain development
(particularly of cortex formation), but also for that of trends in mammalian
evolution with a massive increase in size of the cerebral cortex in primates, of 
microcephalies of other etiologies including environmentally induced
microcephalies, and of cancer formation.

2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19931588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Genome Res. 2009 Dec;19(12):2172-84. doi: 10.1101/gr.098921.109. Epub 2009 Nov 3.

Erythroid GATA1 function revealed by genome-wide analysis of transcription factor
occupancy, histone modifications, and mRNA expression.

Cheng Y(1), Wu W, Kumar SA, Yu D, Deng W, Tripic T, King DC, Chen KB, Zhang Y,
Drautz D, Giardine B, Schuster SC, Miller W, Chiaromonte F, Zhang Y, Blobel GA,
Weiss MJ, Hardison RC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics of the Huck Institutes of
Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania
16802, USA.

The transcription factor GATA1 regulates an extensive program of gene activation 
and repression during erythroid development. However, the associated mechanisms, 
including the contributions of distal versus proximal cis-regulatory modules,
co-occupancy with other transcription factors, and the effects of histone
modifications, are poorly understood. We studied these problems genome-wide in a 
Gata1 knockout erythroblast cell line that undergoes GATA1-dependent terminal
maturation, identifying 2616 GATA1-responsive genes and 15,360 GATA1-occupied DNA
segments after restoration of GATA1. Virtually all occupied DNA segments have
high levels of H3K4 monomethylation and low levels of H3K27me3 around the
canonical GATA binding motif, regardless of whether the nearby gene is induced or
repressed. Induced genes tend to be bound by GATA1 close to the transcription
start site (most frequently in the first intron), have multiple GATA1-occupied
segments that are also bound by TAL1, and show evolutionary constraint on the
GATA1-binding site motif. In contrast, repressed genes are further away from
GATA1-occupied segments, and a subset shows reduced TAL1 occupancy and increased 
H3K27me3 at the transcription start site. Our data expand the repertoire of GATA1
action in erythropoiesis by defining a new cohort of target genes and determining
the spatial distribution of cis-regulatory modules throughout the genome. In
addition, we begin to establish functional criteria and mechanisms that
distinguish GATA1 activation from repression at specific target genes. More
broadly, these studies illustrate how a "master regulator" transcription factor
coordinates tissue differentiation through a panoply of DNA and protein
interactions.

PMCID: PMC2792182
PMID: 19887574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Blood. 2010 Jan 28;115(4):792-803. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-01-201384. Epub 2009
Oct 22.

Scl regulates the quiescence and the long-term competence of hematopoietic stem
cells.

Lacombe J(1), Herblot S, Rojas-Sutterlin S, Haman A, Barakat S, Iscove NN,
Sauvageau G, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Research in Immunology and Cancer (IRIC), Montreal, QC, Canada.

Comment in
    Blood. 2010 Jan 28;115(4):751-2.

The majority of long-term reconstituting hematopoietic stem cells (LT-HSCs) in
the adult is in G(0), whereas a large proportion of progenitors are more cycling.
We show here that the SCL/TAL1 transcription factor is highly expressed in
LT-HSCs compared with short-term reconstituting HSCs and progenitors and that SCL
negatively regulates the G(0)-G(1) transit of LT-HSCs. Furthermore, when SCL
protein levels are decreased by gene targeting or by RNA interference, the
reconstitution potential of HSCs is impaired in several transplantation assays.
First, the mean stem cell activity of HSCs transplanted at approximately 1
competitive repopulating unit was 2-fold decreased when Scl gene dosage was
decreased. Second, Scl(+/-) HSCs were at a marked competitive disadvantage with
Scl(+/+) cells when transplanted at 4 competitive repopulating units equivalent. 
Third, reconstitution of the stem cell pool by adult HSCs expressing Scl-directed
shRNAs was decreased compared with controls. At the molecular level, we found
that SCL occupies the Cdkn1a and Id1 loci in primary hematopoietic cells and that
the expression levels of these 2 regulators of HSC cell cycle and long-term
functions are sensitive to Scl gene dosage. Together, our observations suggest
that SCL impedes G(0)-G(1) transition in HSCs and regulates their long-term
competence.

PMID: 19850742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 11;390(2):295-301. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.09.111. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

Eto2/MTG16 and MTGR1 are heteromeric corepressors of the TAL1/SCL transcription
factor in murine erythroid progenitors.

Cai Y(1), Xu Z, Xie J, Ham AJ, Koury MJ, Hiebert SW, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
37232, USA.

The TAL1 (or SCL) gene, originally discovered through its involvement by a
chromosomal translocation in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, encodes a basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor essential for hematopoietic and
vascular development. To identify its interaction partners, we expressed a tandem
epitope-tagged protein in murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells and characterized
affinity-purified Tal1-containing complexes by liquid chromatography-tandem mass 
spectrometry analysis. In addition to known interacting proteins, two proteins
related to the Eight-Twenty-One (ETO) corepressor, Eto2/Mtg16 and Mtgr1, were
identified from the peptide fragments analyzed. Tal1 interaction with Eto2 and
Mtgr1 was verified by coimmunoprecipitation analysis in Tal1, Eto2-, and
Mtgr1-transfected COS-7 cells, MEL cells expressing V5 epitope-tagged Tal1
protein, and non-transfected MEL cells. Mapping analysis with Gal4 fusion
proteins demonstrated a requirement for the bHLH domain of Tal1 and TAF110 domain
of Eto2 for their interaction, and transient transfection and glutathione
S-transferase pull-down analysis showed that Mtgr1 and Eto2 enhanced the other's 
association with Tal1. Enforced expression of Eto2 in differentiating MEL cells
inhibited the promoter of the Protein 4.2 (P4.2) gene, a direct target of TAL1 in
erythroid progenitors, and transduction of Eto2 and Mtgr1 augmented Tal1-mediated
gene repression. Finally, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that
Eto2 occupancy of the P4.2 promoter in MEL cells decreased with differentiation, 
in parallel with a decline in Eto2 protein abundance. These results identify Eto2
and Mtgr1 as authentic interaction partners of Tal1 and suggest they act as
heteromeric corepressors of this bHLH transcription factor during erythroid
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2774815
PMID: 19799863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Stem Cells. 2010 Jan;28(1):100-12. doi: 10.1002/stem.228.

Enhanced hematovascular contribution of SCL 3' enhancer expressing fetal liver
cells uncovers their potential to integrate in extramedullary adult niches.

Garcia-Ortega AM(1), Cañete A, Quinter C, Silberstein L, Piquer-Gil M,
Alvarez-Dolado M, Dekel B, Gottgens B, Sánchez MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo (CABD), CSIC, Universidad Pablo de
Olavide, Seville, Spain.

Fetal liver (FL) hematopoietic progenitors have superior blood engraftment
competence compared with adult bone marrow (BM), however less is known about FL
in vivo vascular capacity. Here we show in transplantation assays that FL cells
possess enhanced vascular endothelial potential compared with adult bone marrow. 
We generated high-level hematopoietic chimeras using donor cells from mice
transgenic for the stem cell leukaemia 3' enhancer human placental alkaline
phosphatase (SCL3'Enh-PLAP) reporter construct, active in vascular endothelium,
and blood progenitor and stem cells. Long-term lineage tracing analysis revealed 
PLAP(+) vascular-like patches in FL-derived chimeras, whereas adult BM-derived
chimeras presented only rare and scattered PLAP(+) cells. PLAP(+) vascular-like
patches were formed following transplantation into both newborn and adult
recipient mice, although their frequency was reduced in adult recipients.
Confocal analysis of multiple labeled tissues revealed that whereas most liver
and heart PLAP(+) vascular patch-associated cells were endothelial, PLAP(+)
vascular patches in the kidney contained endothelial, hematopoietic, and putative
hemangioblastic cells. Moreover, fluorescence-activated cell sorting assays
showed that only FL PLAP(bright+) donor cells can generate PLAP(+) vascular
patches upon transplantation. Taken together, these data demonstrate superior
vascular contribution potential of FL cells, and not only provide new insights
into the developmental pathways controlling endothelial development but also may 
prove informative when addressing the mechanisms involved in vascular
regeneration and hemangiogenic recovery in a clinical context.

PMID: 19785037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Retrovirology. 2009 Sep 16;6:81. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-6-81.

E box motifs as mediators of proviral latency of human retroviruses.

Terme JM(1), Calvignac S, Duc Dodon M, Gazzolo L, Jordan A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologia Molecular Barcelona IBMB-CSIC, Parc Cientific de
Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. jeanmichel.terme@ibmb.csic.es

The palindromic sequence motifs (CANNTG) known as E boxes are considered as
binding sites for the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) class of DNA-binding
proteins. Their presence has been reported in the long terminal repeats (LTR) of 
the HIV-1 and HTLV-1 proviruses. Their close proximity with the TATA region of
both LTRs indicates that the bHLH proteins may act as important regulators of the
function of proviral transcription. Indeed, observations on HIV-1 and recent
results on HTLV-1 underline that these E boxes may be critically involved in the 
regulation of the proviral transcription of these human retroviruses. Indeed, of 
the two E boxes flanking the TATA sequences of the HIV-1 provirus, the 3' E box
has been implicated in the transcriptional inhibition of viral gene expression.
Such a role might also be played by the unique 5' E box present in the HTLV-1
LTR. In both cases, the expression of tissue-specfic bHLH proteins, like TAL1
might counteract the inhibitory effect exerted by E box proteins, thereby
increasing proviral transcription. Finally, a phylogenetic study encompassing
several subtypes of these two human retroviruses underlines that these E box
motifs have recently appeared in the proviral LTRs and may be considered as
potential mediators in the establishment of proviral latency.

PMCID: PMC2749803
PMID: 19758443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Epigenetics. 2009 Aug 16;4(6):357-61. Epub 2009 Aug 31.

Transcriptional regulation by TAL1: a link between epigenetic modifications and
erythropoiesis.

Hu X(1), Ybarra R, Qiu Y, Bungert J, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Edmond H. Fischer Signal Transduction Laboratory, College of Life Science,
Jilin University, Changchun, China.

TAL1/SCL (hereafter referred to as TAL1) is a critical transcription factor
required for hematopoiesis in which hematopoietic stem cells commit and
differentiate to different lineages. During this process, transcription of many
genes is turned on and off in part by epigenetic mechanisms. TAL1 has recently
been shown to differentially recruit LSD1 and other histone modifying complexes
to regulate its target genes. Here, we focus primarily on epigenetic mechanisms
that are regulated by TAL1 during normal and malignant hematopoiesis. We discuss 
how different histone modifying enzymes are recruited by TAL1 and how these
enzymatic activities mediate the activating or repressive function of TAL1.
Finally, we further explore the possible mechanisms by which dysregulation of the
recruitment and activity of histone modifying enzymes contribute to
leukemogenesis.

PMID: 19736520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Oct;29(20):5399-412. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00777-09. Epub 2009 Aug
17.

Chromatin architecture and transcription factor binding regulate expression of
erythrocyte membrane protein genes.

Steiner LA(1), Maksimova Y, Schulz V, Wong C, Raha D, Mahajan MC, Weissman SM,
Gallagher PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar
Street, P.O. Box 208064, New Haven, CT 06520-8064, USA.

Erythrocyte membrane protein genes serve as excellent models of complex gene
locus structure and function, but their study has been complicated by both their 
large size and their complexity. To begin to understand the intricate interplay
of transcription, dynamic chromatin architecture, transcription factor binding,
and genomic organization in regulation of erythrocyte membrane protein genes, we 
performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled with microarray analysis
and ChIP coupled with massively parallel DNA sequencing in both erythroid and
nonerythroid cells. Unexpectedly, most regions of GATA-1 and NF-E2 binding were
remote from gene promoters and transcriptional start sites, located primarily in 
introns. Cooccupancy with FOG-1, SCL, and MTA-2 was found at all regions of
GATA-1 binding, with cooccupancy of SCL and MTA-2 also found at regions of NF-E2 
binding. Cooccupancy of GATA-1 and NF-E2 was found frequently. A common signature
of histone H3 trimethylation at lysine 4, GATA-1, NF-E2, FOG-1, SCL, and MTA-2
binding and consensus GATA-1-E-box binding motifs located 34 to 90 bp away from
NF-E2 binding motifs was found frequently in erythroid cell-expressed genes.
These results provide insights into our understanding of membrane protein gene
regulation in erythropoiesis and the regulation of complex genetic loci in
erythroid and nonerythroid cells and identify numerous candidate regions for
mutations associated with membrane-linked hemolytic anemia.

PMCID: PMC2756878
PMID: 19687298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Mar;19(3):321-32. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0397.

Increased levels of NOTCH1, NF-kappaB, and other interconnected transcription
factors characterize primitive sets of hematopoietic stem cells.

Panepucci RA(1), Oliveira LH, Zanette DL, Viu Carrara Rde C, Araujo AG, Orellana 
MD, Bonini de Palma PV, Menezes CC, Covas DT, Zago MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine of the Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirao
Preto-USP, Center for Cell Therapy and Regional Blood Center, Araraquara, São
Paulo, Brazil. rapane@gmail.com

As previously shown, higher levels of NOTCH1 and increased NF-kappaB signaling is
a distinctive feature of the more primitive umbilical cord blood (UCB) CD34+
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), as compared to bone marrow (BM). Differences
between BM and UCB cell composition also account for this finding. The CD133
marker defines a more primitive cell subset among CD34+ HSC with a proposed
hemangioblast potential. To further evaluate the molecular basis related to the
more primitive characteristics of UCB and CD133+ HSC, immunomagnetically purified
human CD34+ and CD133+ cells from BM and UCB were used on gene expression
microarrays studies. UCB CD34+ cells contained a significantly higher proportion 
of CD133+ cells than BM (70% and 40%, respectively). Cluster analysis showed that
BM CD133+ cells grouped with the UCB cells (CD133+ and CD34+) rather than to BM
CD34+ cells. Compared with CD34+ cells, CD133+ had a higher expression of many
transcription factors (TFs). Promoter analysis on all these TF genes revealed a
significantly higher frequency (than expected by chance) of NF-kappaB-binding
sites (BS), including potentially novel NF-kappaB targets such as RUNX1, GATA3,
and USF1. Selected transcripts of TF related to primitive hematopoiesis and
self-renewal, such as RUNX1, GATA3, USF1, TAL1, HOXA9, HOXB4, NOTCH1, RELB, and
NFKB2 were evaluated by real-time PCR and were all significantly positively
correlated. Taken together, our data indicate the existence of an interconnected 
transcriptional network characterized by higher levels of NOTCH1, NF-kappaB, and 
other important TFs on more primitive HSC sets.

PMID: 19686049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Leuk Res. 2010 Apr;34(4):483-6. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.06.026. Epub 2009 Jul
24.

T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia in early childhood presents NOTCH1 mutations and
MLL rearrangements.

Mansur MB(1), Emerenciano M, Splendore A, Brewer L, Hassan R, Pombo-de-Oliveira
MS; Brazilian Collaborative Study Group of Infant Acute Leukemia.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Program, Research Center, Instituto Nacional
de Câncer-INCA, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) may affect children in very early
age. However, the critical events leading to this brief latency is still unclear.
We used standard methods to explore NOTCH1 mutations and other specific molecular
markers in 15 early childhood T-ALL cases. Most of them consisted of immature
differentiation subtype. Despite being found in a lower frequency than that
described for overall pediatric T-ALL, NOTCH1 alterations were the most frequent 
ones. Other alterations included MLL(+) (n=4), SIL-TAL1(+) (n=3), FLT3 mutation
(n=1) and HOX11L2(+) (n=1). Our results suggest that NOTCH1 and MLL abnormalities
are primary leukemogenic hits in early T-ALL.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19631984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mech Dev. 2009 Oct;126(10):863-72. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.07.005. Epub 2009 Jul 
23.

In vivo fate mapping with SCL regulatory elements identifies progenitors for
primitive and definitive hematopoiesis in mice.

Bockamp E(1), Antunes C, Liebner S, Schmitt S, Cabezas-Wallscheid N, Heck R,
Ohnngemach S, Oesch-Bartlomowicz B, Rickert C, Sanchez MJ, Hengstler J, Kaina B, 
Wilson A, Trumpp A, Eshkind L.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Centre of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Institute for
Toxicology, 55131 Mainz, Germany. bockamp@uni-mainz.de

One of the principal issues facing biomedical research is to elucidate
developmental pathways and to establish the fate of stem and progenitor cells in 
vivo. Hematopoiesis, the process of blood cell formation, provides a powerful
experimental system for investigating this process. Here, we employ
transcriptional regulatory elements from the stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene to
selectively label primitive and definitive hematopoiesis. We report that
SCL-labelled cells arising in the mid to late streak embryo give rise to
primitive red blood cells but fail to contribute to the vascular system of the
developing embryo. Restricting SCL-marking to different stages of foetal
development, we identify a second population of multilineage progenitors,
proficient in contributing to adult erythroid, myeloid and lymphoid cells. The
distinct lineage-restricted potential of SCL-labelled early progenitors
demonstrates that primitive erythroid cell fate specification is initiated during
mid gastrulation. Our data also suggest that the transition from a
hemangioblastic precursors with endothelial and blood forming potential to a
committed hematopoietic progenitor must have occurred prior to SCL-marking of
definitive multilineage blood precursors.

PMID: 19631738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Leuk Res. 2010 Apr;34(4):521-8. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.06.020. Epub 2009 Jul
15.

Multiple mechanisms induce ectopic expression of LYL1 in subsets of T-ALL cell
lines.

Nagel S(1), Venturini L, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Scherr M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Human and Animal Cell Lines, DSMZ - German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Inhoffenstr 7B, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
sna@dsmz.de

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are essential for lymphocytic
differentiation. Here, we have analyzed the complete bHLH family in T-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia cell lines by expression profiling. Differential
expression was detected for BHLHB2, HES1, HES4, HEY1, ID1, ID2, ID3, LYL1 and
TAL1, highlighting dysregulation of family members with inhibitory activity.
Subsequently we focused on the mechanisms responsible for aberrant expression of 
LYL1 in comparison to TAL1. Quantitative genomic PCR indicated microdeletions
upstream of both, TAL1 and LYL1, targeting STIL/SIL and TRMT1, respectively.
Additionally, one LYL1-expressing cell line exhibited amplification of TRMT1.
While deletion of STIL correlated with expression of the STIL-TAL1 fusion
transcript, no TRMT-LYL1 fusion transcripts were detected in parallel with
genomic rearrangements thereof. Sequence analysis of the LYL1 promoter region
revealed potential binding sites for transcription factors HOXA10, LMO2 and
NKX2-5. Overexpression analysis, reporter gene assays and chromatin
immuno-precipitation confirmed their activating impact on LYL1 expression. In
conclusion, we identified multiple mechanisms which activate LYL1 in leukemic
cells, including structural genomic alterations, namely microdeletion or
amplification, together with the involvement of prominent oncogenic transcription
factors.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19608273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Development. 2009 Aug;136(16):2757-65. doi: 10.1242/dev.034959. Epub 2009 Jul 15.

The Integrator subunits function in hematopoiesis by modulating Smad/BMP
signaling.

Tao S(1), Cai Y, Sampath K.

Author information: 
(1)Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, 1 Research Link, National University of
Singapore, Singapore.

Hematopoiesis, the dynamic process of blood cell development, is regulated by the
activity of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathway and by many
transcription factors. However, the molecules and mechanisms that regulate
BMP/Smad signaling in hematopoiesis are largely unknown. Here, we show that the
Integrator complex, an evolutionarily conserved group of proteins, functions in
zebrafish hematopoiesis by modulating Smad/BMP signaling. The Integrator complex 
proteins are known to directly interact with RNA polymerase II to mediate 3' end 
processing of U1 and U2 snRNAs. We have identified several subunits of the
Integrator complex in zebrafish. Antisense morpholino-mediated knockdown of the
Integrator subunit 5 (Ints5) in zebrafish embryos affects U1 and U2 snRNA
processing, leading to aberrant splicing of smad1 and smad5 RNA, and reduced
expression of the hematopoietic genes stem cell leukemia (scl, also known as
tal1) and gata1. Blood smears from ints5 morphant embryos show arrested red blood
cell differentiation, similar to scl-deficient embryos. Interestingly, targeting 
other Integrator subunits also leads to defects in smad5 RNA splicing and
arrested hematopoiesis, suggesting that the Ints proteins function as a complex
to regulate the BMP pathway during hematopoiesis. Our work establishes a link
between the RNA processing machinery and the downstream effectors of BMP
signaling, and reveals a new group of proteins that regulates the switch from
primitive hematopoietic stem cell identity and blood cell differentiation by
modulating Smad function.

PMID: 19605500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Leukemia. 2009 Nov;23(11):2081-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2009.131. Epub 2009 Jul 9.

Inhibition of the hTERT promoter by the proto-oncogenic protein TAL1.

Terme JM(1), Mocquet V, Kuhlmann AS, Zane L, Mortreux F, Wattel E, Duc Dodon M,
Jalinot P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, Unité Mixte de Recherche
5239, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Ecole Normale Supérieure de
Lyon, Institut Fédératif de Recherche, Lyon cedex 07, France.

Telomerase activity, which has fundamental roles in development and
carcinogenesis, strongly depends on the expression of human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT), its catalytic subunit. In this report, we show that the
basic helix-loop-helix factor, TAL1 (T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia 1), is a
negative regulator of the hTERT promoter. Indeed, TAL1 overexpression leads to a 
decrease in hTERT mRNA abundance and hence to reduced telomerase activity.
Conversely, suppression of TAL1 by RNA interference in Jurkat cells increases
hTERT expression. Analysis by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that
TAL1 binds to the hTERT proximal promoter and recruits HDAC1. Considering the
relationship recently established between TAL1 and the human T-cell leukemia
virus type 1 (HTLV-1) Tax protein, which was confirmed in T lymphocyte clones
derived from adult T-cell leukemia patients, we analyzed the effect of TAL1 with 
respect to the earlier characterized effects of Tax and HBZ (HTLV-1 basic leucine
zipper) on hTERT expression. TAL1 was observed to reinforce the negative effect
of Tax, whereas hTERT transactivation by the HBZ-JunD complex was repressed by
TAL1 overexpression. Moreover, HBZ was found to induce proteasome-mediated
degradation of TAL1. These observations support a model in which Tax and TAL1 by 
repressing hTERT would initially favor genomic instability, whereas expression of
factors such as HBZ allows at a later stage an increase in hTERT production and
consequently in telomerase activity.

PMID: 19587703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Korean J Lab Med. 2009 Jun;29(3):199-203. doi: 10.3343/kjlm.2009.29.3.199.

A novel translocation t(1;5)(p32;q31) that was not associated with the TAL1
rearrangement in a case of T lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.

Cho HS(1), Kim MK, Bae YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yeungnam University College of Medicine,
Nam-Gu, Daegu, Korea. chscp@med.yu.ac.kr

Chromosome 1 band p32 (1p32) aberrations are common in T lymphoblastic
leukemia/lymphoma (T-ALL/LBL). Two types of 1p32 aberrations include
translocations with different partners and submicroscopic interstitial deletion. 
Both aberrations are known to result in TAL1 gene deregulation. The
t(1;5)(p32;q31) is a rare translocation of 1p32 in T-ALL. We now present the
second case of t(1;5)(p32;q31) in T-ALL, which was present as a primary
cytogenetic abnormality, with a review of the relevant literature. Interestingly,
neither the translocation of the TAL1 gene nor aberrant expression of TAL1
protein was detected by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and by
immunohistochemical staining in this case.

PMID: 19571616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 Aug;50(8):1318-25. doi: 10.1080/10428190903040014.

SIL-TAL1 fusion gene negative impact in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
outcome.

Mansur MB(1), Emerenciano M, Brewer L, Sant'Ana M, Mendonça N, Thuler LC, Koifman
S, Pombo-de-Oliveira MS.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Hematologia-Oncologia Pediátricas - Coordenação de Pesquisa,
Instituto Nacional de Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

SIL-TAL1 fusion gene and the ectopic expression of HOX11L2 are common molecular
abnormalities in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). To verify their
influence on outcome, we analyzed a Brazilian pediatric T-ALL series of cases.
One hundred and ninety two children, age ranged 0-21 years old, were
consecutively diagnosed and treated. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) technique was used to identify the molecular alterations.
Kaplan-Meyer method was applied to estimate overall survival. The most frequent
maturation stage was T-IV (40.1%), and 30.7% of cases were CD10(+). SIL-TAL1(+)
and HOX11L2(+) accounted for 26.7% and 10.3% of the cases, respectively. The
overall survival (OS) was 74% in 80-month follow-up. HOX11L2(+) was not
predictive factor for outcome. Considering patients younger than nine years-old, 
those with SIL-TAL1(+) presented a poorer outcome (p = 0.02). The results of this
study suggest that in the Brazilian population only the presence of SIL-TAL1 can 
predict outcome in a restricted group of patients.

PMID: 19562638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. BMC Pediatr. 2009 Jun 25;9:42. doi: 10.1186/1471-2431-9-42.

Analysis of circulating hem-endothelial marker RNA levels in preterm infants.

Strauss T(1), Metsuyanim S, Pessach I, Shuchan-Eisen I, Kuint J, Dekel B.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Department, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. t.tzipi@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Circulating endothelial cells may serve as novel markers of
angiogenesis. These include a subset of hem-endothelial progenitor cells that
play a vital role in vascular growth and repair. The presence and clinical
implications of circulating RNA levels as an expression for hematopoietic and
endothelial-specific markers have not been previously evaluated in preterm
infants. This study aims to determine circulating RNA levels of hem-endothelial
marker genes in peripheral blood of preterm infants and begin to correlate these 
findings with prenatal complications.
METHODS: Peripheral blood samples from seventeen preterm neonates were analyzed
at three consecutive post-delivery time points (day 3-5, 10-15 and 30). Using
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction we studied the
expression patterns of previously established hem-endothelial-specific
progenitor-associated genes (AC133, Tie-2, Flk-1 (VEGFR2) and Scl/Tal1) in
association with characteristics of prematurity and preterm morbidity.
RESULTS: Circulating Tie-2 and SCL/Tal1 RNA levels displayed an inverse
correlation to gestational age (GA). We observed significantly elevated Tie-2
levels in preterm infants born to mothers with amnionitis, and in infants with
sustained brain echogenicity on brain sonography. Other markers showed similar
expression patterns yet we could not demonstrate statistically significant
correlations.
CONCLUSION: These preliminary findings suggest that circulating RNA levels
especially Tie2 and SCL decline with maturation and might relate to some preterm 
complication. Further prospective follow up of larger cohorts are required to
establish this association.

PMCID: PMC2709108
PMID: 19555479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 18;4(6):e5956. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005956.

Gene specificity of suppression of transgene-mediated insertional transcriptional
activation by the chicken HS4 insulator.

Desprat R(1), Bouhassira EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
United States of America.

Insertional mutagenesis has emerged as a major obstacle for gene therapy based on
vectors that integrate randomly in the genome. Reducing the genotoxicity of
genomic viral integration can, in first approximation, be equated with reducing
the risk of oncogene activation, at least in the case of therapeutic payloads
that have no known oncogenic potential, such as the globin genes. An attractive
solution to the problem of oncogene activation is the inclusion of
insulators/enhancer-blockers in the viral vectors. In this study we have used
Recombinase-Mediated Cassette Exchange to characterize the effect of integration 
of globin therapeutic cassettes in the presence or absence of the chicken HS4 and
three other putative insulators inserted near Stil, Tal1 and MAP17, three
well-known cellular proto-oncogenes in the SCL/Tal1 locus. We show that insertion
of a Locus Control Region-driven globin therapeutic globin transgene had a
dramatic activating effect on Tal1 and Map17, the two closest genes, a minor
effect on Stil, and no effect on Cyp4x1, a non-expressed gene. Of the four
element tested, cHS4 was the only one that was able to suppress this
transgene-mediated insertional transcriptional activation. cHS4 had a strong
suppressive effect on the activation expression of Map17 but has little or no
effect on expression of Tal1. The suppressive activity of cHS4 is therefore
promoter specific. Importantly, the observed suppressive effect of cHS4 on Map17 
activation did not depend on its intercalation between the LCR and the Map 17
promoter. Rather, presence of one or two copies of cHS4 anywhere within the
transgene was sufficient to almost completely block the activation of Map17.
Therefore, at this complex locus, suppression of transgene-mediated insertional
transcriptional activation by cHS4 could not be adequately explained by models
that predict that cHS4 can only suppress expression through an enhancer-blocking 
activity that requires intercalation between an enhancer and a promoter. This has
important implications for our theoretical understanding of the possible effects 
of the insertion of cHS4 on gene therapy vectors. We also show that cHS4
decreased the level of expression of the globin transgene. Therefore, the
benefits of partially preventing insertional gene activation are in part negated 
by the lower expression level of the transgene. A cost/benefit analysis of the
utility of incorporation of insulators in gene therapy vectors will require
further studies in which the effects of insulators on both the therapeutic gene
and the flanking genes are determined at a large number of integration sites.
Identification of insulators with minimal promoter specificity would also be of
great value.

PMCID: PMC2694267
PMID: 19536296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Br J Cancer. 2009 Jul 7;101(1):132-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605111. Epub 2009 Jun 
16.

Death-associated protein 3 is overexpressed in human thyroid oncocytic tumours.

Jacques C(1), Fontaine JF, Franc B, Mirebeau-Prunier D, Triau S, Savagner F,
Malthiery Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U694, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d'Angers, Laboratoire de
Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Angers, France.
caroline.jacques@univ-angers.fr

BACKGROUND: The human death-associated protein 3 (hDAP3) is a GTP-binding
constituent of the small subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome with a
pro-apoptotic function.
METHODS: A search through publicly available microarray data sets showed 337
genes potentially coregulated with the DAP3 gene. The promoter sequences of these
337 genes and 70 out of 85 mitochondrial ribosome genes were analysed in silico
with the DAP3 gene promoter sequence. The mitochondrial role of DAP3 was also
investigated in the thyroid tumours presenting various mitochondrial contents.
RESULTS: The study revealed nine transcription factors presenting enriched motifs
for these gene promoters, five of which are implicated in cellular growth (ELK1, 
ELK4, RUNX1, HOX11-CTF1, TAL1-ternary complex factor 3) and four in mitochondrial
biogenesis (nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), GABPA, PPARG-RXRA and
estrogen-related receptor alpha (ESRRA)). An independent microarray data set
showed the overexpression of ELK1, RUNX1 and ESRRA in the thyroid oncocytic
tumours. Exploring the thyroid tumours, we found that DAP3 mRNA and protein
expression is upregulated in tumours presenting a mitochondrial biogenesis
compared with the normal tissue. ELK1 and ESRRA were also showed upregulated with
DAP3.
CONCLUSION: ELK1 and ESRRA may be considered as potential regulators of the DAP3 
gene expression. DAP3 may participate in mitochondrial maintenance and play a
role in the balance between mitochondrial homoeostasis and tumourigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2713694
PMID: 19536094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Soc Biol. 2009;203(2):143-53. doi: 10.1051/jbio/2009017. Epub 2009 Jun 16.

[The bHLH TAL1 protein: a key molecule in the hematopoietic and endothelial
systems].

[Article in French]

Mathieu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire, CNRS-UMR 5535, Universités de Montpellier 1
et Montpellier 2, 1919 route de Mende, 34293 Montpellier Cedex 1, France.
danielle.mathieu@igmn.cnrs.fr

The formation of blood cells and vascular networks occurs simultaneously during
development, and both lineages remain in close association in all adult tissues. 
The functional setting of both systems within the embryo and their renewal during
adult life are highly complex processes, and require the involvement of numerous 
molecular actors, the activities of which are often overlapping. Here, I review
the activity of TAL-1, a basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor, which plays
a key role in the formation and functioning of both blood and endothelial
systems, with a particular emphasis on recent data that associate TAL-1 with
angiogenesis.

PMID: 19527627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jun 23;106(25):10141-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0900437106. Epub 2009 Jun 3.

LSD1-mediated epigenetic modification is required for TAL1 function and
hematopoiesis.

Hu X(1), Li X, Valverde K, Fu X, Noguchi C, Qiu Y, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Anatomy and Cell
Biology, Genetics Institute, and Shands Cancer Center, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

TAL1 is a critical transcription factor required for hematopoiesis. However,
perturbation of its activity often leads to T cell leukemia. Whether and how its 
transcriptional activities are regulated during hematopoiesis remains to be
addressed. Here, we show that TAL1 is associated with histone demethylase
complexes containing lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1), RE1 silencing
transcription factor corepressor (CoREST), histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), and
histone deacetylase 2 in erythroleukemia and T cell leukemia cells. The enzymatic
domain of LSD1 plays an important role in repressing the TAL1-directed
transcription of GAL4 reporter linked to a thymidine kniase minimal promoter.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that the TAL1-associated LSD1, HDAC1, and their
enzymatic activities are coordinately down-regulated during the early phases of
erythroid differentiation. Consistent with the rapid changes of TAL1-corepressor 
complex during differentiation, TAL1 recruits LSD1 to the silenced p4.2 promoter 
in undifferentiated, but not in differentiated, murine erythroleukemia (MEL)
cells. Finally, shRNA-mediated knockdown of LSD1 in MEL cells resulted in
derepression of the TAL1 target gene accompanied by increasing dimeH3K4 at the
promoter region. Thus, our data revealed that histone lysine demethylase LSD1 may
negatively regulate TAL1-mediated transcription and suggest that the dynamic
regulation of TAL1-associated LSD1/HDAC1 complex may determine the onset of
erythroid differentiation programs.

PMCID: PMC2700898
PMID: 19497860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. BMC Genomics. 2009 May 15;10:225. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-225.

Systematic identification of transcription factors associated with patient
survival in cancers.

Cheng C(1), Li LM, Alves P, Gerstein M.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New
Haven, CT, USA. chao.cheng@yale.edu

BACKGROUND: Aberrant activation or expression of transcription factors has been
implicated in the tumorigenesis of various types of cancer. In spite of the
prevalent application of microarray experiments for profiling gene expression in 
cancer samples, they provide limited information regarding the activities of
transcription factors. However, the association between transcription factors and
cancers is largely dependent on the transcription regulatory activities rather
than mRNA expression levels.
RESULTS: In this paper, we propose a computational approach that integrates
microarray expression data with the transcription factor binding site information
to systematically identify transcription factors associated with patient survival
given a specific cancer type. This approach was applied to two gene expression
data sets for breast cancer and acute myeloid leukemia. We found that two
transcription factor families, the steroid nuclear receptor family and the
ATF/CREB family, are significantly correlated with the survival of patients with 
breast cancer; and that a transcription factor named T-cell acute lymphocytic
leukemia 1 is significantly correlated with acute myeloid leukemia patient
survival.
CONCLUSION: Our analysis identifies transcription factors associating with
patient survival and provides insight into the regulatory mechanism underlying
the breast cancer and leukemia. The transcription factors identified by our
method are biologically meaningful and consistent with prior knowledge. As an
insightful tool, this approach can also be applied to other microarray cancer
data sets to help researchers better understand the intricate relationship
between transcription factors and diseases.

PMCID: PMC2686740
PMID: 19442316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Blood. 2009 Jun 25;113(26):6695-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-166835. Epub 2009
Apr 30.

TGF-beta induces degradation of TAL1/SCL by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway
through AKT-mediated phosphorylation.

Terme JM(1), Lhermitte L, Asnafi V, Jalinot P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, Unité Mixte de Recherche
5239, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Ecole Normale Supérieure de
Lyon, Institut Fédératif de Recherche 128 Biosciences Lyon Gerland, Lyon, France.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia 1 (TAL1), also known as stem cell leukemia
(SCL), plays important roles in differentiation of hematopoietic and endothelial 
cells and is deregulated in a high percentage of T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL). In this report we show that the intracellular concentration of 
TAL1 is regulated by transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta), which triggers
its polyubiquitylation and degradation by the proteasome. This effect is mediated
by AKT1, which phosphorylates TAL1 at threonine 90. Immunoprecipitation
experiments showed that this event increases association of TAL1 with the E3
ubiquitin ligase CHIP. The E47 heterodimerization partner of TAL1 hinders this
association. Our observations indicate that activation of the TGF-beta and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT pathways might reverse overexpression of TAL1
in leukemic cells by inducing proteolysis of this important oncogene.

PMID: 19406989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2009 Apr;29(4):602-5.

[Spontaneous differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into hematopoietic
cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Lin G, Zhao HP, Lu GX.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering of Central South
University, Human Stem Cell Engineering Research Center of China, Changsha
410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the time course of spontaneous differentiation of in
vitro cultured human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) into hematopoietic cells to
provide experimental evidence for induction of hematopoietic commitment of hESCs.
METHODS: In human embryoid bodies (hEBs) derived from spontaneous differentiation
of chESC3, a hESC cell line we established previously, the expressions of such
genes as KDR, Bmi1, Scl and gata2 were detected by RT-PCR every other day during 
the 12-day differentiation to monitor the process of the hematopoiesis. The
hematopoietic stem cell marker CD34 was examined using flow cytometry to evaluate
the efficiency of hematopoietic differentiation of the cells on days 6, 8, 10 and
12. The spontaneously differentiated hESCs were seeded in the hematopoietic
colony culture system to study the hematopoietic colony forming ability.
Immunocytochemical staining for CD45 was performed on the hEBs to examine the
emergence of mature hematopoietic cells.
RESULTS: The expressions of the hematopoietic stem cell-related genes KDR and
Bmi-1 were detected in the hESCs, and on days 4 to 6, the two genes were
upregulated with prolonged cuture of the hEBs. Scl and gata2 gene expressions
were detected since 6-8 days of culture and maintained high expressions till day 
12. Flow cytometry revealed a gradual increase in CD34-positive cells in the
culture, with positivity rates on days 6, 8, 10, and 12 of (1.4-/+0.4)%,
(3.4-/+1.3)%, (5.5-/+2.2)%, and (5.1-/+1.7)%, respectively. The numbers of
CD43-positive cell colonies on days 6, 8, 10, and 12 were 0, 7-/+2, 37-/+11, and 
89-/+29 in each 10(5) cells, respectively. Immunocytochemical staining identified
CD45-positive cells on days 10, 12, 15, and 18 in the cell colonies, with the
positive cell numbers of 0, 40.5-/+15.09, 178.6-/+55.89, and 253.0-/+52.04,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: The hESCs undergo spontaneous hematopoietic differentiation in 3
stages, including the differentiation into germ layer-specific cells (days 6-8), 
expansion period of the hematopoitic progenitors (days 8-12), and maturation of
the hematopoietic cells (after day 15).

PMID: 19403374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5170. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005170. Epub 2009 Apr 13.

Mechanisms controlling anaemia in Trypanosoma congolense infected mice.

Noyes HA(1), Alimohammadian MH, Agaba M, Brass A, Fuchs H, Gailus-Durner V, Hulme
H, Iraqi F, Kemp S, Rathkolb B, Wolf E, de Angelis MH, Roshandel D, Naessens J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Trypanosoma congolense are extracellular protozoan parasites of the
blood stream of artiodactyls and are one of the main constraints on cattle
production in Africa. In cattle, anaemia is the key feature of disease and
persists after parasitaemia has declined to low or undetectable levels, but
treatment to clear the parasites usually resolves the anaemia.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The progress of anaemia after Trypanosoma
congolense infection was followed in three mouse strains. Anaemia developed
rapidly in all three strains until the peak of the first wave of parasitaemia.
This was followed by a second phase, characterized by slower progress to severe
anaemia in C57BL/6, by slow recovery in surviving A/J and a rapid recovery in
BALB/c. There was no association between parasitaemia and severity of anaemia.
Furthermore, functional T lymphocytes are not required for the induction of
anaemia, since suppression of T cell activity with Cyclosporin A had neither an
effect on the course of infection nor on anaemia. Expression of genes involved in
erythropoiesis and iron metabolism was followed in spleen, liver and kidney
tissues in the three strains of mice using microarrays. There was no evidence for
a response to erythropoietin, consistent with anaemia of chronic disease, which
is erythropoietin insensitive. However, the expression of transcription factors
and genes involved in erythropoiesis and haemolysis did correlate with the
expression of the inflammatory cytokines Il6 and Ifng.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The innate immune response appears to be the major
contributor to the inflammation associated with anaemia since suppression of T
cells with CsA had no observable effect. Several transcription factors regulating
haematopoiesis, Tal1, Gata1, Zfpm1 and Klf1 were expressed at consistently lower 
levels in C57BL/6 mice suggesting that these mice have a lower haematopoietic
capacity and therefore less ability to recover from haemolysis induced anaemia
after infection.

PMCID: PMC2664899
PMID: 19365556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Blood. 2009 May 28;113(22):5456-65. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-01-200048. Epub 2009 
Apr 3.

The transcriptional program controlled by the stem cell leukemia gene Scl/Tal1
during early embryonic hematopoietic development.

Wilson NK(1), Miranda-Saavedra D, Kinston S, Bonadies N, Foster SD, Calero-Nieto 
F, Dawson MA, Donaldson IJ, Dumon S, Frampton J, Janky R, Sun XH, Teichmann SA,
Bannister AJ, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Scl/Tal1 controls the development
and subsequent differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). However,
because few Scl target genes have been validated to date, the underlying
mechanisms have remained largely unknown. In this study, we have used ChIP-Seq
technology (coupling chromatin immunoprecipitation with deep sequencing) to
generate a genome-wide catalog of Scl-binding events in a stem/progenitor cell
line, followed by validation using primary fetal liver cells and comprehensive
transgenic mouse assays. Transgenic analysis provided in vivo validation of
multiple new direct Scl target genes and allowed us to reconstruct an in vivo
validated network consisting of 17 factors and their respective regulatory
elements. By coupling ChIP-Seq in model cell lines with in vivo transgenic
validation and sophisticated bioinformatic analysis, we have identified a widely 
applicable strategy for the reconstruction of stem cell regulatory networks in
which biologic material is otherwise limiting. Moreover, in addition to revealing
multiple previously unrecognized links to known HSC regulators, as well as novel 
links to genes not previously implicated in HSC function, comprehensive
transgenic analysis of regulatory elements provided substantial new insights into
the transcriptional control of several important hematopoietic regulators,
including Cbfa2t3h/Eto2, Cebpe, Nfe2, Zfpm1/Fog1, Erg, Mafk, Gfi1b, and Myb.

PMID: 19346495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Neuron. 2009 Mar 26;61(6):839-51. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.02.011.

LMO4 controls the balance between excitatory and inhibitory spinal V2
interneurons.

Joshi K(1), Lee S, Lee B, Lee JW, Lee SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA.

Multiple excitatory and inhibitory interneurons form the motor circuit with motor
neurons in the ventral spinal cord. Notch signaling initiates the diversification
of immature V2-interneurons into excitatory V2a-interneurons and inhibitory
V2b-interneurons. Here, we provide a transcriptional regulatory mechanism
underlying their balanced production. LIM-only protein LMO4 controls this binary 
cell fate choice by regulating the activity of V2a- and V2b-specific LIM
complexes inversely. In the spinal cord, LMO4 induces GABAergic V2b-interneurons 
in collaboration with SCL and inhibits Lhx3 from generating glutamatergic
V2a-interneuons. In LMO4;SCL compound mutant embryos, V2a-interneurons increase
markedly at the expense of V2b-interneurons. We further demonstrate that LMO4
nucleates the assembly of a novel LIM-complex containing SCL, Gata2, and NLI.
This complex activates specific enhancers in V2b-genes consisting of binding
sites for SCL and Gata2, thereby promoting V2b-interneuron fate. Thus, LMO4 plays
essential roles in directing a balanced generation of inhibitory and excitatory
neurons in the ventral spinal cord.

PMCID: PMC2848494
PMID: 19323994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Blood. 2009 Jul 2;114(1):60-3. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-08-174755. Epub 2009 Mar
25.

Expression of Scl in mesoderm rescues hematopoiesis in the absence of Oct-4.

Kong KY(1), Williamson EA, Rogers JH, Tran T, Hromas R, Dahl R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico Health Sciences
Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.

In embryonic stem cells, Oct-4 concentration is critical in determining the
development of endoderm, mesoderm, and trophectoderm. Although Oct-4 expression
is essential for mesoderm development, it is unclear whether it has a role in the
development of specific mesodermal tissues. In this study, we have examined the
importance of Oct-4 in the generation of hematopoietic cells using an inducible
Oct-4 ESC line. We demonstrate that Oct-4 has a role in supporting hematopoiesis 
after specifying brachyury-positive mesoderm. When we suppressed Oct-4 expression
before or after mesoderm specification, no hematopoietic cells are detected.
However, hematopoiesis can be rescued in the absence of Oct-4 after mesoderm
specification if the essential hematopoietic transcription factor stem cell
leukemia is expressed. Our results suggest that, for hematopoiesis to occur,
Oct-4 is required for the initial specification of mesoderm and subsequently is
required for the development of hematopoietic cells from uncommitted mesoderm.

PMCID: PMC2710954
PMID: 19321862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Mol Psychiatry. 2009 Apr;14(4):351-3. doi: 10.1038/mp.2008.122.

Findings from bipolar disorder genome-wide association studies replicate in a
Finnish bipolar family-cohort.

Ollila HM, Soronen P, Silander K, Palo OM, Kieseppä T, Kaunisto MA, Lönnqvist J, 
Peltonen L, Partonen T, Paunio T.

PMCID: PMC2694406
PMID: 19308021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Blood. 2009 Jun 11;113(24):6172-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-02-136762. Epub 2009 
Feb 26.

Targeting the Notch1 and mTOR pathways in a mouse T-ALL model.

Cullion K(1), Draheim KM, Hermance N, Tammam J, Sharma VM, Ware C, Nikov G,
Krishnamoorthy V, Majumder PK, Kelliher MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and the Cancer Center, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Jun 11;113(24):6044-5.

Mutations in NOTCH1 are frequently detected in patients with T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and in mouse T-ALL models. Treatment of mouse or
human T-ALL cell lines in vitro with gamma-secretase inhibitors (GSIs) results in
growth arrest and/or apoptosis. These studies suggest GSIs as potential
therapeutic agents in the treatment of T-ALL. To determine whether GSIs have
antileukemic activity in vivo, we treated near-end-stage Tal1/Ink4a/Arf+/-
leukemic mice with vehicle or with a GSI developed by Merck (MRK-003). We found
that GSI treatment significantly extended the survival of leukemic mice compared 
with vehicle-treated mice. Notch1 target gene expression was repressed and
increased numbers of apoptotic cells were observed in the GSI-treated mice,
demonstrating that Notch1 inhibition in vivo induces apoptosis. T-ALL cell lines 
also exhibit PI3K/mTOR pathway activation, indicating that rapamycin may also
have therapeutic benefit. When GSIs are administered in combination with
rapamycin, mTOR kinase activity is ablated and apoptosis induced. Moreover, GSI
and rapamycin treatment inhibits human T-ALL growth and extends survival in a
mouse xenograft model. This work supports the idea of targeting NOTCH1 in T-ALL
and suggests that inhibition of the mTOR and NOTCH1 pathways may have added
efficacy.

PMCID: PMC2699237
PMID: 19246562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Leuk Res. 2009 Sep;33(9):1249-54. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.01.022. Epub 2009
Feb 20.

Inhibition of all-trans retinoic acid-induced granulocytic differentiation of
WEHI-3B D+ cells by forced expression of SCL (TAL1) and GATA-1.

Ishiguro K(1), Rice AM, Rice KP, Sartorelli AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Developmental Therapeutics Program, Cancer
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) induces granulocytic maturation of WEHI-3B D+
leukemia cells and LiCl enhances this maturation, while WEHI-3B D- cells are
non-responsive to ATRA. Transfection of SCL, expressed in D- but absent in D+
cells, into D+ cells, caused resistance to ATRA, while transfection of GATA-1
into D+ cells produced resistance to the combination of ATRA and LiCl. SCL
expression in D+ cells did not induce the expression of c-Kit, a putative target 
gene for SCL. LiCl, known to inhibit some kinases by displacing Mg2+, did not
affect tyrosine kinase activity of the cytoplasmic domain of c-Kit.

PMCID: PMC2780339
PMID: 19230972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Blood. 2009 Apr 9;113(15):3461-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-167577. Epub 2009
Feb 11.

Mef2C is a lineage-restricted target of Scl/Tal1 and regulates megakaryopoiesis
and B-cell homeostasis.

Gekas C(1), Rhodes KE, Gereige LM, Helgadottir H, Ferrari R, Kurdistani SK,
Montecino-Rodriguez E, Bassel-Duby R, Olson E, Krivtsov AV, Armstrong S, Orkin
SH, Pellegrini M, Mikkola HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor stem cell leukemia gene (Scl) is 
a master regulator for hematopoiesis essential for hematopoietic specification
and proper differentiation of the erythroid and megakaryocyte lineages. However, 
the critical downstream targets of Scl remain undefined. Here, we identified a
novel Scl target gene, transcription factor myocyte enhancer factor 2 C (Mef2C)
from Scl(fl/fl) fetal liver progenitor cell lines. Analysis of Mef2C(-/-) embryos
showed that Mef2C, in contrast to Scl, is not essential for specification into
primitive or definitive hematopoietic lineages. However, adult
VavCre(+)Mef2C(fl/fl) mice exhibited platelet defects similar to those observed
in Scl-deficient mice. The platelet counts were reduced, whereas platelet size
was increased and the platelet shape and granularity were altered. Furthermore,
megakaryopoiesis was severely impaired in vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
microarray hybridization analysis revealed that Mef2C is directly regulated by
Scl in megakaryocytic cells, but not in erythroid cells. In addition, an
Scl-independent requirement for Mef2C in B-lymphoid homeostasis was observed in
Mef2C-deficient mice, characterized as severe age-dependent reduction of specific
B-cell progenitor populations reminiscent of premature aging. In summary, this
work identifies Mef2C as an integral member of hematopoietic transcription
factors with distinct upstream regulatory mechanisms and functional requirements 
in megakaryocyte and B-lymphoid lineages.

PMCID: PMC2945827
PMID: 19211936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Feb 6;4(2):180-6. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2009.01.001.

Adult hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells require either Lyl1 or Scl for
survival.

Souroullas GP(1), Salmon JM, Sablitzky F, Curtis DJ, Goodell MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Scl and Lyl1 encode two related basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factors
implicated in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Previous studies showed that
Scl is essential for embryonic and adult erythropoiesis, while Lyl1 is important 
for B cell development. Single-knockout mice have not revealed an essential
function for Scl or Lyl1 in adult hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). To determine
if maintenance of HSCs in single-knockout mice is due to functional redundancy,
we generated Lyl1;Scl-conditional double-knockout mice. Here, we report a
striking genetic interaction between the two genes, with a clear dose dependence 
for the presence of Scl or Lyl1 alleles for HSC function. Bone marrow
repopulation assays and analyses demonstrated rapid loss of hematopoietic
progenitors due to apoptosis. The function of HSCs could be rescued by a single
allele of Lyl1 but not Scl. These results show that expression of at least one of
these factors is essential for maintenance of adult HSC function.

PMCID: PMC2672304
PMID: 19200805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2009 Feb;31(2):131-5. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0b013e31818c919e.

Molecular and epidemiologic findings of childhood acute leukemia in Costa Rica.

Santamaría-Quesada C(1), Vargas M, Venegas P, Calvo M, Obando C, Valverde B,
Cartín W, Carrillo JM, Jimenez R, González M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory Department, Molecular Biology Laboratory double, National 
Children's Hospital, San José, Costa Rica. csantamariaq@hnn.sa.cr

In Central America, nearly 70% of pediatric cancer is related to hemato-oncologic
disorders, especially acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Preliminary studies
have described a high incidence of childhood leukemia in these countries;
however, no molecular analyses of these malignancies have yet been carried out.
We studied diagnostic samples from 84 patients from the National Children's
Hospital in San Jose, Costa Rica (65 precursor B-ALL, 5 T-cell ALL, and 14 acute 
myeloblastic leukemia). Our methodology included cytogenetic, fluorescent in situ
hybridization, and polymerase chain reaction approaches. The observed rate of
leukemia was 52.2 cases per million children per year. Twelve out of 65 (18.4%)
precursor B-ALL tested positive for TEL-AML1 and 3 cases for BCR-ABL (4.6%). In
addition, we detected 2 patients carrying an E2A-PBX1 transcript (3.1%) and 1
patient with an MLL-AF4 fusion gene (1.5%). None of the T-cell ALL cases were
positive for either SIL-TAL1 or HOX11L2. Within 14 acute myeloblastic leukemia
patients, we confirmed 2 cases with FLT3-internal tandem duplication+, 1 patient 
with AML1-ETO, and only 1 case carrying a PML-RARalpha rearrangement. The present
study confirms the relatively high incidence of pediatric leukemia in Costa Rica 
and constitutes the first report regarding the incidence of the main molecular
alterations of childhood leukemia in our region.

PMID: 19194200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Nature. 2009 Feb 12;457(7231):892-5. doi: 10.1038/nature07679. Epub 2009 Jan 28.

The haemangioblast generates haematopoietic cells through a haemogenic
endothelium stage.

Lancrin C(1), Sroczynska P, Stephenson C, Allen T, Kouskoff V, Lacaud G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Stem Cell Biology Group.

Comment in
    Nature. 2009 Feb 12;457(7231):801-3.

It has been proposed that during embryonic development haematopoietic cells arise
from a mesodermal progenitor with both endothelial and haematopoietic potential
called the haemangioblast. A conflicting theory instead associates the first
haematopoietic cells with a phenotypically differentiated endothelial cell that
has haematopoietic potential (that is, a haemogenic endothelium). Support for the
haemangioblast concept was initially provided by the identification during mouse 
embryonic stem cell differentiation of a clonal precursor, the blast
colony-forming cell (BL-CFC), which gives rise to blast colonies with both
endothelial and haematopoietic components. Although recent studies have now
provided evidence for the presence of this bipotential precursor in vivo, the
precise mechanism for generation of haematopoietic cells from the haemangioblast 
still remains completely unknown. Here we demonstrate that the haemangioblast
generates haematopoietic cells through the formation of a haemogenic endothelium 
intermediate, providing the first direct link between these two precursor
populations. The cell population containing the haemogenic endothelium is
transiently generated during BL-CFC development. This cell population is also
present in gastrulating mouse embryos and generates haematopoietic cells on
further culture. At the molecular level, we demonstrate that the transcription
factor Tal1 (also known as Scl; ref. 10) is indispensable for the establishment
of this haemogenic endothelium population whereas the core binding factor Runx1
(also known as AML1; ref. 11) is critical for generation of definitive
haematopoietic cells from haemogenic endothelium. Together our results merge the 
two a priori conflicting theories on the origin of haematopoietic development
into a single linear developmental process.

PMCID: PMC2661201
PMID: 19182774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Blood. 2009 Jun 4;113(23):5783-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-11-187757. Epub 2009
Jan 26.

Expression of the leukemia oncogene Lmo2 is controlled by an array of
tissue-specific elements dispersed over 100 kb and bound by Tal1/Lmo2, Ets, and
Gata factors.

Landry JR(1), Bonadies N, Kinston S, Knezevic K, Wilson NK, Oram SH, Janes M,
Piltz S, Hammett M, Carter J, Hamilton T, Donaldson IJ, Lacaud G, Frampton J,
Follows G, Kouskoff V, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Jun 4;113(23):5693.

The Lmo2 gene encodes a transcriptional cofactor critical for the development of 
hematopoietic stem cells. Ectopic LMO2 expression causes leukemia in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) patients and severe combined immunodeficiency
patients undergoing retroviral gene therapy. Tightly controlled Lmo2 expression
is therefore essential, yet no comprehensive analysis of Lmo2 regulation has been
published so far. By comparative genomics, we identified 17 highly conserved
noncoding elements, 9 of which revealed specific acetylation marks in
chromatin-immunoprecipitation and microarray (ChIP-chip) assays performed across 
250 kb of the Lmo2 locus in 11 cell types covering different stages of
hematopoietic differentiation. All candidate regulatory regions were tested in
transgenic mice. An extended LMO2 proximal promoter fragment displayed strong
endothelial activity, while the distal promoter showed weak forebrain activity.
Eight of the 15 distal candidate elements functioned as enhancers, which together
recapitulated the full expression pattern of Lmo2, directing expression to
endothelium, hematopoietic cells, tail, and forebrain. Interestingly, distinct
combinations of specific distal regulatory elements were required to extend
endothelial activity of the LMO2 promoter to yolk sac or fetal liver
hematopoietic cells. Finally, Sfpi1/Pu.1, Fli1, Gata2, Tal1/Scl, and Lmo2 were
shown to bind to and transactivate Lmo2 hematopoietic enhancers, thus identifying
key upstream regulators and positioning Lmo2 within hematopoietic regulatory
networks.

PMID: 19171877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Toxicol Pathol. 2008 Dec;36(7):958-71. doi: 10.1177/0192623308327121.

Effects of p38 MAP kinase inhibitors on the differentiation and maturation of
erythroid progenitors.

Dalmas DA(1), Tierney LA, Zhang C, Narayanan PK, Boyce RW, Schwartz LW, Frazier
KS, Scicchitano MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Safety Assessment, GlaxoSmithKline, King of Prussia,
Pennsylvania 19406, USA. deidre.a.dalmas@gsk.com

In rodents, p38 MAP kinase inhibitors (p38is) induce bone marrow hypocellularity 
and reduce reticulocyte and erythrocyte counts. To identify target cell
populations affected, a differentiating primary liquid erythroid culture system
using sca-1(+)cells from mouse bone marrow was developed and challenged with
p38is SB-203580, SB-226882, and SB-267030. Drug-related alterations in genes
involved at different stages of erythropoiesis, cell-surface antigen expression
(CSAE), burst-forming unit erythroid (BFU-E) colony formation, and cellular
morphology (CM), growth (CG), and viability were evaluated. CSAE, CM, and
decreases in BFU-E formation indicated delayed maturation, while CG and viability
were unaffected. Terminal differentiation was delayed until day 14 versus day 7
in controls. CSAE demonstrated higher percentages of sca-1(+)cells after day 2
and reduced percentages of ter119(+) cells after day 7 in all treated cultures.
Real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction revealed a transient
delay in expression of genes involved at early, intermediate, and late stages of 
erythropoiesis, followed by rebound expression at later time points. Results
demonstrate p38is do not irreversibly inhibit erythrogenesis but induce a
potency-dependent, transient delay in erythropoietic activity. The delay in
activity is suggestive of effects on sca-1(+)bone marrow cells caused by
alterations in expression of genes related to erythroid commitment and
differentiation resulting in delayed maturation.

PMID: 19126791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Ann Pathol. 2008 Nov;28 Spec No 1(1):S28-9. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2008.09.004.
Epub 2008 Oct 17.

[Demonstration of leukemic stem cells in the human T-ALLs and study of the
involvement of the NOTCH, TAL1 and ERK/MAPK pathways in human T-leukemogenesis].

[Article in French]

Gerby B(1), Armstrong F, Brunet de la Grange P, Calvo J, Ballerini P, Pflumio F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire des cellules souches hématopoïétiques et leucémiques, institut de 
radiobiologie moléculaire et cellulaire, CEA, 18, route de Panorama, BP 6, 92265 
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.

PMID: 18984291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Yeast. 2008 Nov;25(11):835-47. doi: 10.1002/yea.1638.

Identification of common traits in improved xylose-growing Saccharomyces
cerevisiae for inverse metabolic engineering.

Bengtsson O(1), Jeppsson M, Sonderegger M, Parachin NS, Sauer U, Hahn-Hägerdal B,
Gorwa-Grauslund MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Microbiology, Lund University, PO Box 124, 221 00 Lund, 
Sweden.

Four recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains with enhanced xylose growth
(TMB3400, C1, C5 and BH42) were compared with two control strains (TMB3399,
TMB3001) through genome-wide transcription analysis in order to identify novel
targets for inverse metabolic engineering. A subset of 13 genes with changed
expression levels in all improved strains was selected for further analysis.
Thirteen validation strains and two reference strains were constructed to
investigate the effect of overexpressing or deleting these genes in
xylose-utilizing S. cerevisiae. Improved aerobic growth rates on xylose were
observed in five cases. The strains overexpressing SOL3 and TAL1 grew 19% and 24%
faster than their reference strain, and the strains carrying deletions of
YLR042C, MNI1 or RPA49 grew 173%, 62% and 90% faster than their reference strain.

(c) 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 19061191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Yeast. 2008 Nov;25(11):825-33. doi: 10.1002/yea.1637.

Acetaldehyde tolerance in Saccharomyces cerevisiae involves the pentose phosphate
pathway and oleic acid biosynthesis.

Matsufuji Y(1), Fujimura S, Ito T, Nishizawa M, Miyaji T, Nakagawa J, Ohyama T,
Tomizuka N, Nakagawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology, Faculty of Bioindustry, Tokyo
University of Agriculture, 196 Yasaka, Abashiri, Hokkaido 099-2493, Japan.

To identify genes responsible for acetaldehyde tolerance, genome-wide screening
was performed using a collection of haploid Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains
deleted in single genes. The screen identified 49 genes whose deletion conferred 
acetaldehyde sensitivity, and these were termed the genes required for
acetaldehyde tolerance. We focused on six of these genes required for
acetaldehyde tolerance, ZWF1, GND1, RPE1, TKL1 and TAL1, which encode enzymes in 
the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), and OAR1, which encodes for NADPH-dependent 
3-oxoacyl-(acyl-carrier-protein) reductase. These genes were not only responsible
for acetaldehyde tolerance but also turned out to be induced by acetaldehyde.
Moreover, the content of oleic acid was remarkably increased in yeast cells under
acetaldehyde stress, and supplementation of oleic acid into the media partially
alleviated acetaldehyde stress-induced growth inhibition of strains disrupted in 
the genes required for acetaldehyde tolerance and OLE1. Taken together, our data 
suggest that the supply of NADPH and the process of fatty acid biosynthesis are
the key factors in acetaldehyde tolerance in the yeast, and that oleic acid plays
an important role in acetaldehyde tolerance.

(c) 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 19061187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Br J Haematol. 2009 Feb;144(4):546-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07453.x.
Epub 2008 Nov 13.

The t(X;7)(q22;q34) in paediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia results in
overexpression of the insulin receptor substrate 4 gene through illegitimate
recombination with the T-cell receptor beta locus.

Karrman K(1), Kjeldsen E, Lassen C, Isaksson M, Davidsson J, Andersson A, Hasle
H, Fioretos T, Johansson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
kristina.karrman@med.lu.se

The t(X;7)(q22;q34), a translocation not previously reported in a neoplastic
disorder, was identified and molecularly characterised in a paediatric T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL), subsequently shown also to harbour a
deletion of 6q, a STIL/TAL1 fusion and an activating NOTCH1 mutation. The t(X;7) 
was further investigated using fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH),
real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR) and Western blot
analyses. FISH revealed a breakpoint at the T-cell receptor beta locus at 7q34
and mapped the corresponding breakpoint to Xq22.3. The latter region contains
only two known genes, namely insulin receptor substrate 4 (IRS4) and collagen,
type IV, alpha 5 (COL4A5), the expressions of which were analysed by the use of
RQ-PCR. COL4A5 was not differentially expressed in the t(X;7)-positive sample
compared to five T-ALL controls. However, a marked, 1000-fold overexpression of
IRS4 was identified. Western blot analysis with a monoclonal antibody against
IRS4 showed overexpression also at the protein level. Considering that forced
expression of several members of the IRS family has been shown to result in
increased cell proliferation, for example in haematopoietic cells, we hypothesise
that the IRS4 up-regulation in T-ALL is pathogenetically important as a mitogenic
stimulus.

PMID: 19055661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Biochem. 2009 Feb;145(2):129-35. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvn158. Epub 2008 Nov 23.

TAL1/SCL relieves the E2-2-mediated repression of VEGFR2 promoter activity.

Tanaka A(1), Itoh F, Itoh S, Kato M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575,
Japan.

Comment in
    J Biochem. 2011 Feb;149(2):117-9.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein TAL1/SCL is essential for
embryonic-vascular development. TAL1/SCL regulates the activation of endothelial 
cells by binding directly or indirectly to DNA sequences in critical target
genes. We recently demonstrated that E-box protein E2-2 blocks endothelial cell
activation via perturbation of VEGFR2 promoter activity. Herein, we report that
TAL1/SCL interacts with E2-2 and inhibits E2-2-mediated effects on reporter
activity. Mutational analysis revealed that the HLH domain of TAL1/SCL, but not
its basic region, is required for interaction with E2-2. Importantly, TAL1/SCL
relieves the E2-2-mediated repression of VEGFR2 reporter activity in endothelial 
cells. Our data elaborate on the bHLH protein interactions that regulate
endothelial cell activation.

PMID: 19029143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mech Dev. 2009 Mar-Apr;126(3-4):220-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2008.11.001. Epub 2008 
Nov 8.

The role of the ETS factor erg in zebrafish vasculogenesis.

Ellett F(1), Kile BT, Lieschke GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade,
Parkville, VIC 3050, Australia.

Erg, a member of the ETS family of transcription factors, has been implicated by 
previous studies in endothelial and haematopoietic development. Deregulation of
the human ERG locus is associated with acute myeloid leukaemia, prostate cancer
and Ewing's sarcoma. To better understand the role of Erg during early
development, we utilised the zebrafish as a model amenable to descriptive and
functional studies in vivo. Zebrafish have a single erg gene that is expressed in
mesoderm and its vascular derivatives during angioblast migration, vasculogenesis
and early angiogenesis. Mutant and morphant expression analyses placed erg in a
genetic pathway downstream of cloche, tal1/scl and etsrp during early angioblast 
migration. Furthermore, a combination of gain-of-function and loss-of-function
studies suggested a redundant yet specific role for erg in both angioblast
specification/proliferation and early angiogenesis, and a synergistic interaction
with the critical ETS factor etsrp.

PMCID: PMC2844499
PMID: 19027849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Blood. 2009 Mar 5;113(10):2191-201. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-169417. Epub 2008 
Nov 14.

SCL and associated proteins distinguish active from repressive GATA transcription
factor complexes.

Tripic T(1), Deng W, Cheng Y, Zhang Y, Vakoc CR, Gregory GD, Hardison RC, Blobel 
GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

GATA-1 controls hematopoietic development by activating and repressing gene
transcription, yet the in vivo mechanisms that specify these opposite activities 
are unknown. By examining the composition of GATA-1-associated protein complexes 
in a conditional erythroid rescue system as well as through the use of tiling
arrays we detected the SCL/TAL1, LMO2, Ldb1, E2A complex at all positively acting
GATA-1-bound elements examined. Similarly, the SCL complex is present at all
activating GATA elements in megakaryocytes and mast cells. In striking contrast, 
at sites where GATA-1 functions as a repressor, the SCL complex is depleted. A
DNA-binding defective form of SCL maintains association with a subset of active
GATA elements indicating that GATA-1 is a key determinant for SCL recruitment.
Knockdown of LMO2 selectively impairs activation but not repression by GATA-1.
ETO-2, an SCL-associated protein with the potential for transcription repression,
is also absent from GATA-1-repressed genes but, unlike SCL, fails to accumulate
at GATA-1-activated genes. Together, these studies identify the SCL complex as a 
critical and consistent determinant of positive GATA-1 activity in multiple
GATA-1-regulated hematopoietic cell lineages.

PMCID: PMC2652367
PMID: 19011221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 1;68(19):7723-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6661.

SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus derepresses GLI1 from the negative control of
suppressor-of-fused in pancreatic cancer cell.

Kasai K(1), Inaguma S, Yoneyama A, Yoshikawa K, Ikeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Promoting Center for Clinical Research, Aichi
Medical University School of Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.
kkasai@amugw.aichi-med-u.ac.jp

As a physically binding protein of GLI1 transcription factor, Suppressor-of-Fused
(SUFU) has been placed in the center of negative regulation of Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling. SUFU tethers GLI1 in cytoplasm, and in some circumstances, it moves
into the nucleus in association with GLI1, leading to the suppression of GLI1
target gene expression by recruiting a corepressor complex. The activated
transcriptional function of GLI1 is important for cellular proliferation in a
variety of human cancers. However, it has not been revealed how GLI1 is
derepressed from SUFU-mediated suppression. Here, we show SCL/TAL1 interrupting
locus (SIL) product, a cytoplasmic protein overexpressed in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA), is responsible for the derepression of GLI1. We found SIL
associated with the carboxyl terminus of SUFU, one of two distinct GLI1-binding
domains, and this association was responsible for cytoplasmic tethering of SUFU. 
Overexpressed SIL attenuated SUFU-mediated cytoplasmic tethering and target gene 
suppression of GLI1. Knockdown of SIL in PDA cells conversely induced the nuclear
accumulation of SUFU in association with GLI1 and the transcriptional suppression
of GLI1 target genes. Importantly, we also showed that oncogenic K-RAS, and not
Sonic hedgehog, enhanced the SIL association with the amino-terminus of SUFU, the
other GLI1-binding domain that led to further increase of nuclear translocation
of GLI1. These results uncover the role of SIL in derepressing GLI1 from the
negative control of SUFU, which is a crucial step for activating Hh signaling in 
cancer cells.

PMID: 18829525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Exp Hematol. 2008 Dec;36(12):1593-603. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2008.07.005. Epub
2008 Sep 21.

Mesodermal patterning activity of SCL.

Ismailoglu I(1), Yeamans G, Daley GQ, Perlingeiro RC, Kyba M.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute and Department of Pediatrics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The transcription factor SCL is critically required for establishing
hematopoiesis and for proper endothelial development, but not for maintenance of 
hematopoietic stem cells or endothelial cells in the adult. Conflicting data
exists regarding the developmental function of SCL, namely, whether it acts as a 
master regulator, actively patterning mesoderm toward hematopoietic development
at the expense of other lineages, or is merely necessary to maintain the earliest
committed hematopoietic precursors. To answer this question, we have engineered
murine embryonic stem cells with a conditional doxycycline-inducible SCL
transgene, and evaluated the effects of SCL expression at defined time points
during in vitro development. Continual SCL expression during differentiation
results in markedly increased hematopoiesis. By using pulses of gene expression
over a 6-day differentiation time course, we map and characterize windows of SCL 
responsiveness. Notably, a pulse of SCL expression during early mesodermal
patterning (48 to 72 hours of differentiation) promoted Flk1+ PDGFRalphaneg
presumptive extraembryonic/lateral plate mesoderm at the expense of PDGFRalpha+
Flk1neg presumptive paraxial mesoderm. Consistent with this, the early pulse of
SCL expression also expanded hematopoietic colony-forming cell numbers, while
concomitantly repressing expression of paraxial and cardiac markers, and
inhibited development of beating cardiomyocytes. By mixing the inducible
embryonic stem cells with fluorescently labeled wild-type cells in chimeric
embryoid bodies, we show that these effects of SCL are cell autonomous. These
data support a master-regulatory role for SCL in mesodermal patterning, in
addition to its established later roles in hematopoietic differentiation.

PMID: 18809240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;28(21):6681-94. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01061-08. Epub 2008 Sep 
8.

Molecular hallmarks of endogenous chromatin complexes containing master
regulators of hematopoiesis.

Wozniak RJ(1), Keles S, Lugus JJ, Young KH, Boyer ME, Tran TM, Choi K, Bresnick
EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Department of
Pharmacology, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Combinatorial interactions among trans-acting factors establish transcriptional
circuits that orchestrate cellular differentiation, survival, and development.
Unlike circuits instigated by individual factors, efforts to identify gene
ensembles controlled by multiple factors simultaneously are in their infancy. A
paradigm has emerged in which the important regulators of hematopoiesis GATA-1
and GATA-2 function combinatorially with Scl/TAL1, another key regulator of
hematopoiesis. The underlying mechanism appears to involve preferential assembly 
of a multimeric complex on a composite DNA element containing WGATAR and E-box
motifs. Based on this paradigm, one would predict that GATA-2 and Scl/TAL1 would 
commonly co-occupy such composite elements in cells. However, chromosome-wide
analyses indicated that the vast majority of conserved composite elements were
occupied by neither GATA-2 nor Scl/TAL1. Intriguingly, the highly restricted set 
of GATA-2-occupied composite elements had characteristic molecular hallmarks,
specifically Scl/TAL1 occupancy, a specific epigenetic signature, specific
neighboring cis elements, and preferential enhancer activity in GATA-2-expressing
cells. Genes near the GATA-2-Scl/TAL1-occupied composite elements were regulated 
by GATA-2 or GATA-1, and therefore these fundamental studies on combinatorial
transcriptional mechanisms were also leveraged to discover novel GATA
factor-mediated cell regulatory pathways.

PMCID: PMC2573226
PMID: 18779319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Curr Biol. 2008 Aug 26;18(16):1234-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.07.048.

Fli1 acts at the top of the transcriptional network driving blood and endothelial
development.

Liu F(1), Walmsley M, Rodaway A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, OX3 9DS Oxford, United Kingdom.

Blood and endothelium arise in close association during development, possibly
from a common precursor, the hemangioblast [1-4]. Genes essential for blood and
endothelial development contain functional ETS binding sites, and binding and
expression data implicate the transcription factor, friend leukaemia integration 
1 (Fli1) [5-10]. However, loss-of-function phenotypes in mice, although suffering
both blood and endothelial defects, have thus far precluded the conclusion that
Fli1 is essential for these two lineages [11, 12]. By using Xenopus and zebrafish
embryos, we show that loss of Fli1 function results in a substantial reduction or
absence of hemangioblasts, revealing an absolute requirement. TUNEL assays show
that the cells are eventually lost by apoptosis, but only after the regulatory
circuit has been disrupted by loss of Fli1. In addition, a constitutively active 
form of Fli1 is sufficient to induce expression of key hemangioblast genes, such 
as Scl/Tal1, Lmo2, Gata2, Etsrp, and Flk1. Epistasis assays show that Fli1
expression is induced by Bmp signaling or Cloche, depending on the hemangioblast 
population, and in both cases Fli1 acts upstream of Gata2, Scl, Lmo2, and Etsrp. 
Taken together, these results place Fli1 at the top of the transcriptional
regulatory hierarchy for hemangioblast specification in vertebrate embryos.

PMID: 18718762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mol Cell Biochem. 2008 Dec;319(1-2):181-7. doi: 10.1007/s11010-008-9891-5. Epub
2008 Aug 15.

Construction of a high-performance human fetal liver-derived lentiviral cDNA
library.

Kurita R(1), Oikawa T, Okada M, Yokoo T, Kurihara Y, Honda Y, Kageyama R, Suehiro
Y, Okazaki T, Iga M, Miyoshi H, Tani K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu
University, Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

The gene transduction method is a very powerful tool, not only in basic science
but also in clinical medicine. Regenerative medicine is one field that has close 
connection with both basic and clinical. Recently, it has been reported that
induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells can be produced from somatic cells by a
three or four gene transduction. We have also recently reported that lentiviral
gene transfer of the tal1/scl gene can efficiently differentiate non-human
primate common marmoset ES cells into hematopoietic cells without the support of 
stromal cells. In this study, we constructed a high-performance human fetal
liver-derived lentiviral expression library, which contains a high number of
individual clones, in order to develop a very helpful tool for understanding
early hematopoiesis and/or hepatocytosis for future regenerative medicine. Our
lentiviral cDNA library consisted of more than 8 x 10(7) individual clones, and
their average insert size was >2 kb. DNA sequence analysis for each individual
inserted cDNAs revealed that >60% contained the full-length protein-coding
regions for many genes including cytokine receptors, cytoplasmic proteins,
protein inhibitors, and nuclear factors. The transduction efficiency on 293T
cells was 100% and the average size of an integrated cDNA was ~1.1 kb. These
results suggest that our lentiviral human fetal liver cDNA expression library
could be a very helpful tool for accelerating the discovery of novel genes that
are involved in early hematopoiesis and hepatopoiesis and to make the use of iPS 
cells more efficient in the field of regenerative medicine.

PMID: 18709335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Clin Invest. 2008 Sep;118(9):3143-50. doi: 10.1172/JCI35798.

Insertional mutagenesis combined with acquired somatic mutations causes
leukemogenesis following gene therapy of SCID-X1 patients.

Howe SJ(1), Mansour MR, Schwarzwaelder K, Bartholomae C, Hubank M, Kempski H,
Brugman MH, Pike-Overzet K, Chatters SJ, de Ridder D, Gilmour KC, Adams S,
Thornhill SI, Parsley KL, Staal FJ, Gale RE, Linch DC, Bayford J, Brown L, Quaye 
M, Kinnon C, Ancliff P, Webb DK, Schmidt M, von Kalle C, Gaspar HB, Thrasher AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunodeficiency, Molecular Immunology Unit, UCL Institute of Child
Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

X-linked SCID (SCID-X1) is amenable to correction by gene therapy using
conventional gammaretroviral vectors. Here, we describe the occurrence of clonal 
T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) promoted by insertional mutagenesis
in a completed gene therapy trial of 10 SCID-X1 patients. Integration of the
vector in an antisense orientation 35 kb upstream of the protooncogene LIM domain
only 2 (LMO2) caused overexpression of LMO2 in the leukemic clone. However,
leukemogenesis was likely precipitated by the acquisition of other genetic
abnormalities unrelated to vector insertion, including a gain-of-function
mutation in NOTCH1, deletion of the tumor suppressor gene locus cyclin-dependent 
kinase 2A (CDKN2A), and translocation of the TCR-beta region to the STIL-TAL1
locus. These findings highlight a general toxicity of endogenous gammaretroviral 
enhancer elements and also identify a combinatorial process during leukemic
evolution that will be important for risk stratification and for future protocol 
design.

PMCID: PMC2496964
PMID: 18688286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Clin Invest. 2008 Sep;118(9):3132-42. doi: 10.1172/JCI35700.

Insertional oncogenesis in 4 patients after retrovirus-mediated gene therapy of
SCID-X1.

Hacein-Bey-Abina S(1), Garrigue A, Wang GP, Soulier J, Lim A, Morillon E,
Clappier E, Caccavelli L, Delabesse E, Beldjord K, Asnafi V, MacIntyre E, Dal
Cortivo L, Radford I, Brousse N, Sigaux F, Moshous D, Hauer J, Borkhardt A,
Belohradsky BH, Wintergerst U, Velez MC, Leiva L, Sorensen R, Wulffraat N,
Blanche S, Bushman FD, Fischer A, Cavazzana-Calvo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotherapy, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Université René Descartes, Paris, France.
salima.hacein-bey@nck.ap-hop-paris.fr

Previously, several individuals with X-linked SCID (SCID-X1) were treated by gene
therapy to restore the missing IL-2 receptor gamma (IL2RG) gene to CD34+ BM
precursor cells using gammaretroviral vectors. While 9 of 10 patients were
successfully treated, 4 of the 9 developed T cell leukemia 31-68 months after
gene therapy. In 2 of these cases, blast cells contained activating vector
insertions near the LIM domain-only 2 (LMO2) proto-oncogene. Here, we report data
on the 2 most recent adverse events, which occurred in patients 7 and 10. In
patient 10, blast cells contained an integrated vector near LMO2 and a second
integrated vector near the proto-oncogene BMI1. In patient 7, blast cells
contained an integrated vector near a third proto-oncogene,CCND2. Additional
genetic abnormalities in the patients' blast cells included chromosomal
translocations, gain-of-function mutations activating NOTCH1, and copy number
changes, including deletion of tumor suppressor gene CDKN2A, 6q interstitial
losses, and SIL-TAL1 rearrangement. These findings functionally specify a genetic
network that controls growth in T cell progenitors. Chemotherapy led to sustained
remission in 3 of the 4 cases of T cell leukemia, but failed in the fourth.
Successful chemotherapy was associated with restoration of polyclonal transduced 
T cell populations. As a result, the treated patients continued to benefit from
therapeutic gene transfer.

PMCID: PMC2496963
PMID: 18688285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Genome Res. 2008 Sep;18(9):1422-32. doi: 10.1101/gr.077008.108. Epub 2008 Aug 7.

A novel mode of enhancer evolution: the Tal1 stem cell enhancer recruited a MIR
element to specifically boost its activity.

Smith AM(1), Sanchez MJ, Follows GA, Kinston S, Donaldson IJ, Green AR, Göttgens 
B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Cambridge CB2 2XY, United Kingdom.

Altered cis-regulation is thought to underpin much of metazoan evolution, yet the
underlying mechanisms remain largely obscure. The stem cell leukemia TAL1 (also
known as SCL) transcription factor is essential for the normal development of
blood stem cells and we have previously shown that the Tal1 +19 enhancer directs 
expression to hematopoietic stem cells, hematopoietic progenitors, and to
endothelium. Here we demonstrate that an adjacent region 1 kb upstream (+18
element) is in an open chromatin configuration and carries active histone marks
but does not function as an enhancer in transgenic mice. Instead, it boosts
activity of the +19 enhancer both in stable transfection assays and during
differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells carrying single-copy reporter
constructs targeted to the Hprt locus. The +18 element contains a mammalian
interspersed repeat (MIR) which is essential for the +18 function and which was
transposed to the Tal1 locus approximately 160 million years ago at the time of
the mammalian/marsupial branchpoint. Our data demonstrate a previously
unrecognized mechanism whereby enhancer activity is modulated by a transposon
exerting a "booster" function which would go undetected by conventional
transgenic approaches.

PMCID: PMC2527711
PMID: 18687876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Stem Cells Dev. 2008 Oct;17(5):917-27. doi: 10.1089/scd.2007.0170.

Gene signature of stromal cells which support dendritic cell development.

Despars G(1), Periasamy P, Tan J, Abbey J, O'Neill TJ, O'Neill HC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Australian National
University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.

Spleen stromal cells are critical determinants of dendritic cell (DC) development
in spleen. The spleen stromal line, namely STX3, supports DC differentiation in
vitro from overlaid bone marrow cells while the lymph node stromal line, namely
2RL22, does not. Here we have characterised the hematopoietic support capacity of
each stroma, and analysed lineage origin of the stromal cell lines by gene
profiling using microarrays. Stromal co-culture experiments were performed using 
bone marrow cells as a source of hematopoietic progenitors. A characteristic
immature myeloid-like CD11c(+)CD11b(+)CD86(+)MHC-II(/lo)B220()CD8alpha() DC is
produced after 14 days in STX3 cocultures, while 2RL22 cocultures produce only
monocyte/macrophage-like cells. No other hematopoietic cell type is produced. The
STX3 and 2RL22 stroma were compared by transcriptome analysis utilising
Affymetrix Murine U74Av2 genechips to identify gene expression related to
differential hematopoietic support function. Data mining was used to determine
cell surface marker expression reflecting endothelial cells and fibroblasts, as
well as adhesion molecules contributing to the microenvironment. STX3 shows gene 
expression reflective of early endothelial cells, while 2RL22 expresses markers
specific to fibroblasts. The expression of genes like Flt1, CD34, Mcam, and Eng
distinguishes STX3 as an early immature endothelial cell lacking markers of
angioblasts or hemangioblasts like Tal1/SCL, Tie1, Tie2, Kdr or Prom1/AC133. The 
absence of expression of genes like Vwf and Cd31 distinguishes STX3 from fully
differentiated vascular endothelial cells. In contrast, the 2RL22 lymph node
stroma specifically expresses genes related to fibroblastic-like cells like
osteoblasts with expression of Vdr (Vitamin D receptor), and epithelial cells
with expression of Krt13 (keratins). Gene expression data identifies STX3 as
splenic endothelial cells, independently able to support the outgrowth of
immature, myeloid DC-like cells from progenitors present in bone marrow, while
2RL22 lymph node fibroblastic cells provide support for development of
monocytes/macrophages.

PMID: 18564035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Jun 15;14(12):3948-55. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-5152.

RCAS/SCL-TVA animal model allows targeted delivery of polyoma middle T oncogene
to vascular endothelial progenitors in vivo and results in hemangioma
development.

Sausville J(1), Molinolo AA, Cheng X, Frampton J, Takebe N, Gutkind JS, Feldman
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE: To recapitulate the generation of cancer stem cells in the context of an
intact animal using a retroviral vector capable of in vivo delivery of oncogenes 
to primitive endothelial and hematopoietic stem cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Targeting of these progenitors was achieved using transgenic
mice in which the avian TVA retroviral receptor was placed under the control of
the stem cell leukemia (scl/tal-1) gene promoter and SCL +19 enhancer.
RESULTS: Injection of an avian retrovirus encoding polyoma middle T (PyMT), an
oncogene that transforms endothelial cells, caused rapid lethality in all SCL-TVA
mice but not in control TVA(-) littermates. The infected animals exhibited
hemorrhagic foci in several organs. Histopathologic analysis confirmed the
presence of hemangiomas and the endothelial origin of the PyMT-transformed cells.
Surprisingly, the transformed endothelial cells contained readily detectable
numbers of TVA(+) cells. By contrast, normal blood vessels had very few of these 
cells. The presence of TVA(+) cells in the lesions suggests that the cells
originally infected by PyMT retained stem cell characteristics. Further analysis 
showed that the tumor cells exhibited activation of the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase/Akt and S6/mammalian target of rapamycin pathways, suggesting a
mechanism used by PyMT to transform endothelial progenitors in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that this experimental system can specifically deliver
oncogenes to vascular endothelial progenitors in vivo and cause a fatal
neoplastic disease. This animal model should allow the generation of endothelial 
cancer stem cells in the natural environment of an immunocompetent animal,
thereby enabling the recapitulation of genetic alterations that are responsible
for the initiation and progression of human malignancies of endothelial origin.

PMID: 18559617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Blood. 2008 Aug 15;112(4):1056-67. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-12-128900. Epub 2008
Jun 12.

Differential use of SCL/TAL-1 DNA-binding domain in developmental hematopoiesis.

Kassouf MT(1), Chagraoui H, Vyas P, Porcher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Medical Research Council, Molecular Haematology
Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Dissecting the molecular mechanisms used by developmental regulators is essential
to understand tissue specification/differentiation. SCL/TAL-1 is a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor absolutely critical for hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cell specification and lineage maturation. Using in vitro and
forced expression experimental systems, we previously suggested that SCL might
have DNA-binding-independent functions. Here, to assess the requirements for SCL 
DNA-binding activity in vivo, we examined hematopoietic development in mice
carrying a germline DNA-binding mutation. Remarkably, in contrast to complete
absence of hematopoiesis and early lethality in scl-null embryos, specification
of hematopoietic cells occurred in homozygous mutant embryos, indicating that
direct DNA binding is dispensable for this process. Lethality was forestalled to 
later in development, although some mice survived to adulthood. Anemia was
documented throughout development and in adulthood. Cellular and molecular
studies showed requirements for SCL direct DNA binding in red cell maturation and
indicated that scl expression is positively autoregulated in terminally
differentiating erythroid cells. Thus, different mechanisms of SCL's action
predominate depending on the developmental/cellular context: indirect DNA binding
activities and/or sequestration of other nuclear regulators are sufficient in
specification processes, whereas direct DNA binding functions with
transcriptional autoregulation are critically required in terminal maturation
processes.

PMID: 18550854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Virol. 2008 Aug;82(16):7913-22. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02414-07. Epub 2008 May 21.

Cross talk between expression of the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 Tax
transactivator and the oncogenic bHLH transcription factor TAL1.

Terme JM(1), Wencker M, Favre-Bonvin A, Bex F, Gazzolo L, Duc Dodon M, Jalinot P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, UMR5239 CNRS/ENS de Lyon,
IFR 128 Biosciences Lyon Gerland, 46 Allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon cedex 07, France.

The human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) Tax transactivator is known to
induce or repress various cellular genes, several of them encoding transcription 
factors. As Tax is known to deregulate various basic bHLH factors, we looked more
specifically at its effect on TAL1 (T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia 1), also 
known as SCL (stem cell leukemia). Indeed, TAL1 is deregulated in a high
percentage of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells, and its oncogenic
properties are well-established. Here we show that Tax induces transcription of
this proto-oncogene by stimulating the activity of the TAL1 gene promoter 1b,
through both the CREB and NF-kappaB pathways. It was also observed that TAL1
upregulates HTLV-1 promoter activity, in either the presence or the absence of
Tax. The viral promoter is inhibited in trans by expression of the E2A protein
E47, and TAL1 is able to abrogate this inhibition. These data show the existence 
of a positive feedback loop between Tax and TAL1 expression and support the
notion that this proto-oncogene participates in generation of adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma by increasing the amount of the Tax oncoprotein but also
possibly by its own transforming activities.

PMCID: PMC2519563
PMID: 18495761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2007 Apr;137-140(1-12):703-10. doi:
10.1007/s12010-007-9090-y.

Comparison of multiple gene assembly methods for metabolic engineering.

Lu C(1), Mansoorabadi K, Jeffries T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

A universal, rapid DNA assembly method for efficient multigene plasmid
construction is important for biological research and for optimizing gene
expression in industrial microbes. Three different approaches to achieve this
goal were evaluated. These included creating long complementary extensions using 
a uracil-DNA glycosylase technique, overlap extension polymerase chain reaction, 
and a SfiI-based ligation method. SfiI ligation was the only successful approach 
for assembling large DNA fragments that contained repeated homologous regions. In
addition, the SfiI method has been improved over a similar, previous published
technique so that it is more flexible and does not require polymerase chain
reaction to incorporate adaptors. In the present study, Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
genes TAL1, TKL1, and PYK1 under control of the 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase 
promoter were successfully ligated together using multiple unique SfiI
restriction sites. The desired construct was obtained 65% of the time during
vector construction using four-piece ligations. The SfiI method consists of three
steps: first a SfiI linker vector is constructed, whose multiple cloning site is 
flanked by two three-base linkers matching the neighboring SfiI linkers on SfiI
digestion; second, the linkers are attached to the desired genes by cloning them 
into SfiI linker vectors; third, the genes flanked by the three-base linkers, are
released by SfiI digestion. In the final step, genes of interest are joined
together in a simple one-step ligation.

PMID: 18478427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2008 Jan-Mar;9(1):127-30.

Does TAL-1 deletion contribute to the high incidence of T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia in South Indian patients?

Sudhakar N(1), Nirmala K, Rajalekshmy KR, Rajkumar T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute WIA, Chennai 600036, Tamil 
Nadu, India. nsudha79@rediffmail.com

BACKGROUND: The incidence of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) in South
India is very high (43.1%) when compared to the Western countries (10-20%). TAL-1
deletion is the most common genetic abnormality in T-ALL.
OBJECTIVES: The present study was aimed to detect the incidence of type 1 and
type 2 TAL-1 deletions and assess whether they might contribute to the high
incidence of T-ALL in South India.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 45 cases of T-ALL (pediatric-32, adolescents-7 and young
adults-6) were studied by DNA-PCR and sequencing. Age of the patients ranged from
3 yrs to 29 yrs (median age 14 yrs).
RESULTS: TAL-1 deletion type 1 was detected in 6 (13.3%) cases (3 pediatric and 3
adolescents) and all were males. TAL-1 deletion type 2 was not present. Comparing
the clinical features and immunological marker analysis of TAL-1 deletion
positive and negative cases did not show any significant differences except in
the WBC count, which was significantly higher in cases showing TAL-1 deletion
(>100 x 109/L, p value= 0.003). All the positive cases of TAL-1 deletion were
confirmed by sequencing, the results showing that the fusion region at SIL gene
and TAL-1 gene contained an average 'N region' insertion of 7.8 nucleotides. The 
numbers of nucleotides deleted at the 5' end and 3' end of TAL-1 gene were
averages of 3 and 1, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Though the incidence of T-ALL is high in South India, the frequency
of TAL-1 deletion and their fusion gene sequences are not unique and are similar 
to those reported in other ethnic and geographic populations. Hence the present
study indicates that TAL-1 deletion alone does not contribute to the high
incidence of T-ALL in South Indian patients.

PMID: 18439091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Stem Cells. 2008 Jun;26(6):1658-62. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0952. Epub 2008
Apr 24.

Impairment of granulo-monocytic development of human common myeloid progenitors
but not of granulo-monocytic progenitors by decreasing stem cell leukemia/T-cell 
acute leukemia 1 expression.

Brunet de la Grange P, Zink E, Armstrong F, Rouyez MC, Pflumio F.

We recently showed that Stem Cell Leukemia/T-cell Acute Leukemia 1 (SCL/TAL1)
regulates hematopoiesis from hematopoietic stem cells to committed myeloid
progenitors compartment. However, in this heterogeneous compartment, the precise 
role of TAL1, that is largely debated, remains to be clearly defined, notably at 
the common myeloid progenitor (CMP) and granulo-monocytic progenitor (GMP)
levels. Using small hairpin (sh)RNA lentiviral constructs, we decreased TAL1
expression in sorted human CMP and GMP subpopulations that were then assayed for 
erythroid and granulo-monocytic (GM) differentiation. Decreased TAL1 expression
in CMP resulted in rare erythroid colonies, in a 2-3 fold reduction of GM colony 
number in clonogenic assays and in a 3.6-5.6 decreased production of
CD14(+)CD15(+) GM cells in liquid culture. Moreover, analysis of transcript
profile of gene involved in GM differentiation showed that GM cells expressing
shRNA-TAL1 construct displayed decreased levels of g-csfr, c/ebpalpha, and mpo
and high levels of gata-2 transcripts, indicating a blocking of GM
differentiation. In contrast, GM differentiation of GMP remained unaffected when 
TAL1 transcript levels were decreased. These data definitively delineate the
human myeloid progenitors that are regulated by TAL1. Disclosure of potential
conflicts of interest is found at the end of this article.

PMID: 18436863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Circ Res. 2008 May 9;102(9):1057-64. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.163907. Epub
2008 Apr 3.

An acyltransferase controls the generation of hematopoietic and endothelial
lineages in zebrafish.

Xiong JW(1), Yu Q, Zhang J, Mably JD.

Author information: 
(1)The Nephrology Division, Massachusetts General Hospital-East, Harvard Medical 
School, 149 13th St, Room 8216, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.
Xiong@cvrc.mgh.harvard.edu

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 May 9;102(9):1005-7.

Hematopoietic and endothelial cells develop from a common progenitor, the
hemangioblast, or directly from mesodermal cells. The molecular pathway that
regulates the specification of both cell lineages remains elusive. Here, we show 
that a lysocardiolipin acyltransferase, lycat, is critical for the establishment 
of both hematopoietic and endothelial lineages. We isolated lycat from the
deletion interval of cloche, a zebrafish mutant that has dramatically reduced
hematopoietic and endothelial cell lineages. Reduction of lycat mRNA levels in
wild-type zebrafish embryos decreases both endothelial and hematopoietic
lineages. Lycat mRNA rescues blood lineages in zebrafish cloche mutant embryos.
E165R and G166L mutations in the highly conserved catalytic domain in lycat
abolish its function in zebrafish hematopoiesis. Epistasis analysis supports that
lycat acts upstream of scl and etsrp in zebrafish hemangioblast development.
These data indicate that lycat is the earliest known player in the generation of 
both endothelial and hematopoietic lineages.

PMCID: PMC2405954
PMID: 18388326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Development. 2008 Apr;135(8):1525-35. doi: 10.1242/dev.011767. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

The stepwise specification of embryonic stem cells to hematopoietic fate is
driven by sequential exposure to Bmp4, activin A, bFGF and VEGF.

Pearson S(1), Sroczynska P, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester
University, Wilmslow Road, M20 4BX, Manchester, UK.

The differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells offers a powerful approach to
study mechanisms implicated in cell fate decision. A major hurdle, however, is to
promote the directed and efficient differentiation of ES cells toward a specific 
lineage. Here, we define in serum-free media the minimal factor requirement
controlling each step of the differentiation process, resulting in the production
of highly enriched hematopoietic progenitors. Four factors - Bmp4, activin A,
bFGF (Fgf2) and VEGF (VegfA) - are sufficient to drive the selective and
efficient differentiation of mouse ES cells to hematopoiesis. Each of these
factors appears to regulate a step of the process: Bmp4 promotes the very
efficient formation of mesoderm; bFGF and activin A induce the differentiation of
these mesodermal precursors to the hemangioblast fate; and VEGF is required for
the production of fully committed hematopoietic progenitors. The stimulation of
mesodermal precursors by bFGF and activin A switches on very rapidly the
hematopoietic program, allowing us to dissect the molecular events leading to the
formation of the hemangioblast. Runx1, Scl (Tal1) and Hhex expression is
upregulated within 3 hours of stimulation, whereas upregulation of Lmo2 and Fli1 
is observed later. Interestingly, increased expression levels of genes such as
cMyb, Pu.1 (Sfpi1), Gata1 and Gata2 are not observed at the onset of
hemangioblast commitment. This stepwise control of differentiation is extremely
efficient, giving rise to a very high frequency of hematopoietic precursors, and 
provides an optimal system for understanding the molecular machineries involved
in blood progenitor commitment.

PMID: 18339678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Blood. 2008 May 1;111(9):4500-10. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-09-110569. Epub 2008
Feb 12.

Interplay among Etsrp/ER71, Scl, and Alk8 signaling controls endothelial and
myeloid cell formation.

Sumanas S(1), Gomez G, Zhao Y, Park C, Choi K, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, USA. saulius.sumanas@cchmc.org

Vascular endothelial and myeloid cells have been proposed to originate from a
common precursor cell, the hemangioblast. The mechanism of endothelial and
myeloid cell specification and differentiation is poorly understood. We have
previously described the endothelial-specific zebrafish Ets1-related protein
(Etsrp), which was both necessary and sufficient to initiate vasculogenesis in
the zebrafish embryos. Here we identify human Etv2/ER71 and mouse ER71 proteins
as functional orthologs of Etsrp. Overexpression of mouse ER71 and Etsrp caused
strong expansion of hemangioblast and vascular endothelial lineages in a
zebrafish embryo. In addition, we show that etsrp is also required for the
formation of myeloid but not erythroid cells. In the absence of etsrp function,
the number of granulocytes and macrophages is greatly reduced. Etsrp
overexpression causes expansion of both myeloid and vascular endothelial
lineages. Analysis of mosaic embryos indicates that etsrp functions cell
autonomously in inducing myeloid lineage. We further demonstrate that the choice 
of endothelial versus myeloid fate depends on a combinatorial effect of etsrp,
scl, and alk8 genes.

PMCID: PMC2343590
PMID: 18270322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Exp Hematol. 2008 Apr;36(4):424-32. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2007.11.015. Epub 2008 
Feb 4.

Combinatorial regulation of novel erythroid gene expression in zebrafish.

Galloway JL(1), Wingert RA, Thisse C, Thisse B, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital
Boston and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Mass., USA.

OBJECTIVE: The specification and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells into
red blood cells requires precise coordination by multiple transcription factors. 
Most genes important for erythroid maturation are regulated by the Gata family of
DNA-binding proteins. Previously, we identified three novel genes kelch-repeat
containing protein (krcp), kiaa0650, and testhymin/glucocorticoid inducible
transcript 1 (glcci1) to be expressed in erythroid cells in a Gata-independent
manner, and we sought to further understand how these transcripts are regulated
during zebrafish hematopoiesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We employed a loss-of-function approach, using
combinations of antisense morpholinos to hematopoietic transcription factors and 
assayed for changes in gene expression in zebrafish embryos.
RESULTS: Upon examination of embryos deficient for Gata1, Gata2, Biklf, and/or
Scl, we found distinct gene combinations were required for expression of the
novel genes. While krcp expression was dependent upon Gata1 and Biklf, kiaa0650
expression was greatly reduced and glcci1 was maintained in
Gata1/Gata2/Biklf-deficient embryos. As with the gata1 gene, kiaa0650 and krcp
required Scl for blood expression. Although reduced, glcci1 was expressed in
posterior blood precursors in the absence of Scl and Gata2.
CONCLUSIONS: This work identifies glcci1 as having Scl-independent expression in 
the posterior hematopoietic mesoderm, suggesting that its posterior expression is
activated by factors upstream or parallel to Scl and Gata2. Additionally, these
studies establish that blood gene expression programs are regulated by
transcription factors acting in combination during erythroid maturation.

PMCID: PMC2390894
PMID: 18243489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Dev Dyn. 2008 Feb;237(2):436-46. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21426.

Identification of erythroid-enriched gene expression in the mouse embryonic yolk 
sac using microdissected cells.

Redmond LC(1), Dumur CI, Archer KJ, Haar JL, Lloyd JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond,
Virginia 23298-0035, USA.

Little is known about the genes that control the embryonic erythroid program.
Laser capture microdissection was used to isolate primitive erythroid precursors 
and epithelial cells from frozen sections of the embryonic day 9.5 yolk sac. The 
RNA samples were amplified and labeled for hybridization to Affymetrix GeneChip
Mouse Genome 430A 2.0 arrays. Ninety-one genes are expressed significantly higher
in erythroid than in epithelial cells. Ingenuity pathway analysis indicates that 
many of these erythroid-enriched genes cluster in highly significant biological
networks. One of these networks contains RBTN2/LMO2, SCL/TAL1, and EKLF/KLF1,
three of the very few genes required for primitive erythropoiesis. Quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to verify that platelet factor 4,
reelin, thrombospondin-1, and muscleblind-like 1 mRNA is erythroid-enriched.
These genes have established roles in development or differentiation in other
systems, and are, therefore, good candidates for regulating primitive
erythropoiesis. These results provide a catalog of genes expressed during
primitive erythropoiesis.

PMID: 18213587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 14;283(11):6717-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710301200. Epub 2008 
Jan 9.

V(D)J recombinase binding and cleavage of cryptic recombination signal sequences 
identified from lymphoid malignancies.

Zhang M(1), Swanson PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68178, USA.

V(D)J recombination is a process integral to lymphocyte development. However,
this process is not always benign, since certain lymphoid malignancies exhibit
recurrent chromosomal abnormalities, such as translocations and deletions, that
harbor molecular signatures suggesting an origin from aberrant V(D)J
recombination. Translocations involving LMO2, TAL1, Ttg-1, and Hox11, as well as 
a recurrent interstitial deletion at 1p32 involving SIL/SCL, are cited examples
of illegitimate V(D)J recombination. Previous studies using extrachromosomal
substrates reveal that cryptic recombination signal sequences (cRSSs) identified 
near the translocation breakpoint in these examples support V(D)J recombination
with efficiencies ranging from about 30- to 20,000-fold less than bona fide V(D)J
recombination signals. To understand the molecular basis for these large
differences, we investigated the binding and cleavage of these cRSSs by the
RAG1/2 proteins that initiate V(D)J recombination. We find that the RAG proteins 
comparably bind all cRSSs tested, albeit more poorly than a consensus RSS. We
show that four cRSSs that support levels of V(D)J recombination above background 
levels in cell culture (LMO2, TAL1, Ttg-1, and SIL) are also cleaved by the RAG
proteins in vitro with efficiencies ranging from 18 to 70% of a consensus RSS.
Cleavage of LMO2 and Ttg-1 by the RAG proteins can also be detected in cell
culture using ligation-mediated PCR. In contrast, Hox11 and SCL are nicked but
not cleaved efficiently in vitro, and cleavage at other adventitious sites in
plasmid substrates may also limit the ability to detect recombination activity at
these cRSSs in cell culture.

PMID: 18187418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Blood. 2008 Mar 15;111(6):3005-14. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-07-098830. Epub 2008
Jan 9.

Runx genes are direct targets of Scl/Tal1 in the yolk sac and fetal liver.

Landry JR(1), Kinston S, Knezevic K, de Bruijn MF, Wilson N, Nottingham WT, Peitz
M, Edenhofer F, Pimanda JE, Ottersbach K, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Transcription factors such as Scl/Tal1, Lmo2, and Runx1 are essential for the
development of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). However, the precise mechanisms
by which these factors interact to form transcriptional networks, as well as the 
identity of the genes downstream of these regulatory cascades, remain largely
unknown. To this end, we generated an Scl(-/-) yolk sac cell line to identify
candidate Scl target genes by global expression profiling after reintroduction of
a TAT-Scl fusion protein. Bioinformatics analysis resulted in the identification 
of 9 candidate Scl target transcription factor genes, including Runx1 and Runx3. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed that both Runx genes are direct targets
of Scl in the fetal liver and that Runx1 is also occupied by Scl in the yolk sac.
Furthermore, binding of an Scl-Lmo2-Gata2 complex was demonstrated to occur on
the regions flanking the conserved E-boxes of the Runx1 loci and was shown to
transactivate the Runx1 element. Together, our data provide a key component of
the transcriptional network of early hematopoiesis by identifying downstream
targets of Scl that can explain key aspects of the early Scl(-/-) phenotype.

PMID: 18184866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Mar;1783(3):503-17. Epub 2007 Dec 7.

Lyl1 interacts with CREB1 and alters expression of CREB1 target genes.

San-Marina S(1), Han Y, Suarez Saiz F, Trus MR, Minden MD.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess Margaret Hospital, 610 University Avenue
9-111, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 2M9.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor family contains key
regulators of cellular proliferation and differentiation as well as the suspected
oncoproteins Tal1 and Lyl1. Tal1 and Lyl1 are aberrantly over-expressed in
leukemia as a result of chromosomal translocations, or other genetic or
epigenetic events. Protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions described so far 
are mediated by their highly homologous bHLH domains, while little is known about
the function of other protein domains. Hetero-dimers of Tal1 and Lyl1 with E2A or
HEB, decrease the rate of E2A or HEB homo-dimer formation and are poor activators
of transcription. In vitro, these hetero-dimers also recognize different binding 
sites from homo-dimer complexes, which may also lead to inappropriate activation 
or repression of promoters in vivo. Both mechanisms are thought to contribute to 
the oncogenic potential of Tal1 and Lyl1. Despite their bHLH structural
similarity, accumulating evidence suggests that Tal1 and Lyl1 target different
genes. This raises the possibility that domains flanking the bHLH region, which
are distinct in the two proteins, may participate in target recognition. Here we 
report that CREB1, a widely-expressed transcription factor and a suspected
oncogene in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) was identified as a binding partner 
for Lyl1 but not for Tal1. The interaction between Lyl1 and CREB1 involves the N 
terminal domain of Lyl1 and the Q2 and KID domains of CREB1. The histone
acetyl-transferases p300 and CBP are recruited to these complexes in the absence 
of CREB1 Ser 133 phosphorylation. In the Id1 promoter, Lyl1 complexes direct
transcriptional activation. We also found that in addition to Id1, over-expressed
Lyl1 can activate other CREB1 target promoters such as Id3, cyclin D3, Brca1,
Btg2 and Egr1. Moreover, approximately 50% of all gene promoters identified by
ChIP-chip experiments were jointly occupied by CREB1 and Lyl1, further
strengthening the association of Lyl1 with Cre binding sites. Given the newly
recognized importance of CREB1 in AML, the ability of Lyl1 to modulate promoter
responses to CREB1 suggests that it plays a role in the malignant phenotype by
occupying different promoters than Tal1.

PMID: 18160048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Development. 2008 Jan;135(2):401-10.

AML1-ETO reprograms hematopoietic cell fate by downregulating scl expression.

Yeh JR(1), Munson KM, Chao YL, Peterson QP, Macrae CA, Peterson RT.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Laboratory, Cardiovascular Research Center,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. jyeh1@partners.org

AML1-ETO is one of the most common chromosomal translocation products associated 
with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). Patients carrying the AML1-ETO fusion gene
exhibit an accumulation of granulocyte precursors in the bone marrow and the
blood. Here, we describe a transgenic zebrafish line that enables inducible
expression of the human AML1-ETO oncogene. Induced AML1-ETO expression in
embryonic zebrafish causes a phenotype that recapitulates some aspects of human
AML. Using this highly tractable model, we show that AML1-ETO redirects
myeloerythroid progenitor cells that are developmentally programmed to adopt the 
erythroid cell fate into the granulocytic cell fate. This fate change is
characterized by a loss of gata1 expression and an increase in pu.1 expression in
myeloerythroid progenitor cells. Moreover, we identify scl as an early and
essential mediator of the effect of AML1-ETO on hematopoietic cell fate. AML1-ETO
quickly shuts off scl expression, and restoration of scl expression rescues the
effects of AML1-ETO on myeloerythroid progenitor cell fate. These results
demonstrate that scl is an important mediator of the ability of AML1-ETO to
reprogram hematopoietic cell fate decisions, suggesting that scl may be an
important contributor to AML1-ETO-associated leukemia. In addition, treatment of 
AML1-ETO transgenic zebrafish embryos with a histone deacetylase inhibitor,
Trichostatin A, restores scl and gata1 expression, and ameliorates the
accumulation of granulocytic cells caused by AML1-ETO. Thus, this zebrafish model
facilitates in vivo dissection of AML1-ETO-mediated signaling, and will enable
large-scale chemical screens to identify suppressors of the in vivo effects of
AML1-ETO.

PMID: 18156164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Leukemia. 2008 Mar;22(3):521-9. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

The role of the proto-oncogene ETS2 in acute megakaryocytic leukemia biology and 
therapy.

Ge Y(1), LaFiura KM, Dombkowski AA, Chen Q, Payton SG, Buck SA, Salagrama S,
Diakiw AE, Matherly LH, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute,
Detroit, MI, USA.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in Down syndrome (DS) children has several unique
features including a predominance of the acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMkL)
phenotype, higher event-free survivals compared to non-DS children using cytosine
arabinoside (ara-C)/anthracycline-based protocols and a uniform presence of
somatic mutations in the X-linked transcription factor gene, GATA1. Several
chromosome 21-localized transcription factor oncogenes including ETS2 may
contribute to the unique features of DS AMkL. ETS2 transcripts measured by
real-time RT-PCR were 1.8- and 4.1-fold, respectively, higher in DS and non-DS
megakaryoblasts than those in non-DS myeloblasts. In a doxycycline-inducible
erythroleukemia cell line, K562pTet-on/ETS2, induction of ETS2 resulted in an
erythroid to megakaryocytic phenotypic switch independent of GATA1 levels.
Microarray analysis of doxycycline-induced and doxycycline-uninduced cells
revealed an upregulation by ETS2 of cytokines (for example, interleukin 1 and
CSF2) and transcription factors (for example, TAL1), which are key regulators of 
megakaryocytic differentiation. In the K562pTet-on/ETS2 cells, ETS2 induction
conferred differences in sensitivities to ara-C and daunorubicin, depending on
GATA1 levels. These results suggest that ETS2 expression is linked to the biology
of AMkL in both DS and non-DS children, and that ETS2 acts by regulating
expression of hematopoietic lineage and transcription factor genes involved in
erythropoiesis and megakaryopoiesis, and in chemotherapy sensitivities.

PMCID: PMC3809919
PMID: 18094719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Cell. 2007 Dec 14;28(5):810-22.

A positive role for NLI/Ldb1 in long-range beta-globin locus control region
function.

Song SH(1), Hou C, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Long-range interactions between distant regulatory elements, such as enhancers,
and their target genes underlie the specificity of gene expression in many
developmentally regulated gene families. NLI/Ldb1, a widely expressed nuclear
factor, is a potential mediator of long-range interactions. Here, we show that
NLI/Ldb1 and erythroid-binding partners GATA-1/SCL/LMO2 bind in vivo to the
beta-globin locus control region (LCR). The C-terminal LIM interaction domain of 
NLI is required for formation of the complex on chromatin. Loss of the LIM domain
converts NLI into a dominant-negative inhibitor of globin gene expression, and
knockdown of NLI by using shRNA results in failure to activate beta-globin
expression. Kinetic studies reveal that the NLI/GATA-1/SCL/LMO2 complex is
detected at the beta-globin promoter coincident with RNA Pol II recruitment,
beta-globin transcription, and chromatin loop formation during erythroid
differentiation, providing evidence that NLI facilitates long-range gene
activation.

PMCID: PMC2195932
PMID: 18082606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Sep;45(9):684-6.

[Classical and molecular cytogenetic abnormalities in 124 pediatric patients with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Chai YH(1), Lü H, Li JQ, Lu J, Xiao PF, He YX, Shao XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Soochow University Children's
Hospital, Suzhou 215003, China.

OBJECTIVE: In childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), cytogenetics plays an
important role in diagnosis, allocation of treatment and prognosis. On the basis 
of the conventional cytogenetic analysis, molecular methods have improved
pediatric hematologists/oncologist's ability to accurately and rapidly perform
risk-stratification on patients with childhood ALL during the last few years. The
aim of the present study was to assess the demography of cytogenetic
abnormalities in childhood ALL.
METHOD: The study subjects consisted of 124 newly diagnosed ALL patients younger 
than 16 years of age, who were diagnosed at the Department of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Soochow University Children's Hospital. The diagnosis and
FAB subtypes of ALL was determined by Wright-Giemsa-stained bone marrow smears
and cytochemical staining. Immunophenotyping of the bone marrow samples was
performed by flow cytometry. Multiplex polymerase chain reaction (Multiplex PCR) 
analysis was performed to detect the 29 most common leukemia translocations for
routine molecular diagnostic hematopathology practice, and complement the
information gained from conventional cytogenetic analysis.
RESULTS: Cytogenetic analysis was successful in 112 of 124 children with ALL.
Sixty-eight (60%) of them had clonal chromosomal abnormalities. Numerical
imbalances consisted of hyperdiploid (> 47 chromosomes, 36 cases), hypodiploid (<
46 chromosomes, 14 cases), pseudodiploidy (18 cases). Chromosomal translocations 
were observed in 13 patients by conventional cytogenetic analysis. Three cases
were found positive for 4; 11 translocation, 3 cases for 9; 22 translocation, 1
case for 1; 19 translocation and 6 cases for other rare translocations.
Multiplex-PCR analysis detected 116 of the 124 ALL patients. Thirteen cases of
TEL-AML1, 10 cases of rearrangement in the MLL gene, 4 cases of E2A-PBX1, 4 cases
of E2A-HLF, 3 cases of BCR-ABL, 2 cases of TLS-ERG, 32 cases of HOX11 were
detected by Multiplex PCR in B-lineage leukemias. SIL-TAL1 had been found in 4 of
7 of T-lineage leukemias.
CONCLUSIONS: Sixty-eight cases of ALL showed chromosomal aberrations. Multiplex
PCR positivity was detected in 59 (50%) of the 116 ALL patients studied.
Multiplex PCR combined with chromosomal analysis uncovered chromosomal
abnormalities in 95 of 124 (77%) of ALL patients and supplemented each other in
detecting chromosomal abnormalities.

PMID: 18021563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Dec 21;364(3):675-81. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

The Lim-only protein LMO2 acts as a positive regulator of erythroid
differentiation.

Hansson A(1), Zetterblad J, van Duren C, Axelson H, Jönsson JI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
Linköping University, SE-581 85 Linköping, Sweden.

LMO2, a member of the LIM-only protein family, is essential for the regulation of
hematopoietic stem cells and formation of erythroid cells. It is found in a
transcriptional complex comprising LMO2, TAL1, E47, GATA-1, and LDB1 which
regulates erythroid genes. While TAL1 has been shown to induce erythroid
differentiation, LMO2 appears to suppress fetal erythropoiesis. In addition to
LMO2, the closely related LMO4 gene is expressed in hematopoietic cells, but has 
unknown functions. Here we demonstrate that LMO2 and LMO4 are expressed at the
same level in erythroid colonies from mouse bone marrow, implying a function in
erythroid differentiation. However, while LMO2 induced erythroid differentiation,
LMO4 had no such effect. Interestingly, both LMO2 and TAL1 were able to partially
suppress myeloid differentiation, implying that they activate erythroid
differentiation in uncommitted bone marrow progenitors. Both LMO2 and LMO4
interacted strongly to LDB1, which was required for their localization to the
nucleus.

PMID: 17964543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Nov 6;104(45):17692-7. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Gata2, Fli1, and Scl form a recursively wired gene-regulatory circuit during
early hematopoietic development.

Pimanda JE(1), Ottersbach K, Knezevic K, Kinston S, Chan WY, Wilson NK, Landry
JR, Wood AD, Kolb-Kokocinski A, Green AR, Tannahill D, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V,
Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XY, United Kingdom. jpimanda@unsw.edu.au

Conservation of the vertebrate body plan has been attributed to the evolutionary 
stability of gene-regulatory networks (GRNs). We describe a regulatory circuit
made up of Gata2, Fli1, and Scl/Tal1 and their enhancers, Gata2-3, Fli1+12, and
Scl+19, that operates during specification of hematopoiesis in the mouse embryo. 
We show that the Fli1+12 enhancer, like the Gata2-3 and Scl+19 enhancers, targets
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and relies on a combination of Ets, Gata, and
E-Box motifs. We show that the Gata2-3 enhancer also uses a similar cluster of
motifs and that Gata2, Fli1, and Scl are expressed in embryonic day-11.5 dorsal
aorta where HSCs originate and in fetal liver where they multiply. The three HSC 
enhancers in these tissues and in ES cell-derived hemangioblast equivalents are
bound by each of these transcription factors (TFs) and form a fully connected
triad that constitutes a previously undescribed example of both this network
motif in mammalian development and a GRN kernel operating during the
specification of a mammalian stem cell.

PMCID: PMC2077040
PMID: 17962413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 11;283(2):684-92. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Ubiquitination and degradation of Tal1/SCL are induced by notch signaling and
depend on Skp2 and CHIP.

Nie L(1), Wu H, Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

Notch signaling controls diverse eukaryotic differentiation processes in multiple
cell types, thus demanding versatile tools with which Notch triggers downstream
events. Ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis has previously been shown to be one such
tool with which Notch regulates the turnover of the basic helix-loophelix
transcription factor, E47. Here, we show that Notch signaling also accelerated
the degradation of Tal1/SCL (T cell acute leukemia 1/stem cell leukemia) protein,
a basic helix-loop-helix protein involved in the development of hematopoietic,
vascular, and neuronal tissues. Notch-induced Tal1/SCL degradation was mediated
by ubiquitination and proteasomes. The sequence responsible for Tal1 degradation 
was localized to a region in the C terminus of Tal1, which is evolutionarily
conserved, thus suggesting a functional significance. Analogous to the situation 
for E47, Notch-induced Tal1/SCL degradation not only required Skp2, a
substrate-binding subunit of SCF ubiquitin ligase complexes, but also relied on
CHIP, a chaperone-binding protein with a ubiquitin ligase activity. In contrast
to the fact that the N-terminal tetratricopeptide region (TPR) domain of CHIP is 
necessary and sufficient for E47 ubiquitination and degradation, CHIP promoted
Tal1 degradation with both chaperone binding and ubiquitin ligase activities,
which are mediated by its TPR domain and U box, respectively. Although the TPR
domain was not involved in Tal1/SCL binding, it was required for enhancing its
degradation. Likewise, the ubiquitin ligase activity of CHIP was dispensable for 
Tal1/SCL binding but essential for degradation. These findings provide both novel
mechanistic insights into the operation of cullin-based ubiquitin ligase
complexes and potential means by which Notch and Tal1/SCL regulate eukaryotic
development.

PMID: 17962192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Oncogene. 2007 Oct 15;26(47):6838-49.

Mechanisms of transcription factor deregulation in lymphoid cell transformation.

O'Neil J(1), Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The most frequent targets of genetic alterations in human lymphoid leukemias are 
transcription factor genes with essential functions in blood cell development.
TAL1, LYL1, HOX11 and other transcription factors essential for normal
hematopoiesis are often misexpressed in the thymus in T-cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia (T-ALL), leading to differentiation arrest and cell transformation.
Recent advances in the ability to assess DNA copy number have led to the
discovery that the MYB transcription factor oncogene is tandemly duplicated in
T-ALL. The NOTCH1 gene, which is essential for key embryonic cell-fate decisions 
in multicellular organisms, was found to be activated by mutation in a large
percentage of T-ALL patients. The gene encoding the FBW7 protein ubiquitin
ligase, which regulates the turnover of the intracellular form of NOTCH (ICN), is
also mutated in T-ALL, resulting in stabilization of the ICN and activation of
the NOTCH signaling pathway. In mature B-lineage ALL and Burkitt lymphoma, the
MYC transcription factor oncogene is overexpressed due to translocation into the 
IG locus. PAX5, a transcription factor essential for B-lineage commitment, is
inactivated in 32% of cases of B-progenitor ALL. Translocations resulting in
oncogenic fusion transcription factors also occur frequently in this form of ALL.
The most frequent transcription factor chimeric fusion, TEL-AML1, is an
initiating event in B-progenitor ALL that acts by repressing transcription.
Therefore, deregulated transcription and its consequent effects on key
developmental pathways play a major role in the molecular pathogenesis of
lymphoid malignancy. Once the full complement of cooperating mutations in
transformed B- and T-progenitor cells is known, and the deregulated downstream
pathways have been elucidated, it will be possible to identify vulnerable
components and to target them with small-molecule inhibitors.

PMID: 17934490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Leukemia. 2008 Jan;22(1):124-31. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

Prognostic significance of molecular-cytogenetic abnormalities in pediatric T-ALL
is not explained by immunophenotypic differences.

van Grotel M(1), Meijerink JP, van Wering ER, Langerak AW, Beverloo HB,
Buijs-Gladdines JG, Burger NB, Passier M, van Lieshout EM, Kamps WA, Veerman AJ, 
van Noesel MM, Pieters R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus University Medical
Center-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is characterized by
chromosomal rearrangements possibly enforcing arrest at specific development
stages. We studied the relationship between molecular-cytogenetic abnormalities
and T-cell development stage to investigate whether arrest at specific stages can
explain the prognostic significance of specific abnormalities. We extensively
studied 72 pediatric T-ALL cases for genetic abnormalities and expression of
transcription factors, NOTCH1 mutations and expression of specific CD markers.
HOX11 cases were CD1 positive consistent with a cortical stage, but as 4/5 cases 
lacked cytoplasmatic-beta expression, developmental arrest may precede
beta-selection. HOX11L2 was especially confined to immature and pre-AB
developmental stages, but 3/17 HOX11L2 mature cases were restricted to the
gammadelta-lineage. TAL1 rearrangements were restricted to the alphabeta-lineage 
with most cases being TCR-alphabeta positive. NOTCH1 mutations were present in
all molecular-cytogenetic subgroups without restriction to a specific
developmental stage. CALM-AF10 was associated with early relapse. TAL1 or HOX11L2
rearrangements were associated with trends to good and poor outcomes,
respectively. Also cases with high vs low TAL1 expression levels demonstrated a
trend toward good outcome. Most cases with lower TAL1 levels were HOX11L2 or
CALM-AF10 positive. NOTCH1 mutations did not predict for outcome. Classification 
into T-cell developmental subgroups was not predictive for outcome.

PMID: 17928886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Proteins. 2008 Mar;70(4):1461-74.

Assembly of the oncogenic DNA-binding complex LMO2-Ldb1-TAL1-E12.

Ryan DP(1), Duncan JL, Lee C, Kuchel PW, Matthews JM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University of Sydney, Sydney,
New South Wales 2006, Australia.

The nuclear proteins TAL1 (T-cell acute leukaemia protein 1) and LMO2 (LIM-only
protein 2) have critical roles in haematopoietic development, but are also often 
aberrantly activated in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. TAL1 and LMO2
operate within multifactorial protein-DNA complexes that regulate gene expression
in the developing blood cell. TAL1 is a tissue-specific basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) protein that binds bHLH domains of ubiquitous E-proteins, (E12 and E47),
to bind E-box (CANNTG) DNA motifs. TAL1(bHLH) also interacts specifically with
the LIM domains of LMO2, which in turn bind Ldb1 (LIM-domain binding protein 1). 
Here we used biophysical methods to characterize the assembly of a five-component
complex containing TAL1, LMO2, Ldb1, E12, and DNA. The bHLH domains of TAL1 and
E12 alone primarily formed helical homodimers, but together preferentially formed
heterodimers, to which LMO2 bound with high affinity (K(A) approximately 10(8)
M(-1)). The resulting TAL1/E12/LMO2 complex formed in the presence or absence of 
DNA, but the different complexes preferentially bound different Ebox-sequences.
Our data provide biophysical evidence for a mechanism, by which LMO2 and TAL1
both regulate transcription in normal blood cell development, and synergistically
disrupt E2A function in T-cells to promote the onset of leukaemia.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17910069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Blood. 2008 Jan 1;111(1):376-8. Epub 2007 Sep 27.

NOTCH1 mutation can be an early, prenatal genetic event in T-ALL.

Eguchi-Ishimae M(1), Eguchi M, Kempski H, Greaves M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Haemato-Oncology, Institute of Cancer Research, London.

NOTCH1 mutations are common in T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL).
Twin studies and retrospective screening of neonatal blood spots provide evidence
that fusion genes and other chromosomal abnormalities associated with pediatric
leukemias can originate prenatally. Whether this is also the case for NOTCH1
mutations is unknown. Eleven cases of T-ALL were screened for NOTCH1 mutations
and 4 (36%) had mutations in either the heterodimerization (HD) or proline
glutamic acid/serine/threonine (PEST) domains. Of these 4, 3 could be amplified
by mutation-specific polymerase chain reaction primers. In one of these 3, with
the highest sensitivity, NOTCH1 mutation was detected in neonatal blood spots. In
this patient, the blood spot was negative for SIL-TAL1 fusion, present
concomitant with NOTCH1 mutation, in the diagnostic sample. We conclude that
NOTCH1 can be an early or initiating event in T-ALL arising prenatally, to be
complemented by a postnatal SIL-TAL1 fusion.

PMID: 17901244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Leukemia. 2008 Jan;22(1):103-13. Epub 2007 Sep 27.

Organ-injury-induced reactivation of hemangioblastic precursor cells.

Dekel B(1), Metsuyanim S, Garcia AM, Quintero C, Sanchez MJ, Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Laboratory of Regenerative Nephrology, Edmond and
Lili Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
benjamin.dekel@sheba.health.gov.il

Early in mammalian development, the stem cell leukemia (SCL/TAL1) gene and its
distinct 3' enhancer (SCL 3'En) specify bipotential progenitor cells that give
rise to blood and endothelium, thus termed hemangioblasts. We have previously
detected a minor population of SCL (+) cells in the postnatal kidney. Here, we
demonstrate that cells expressing the SCL 3'En in the adult kidney are comprised 
of CD45+CD31- hematopoietic cells, CD45-CD31+ endothelial cells and CD45-CD31-
interstitial cells. Creation of bone marrow chimeras of SCL 3'En transgenic mice 
into wild-type hosts shows that all three types of SCL 3'En-expressing cells in
the adult kidney can originate from the bone marrow. Ischemia/reperfusion injury 
to the adult kidney of SCL 3'En transgenic mice results in the intrarenal
elevation of SCL and FLK1 mRNA levels and of cells expressing hem-endothelial
progenitor markers (CD45, CD34, c-Kit and FLK1). Furthermore, analysis of SCL
3'En in the ischemic kidneys reveals an increase in the abundance of SCL
3'En-expressing cells, predominantly within the CD45 (+) hematopoietic fraction
and to a lesser extent in the CD45 (-) fraction. Our results suggest
organ-injury-induced reactivation of bone marrow-derived hemangioblasts and
possible local angioblastic progenitors expressing SCL and SCL 3'En.

PMID: 17898790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 16;282(46):33649-58. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Protein stability and transcription factor complex assembly determined by the
SCL-LMO2 interaction.

Lécuyer E(1), Larivière S, Sincennes MC, Haman A, Lahlil R, Todorova M, Tremblay 
M, Wilkes BC, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Immunologie et Cancérologie, Department of Molecular 
Biology, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 2J7, Canada.

Gene expression programs are established by networks of interacting transcription
factors. The basic helix-loop-helix factor SCL and the LIM-only protein LMO2 are 
components of transcription factor complexes that are essential for
hematopoiesis. Here we show that LMO2 and SCL are predominant interaction
partners in hematopoietic cells and that this interaction occurs through a
conserved interface residing in the loop and helix 2 of SCL. This interaction
nucleates the assembly of SCL complexes on DNA and is required for target gene
induction and for the stimulation of erythroid and megakaryocytic
differentiation. We also demonstrate that SCL determines LMO2 protein levels in
hematopoietic cells and reveal that interaction with SCL prevents LMO2
degradation by the proteasome. We propose that the SCL-LMO2 interaction couples
protein stabilization with higher order protein complex assembly, thus providing 
a powerful means of modulating the stoichiometry and spatiotemporal activity of
SCL complexes. This interaction likely provides a rate-limiting step in the
transcriptional control of hematopoiesis and leukemia, and similar mechanisms may
operate to control the assembly of diverse protein modules.

PMID: 17878155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Blood. 2007 Dec 15;110(13):4188-97. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Runx1-mediated hematopoietic stem-cell emergence is controlled by a
Gata/Ets/SCL-regulated enhancer.

Nottingham WT(1), Jarratt A, Burgess M, Speck CL, Cheng JF, Prabhakar S, Rubin
EM, Li PS, Sloane-Stanley J, Kong-A-San J, de Bruijn MF.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall
Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

The transcription factor Runx1/AML1 is an important regulator of hematopoiesis
and is critically required for the generation of the first definitive
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the major vasculature of the mouse embryo. As 
a pivotal factor in HSC ontogeny, its transcriptional regulation is of high
interest but is largely undefined. In this study, we used a combination of
comparative genomics and chromatin analysis to identify a highly conserved 531-bp
enhancer located at position + 23.5 in the first intron of the 224-kb mouse Runx1
gene. We show that this enhancer contributes to the early hematopoietic
expression of Runx1. Transcription factor binding in vivo and analysis of the
mutated enhancer in transient transgenic mouse embryos implicate Gata2 and Ets
proteins as critical factors for its function. We also show that the
SCL/Lmo2/Ldb-1 complex is recruited to the enhancer in vivo. Importantly,
transplantation experiments demonstrate that the intronic Runx1 enhancer targets 
all definitive HSCs in the mouse embryo, suggesting that it functions as a
crucial cis-regulatory element that integrates the Gata, Ets, and SCL
transcriptional networks to initiate HSC generation.

PMCID: PMC2234795
PMID: 17823307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Blood. 2007 Dec 1;110(12):3881-90. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Smad1 and Smad5 differentially regulate embryonic hematopoiesis.

McReynolds LJ(1), Gupta S, Figueroa ME, Mullins MC, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathway regulates multiple steps
of hematopoiesis, mediated through receptor-regulated Smads, including Smad1 and 
Smad5. Here, we use loss-of-function approaches in zebrafish to compare the roles
of Smad1 and Smad5 during embryonic hematopoiesis. We show that knockdown of
Smad1 or Smad5 generates distinct and even opposite hematopoietic phenotypes.
Embryos depleted for Smad1 have an increased number of primitive erythrocytes,
but fail to produce mature embryonic macrophages. In contrast, Smad5-depleted
embryos are defective in primitive erythropoiesis, yet have normal numbers of
macrophages. Loss of either Smad1 or Smad5 causes a failure in the generation of 
definitive hematopoietic progenitors. To investigate the mechanism behind these
phenotypes, we used rescue experiments and found that Smad5 is unable to rescue
the Smad1 loss-of-function phenotype, indicating that the 2 highly related
proteins have inherently distinct activities. Microarray experiments revealed
that the 2 proteins redundantly regulate the key initiators of the
hemato-vascular program, including scl, lmo2, and gfi1. However, each also
regulates a remarkably distinct genetic program, with Smad5 uniquely regulating
the BMP signaling pathway itself. Our results suggest that specificity of BMP
signaling output, with respect to hematopoiesis, can be explained by differential
functions of Smad1 and Smad5.

PMCID: PMC2200801
PMID: 17761518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. PLoS Genet. 2007 Aug;3(8):e140. Epub 2007 Jul 9.

Early endocardial morphogenesis requires Scl/Tal1.

Bussmann J(1), Bakkers J, Schulte-Merker S.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The primitive heart tube is composed of an outer myocardial and an inner
endocardial layer that will give rise to the cardiac valves and septa.
Specification and differentiation of these two cell layers are among the earliest
events in heart development, but the embryonic origins and genetic regulation of 
early endocardial development remain largely undefined. We have analyzed early
endocardial development in the zebrafish using time-lapse confocal microscopy and
show that the endocardium seems to originate from a region in the lateral plate
mesoderm that will give rise to hematopoietic cells of the primitive myeloid
lineage. Endocardial precursors appear to rapidly migrate to the site of heart
tube formation, where they arrive prior to the bilateral myocardial primordia.
Analysis of a newly discovered zebrafish Scl/Tal1 mutant showed an additional and
previously undescribed role of this transcription factor during the development
of the endocardium. In Scl/Tal1 mutant embryos, endocardial precursors are
specified, but migration is severely defective and endocardial cells aggregate at
the ventricular pole of the heart. We further show that the initial fusion of the
bilateral myocardial precursor populations occurs independently of the
endocardium and tal1 function. Our results suggest early separation of the two
components of the primitive heart tube and imply Scl/Tal1 as an indispensable
component of the molecular hierarchy that controls endocardium morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1950955
PMID: 17722983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;27(20):7206-19. Epub 2007 Aug 20.

The SCL +40 enhancer targets the midbrain together with primitive and definitive 
hematopoiesis and is regulated by SCL and GATA proteins.

Ogilvy S(1), Ferreira R, Piltz SG, Bowen JM, Göttgens B, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, United Kingdom.

The SCL/Tal-1 gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor with key
roles in hematopoietic and neural development. SCL is expressed in, and required 
for, both primitive and definitive erythropoiesis. Thus far, we have identified
only one erythroid SCL enhancer. Located 40 kb downstream of exon 1a, the +40
enhancer displays activity in primitive erythroblasts. We demonstrate here that a
3.7-kb fragment containing this element also targets expression to the midbrain, 
a known site of endogenous SCL expression. Although the 3.7-kb construct was
active in primitive, but not definitive, erythroblasts, a larger 5.0-kb fragment,
encompassing the 3.7-kb region, was active in both fetal and adult definitive
hematopoietic cells. This included Ter119+ erythroid cells along with fetal liver
erythroid and myeloid progenitors. Unlike two other SCL hematopoietic enhancers
(+18/19 and -4), +40 enhancer transgenes were inactive in the endothelium. A
conserved 400-bp core region, essential for both hematopoietic and midbrain +40
enhancer activity in embryos, relied on two GATA/E-box motifs and was bound in
vivo by GATA-1 and SCL in erythroid cells. These results suggest a model in which
the SCL +18/19 and/or -4 enhancers initiate SCL expression in early mesodermal
derivatives capable of generating blood and endothelium, with subsequent
activation of the +40 enhancer via an autoregulatory loop.

PMCID: PMC2168913
PMID: 17709394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Blood. 2007 Nov 15;110(10):3753-62. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

NOTCH1 pathway activation is an early hallmark of SCL T leukemogenesis.

Göthert JR(1), Brake RL, Smeets M, Dührsen U, Begley CG, Izon DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University Hospital, Essen,
Germany.joachim.goethert@uni-due.de

The acquired activation of stem cell leukemia (SCL) during T lymphopoiesis is a
common event in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Here, we generated
tamoxifen (TAM)-inducible transgenic mice (lck-ER(T2)-SCL) to study the
consequences of acquired SCL activation during T-cell development. Aberrant
activation of SCL in thymocytes resulted in the accumulation of immature
CD4(+)CD8(+) (double-positive, DP) cells by preventing normal surface expression 
of the T-cell receptor alphabeta (TCRalphabeta) complex. SCL-induced immature DP 
cells were further characterized by up-regulated NOTCH1 and generated noncycling 
polyclonal CD8(+)TCRbeta(low) cells. The prevalence of these cells was SCL
dependent because TAM withdrawal resulted in their disappearance. Furthermore, we
observed that SCL activation led to a dramatic up-regulation of NOTCH1 target
genes (Hes-1, Deltex1, and CD25) in thymocytes. Strikingly, NOTCH1 target gene
up-regulation was already observed after short-term SCL induction, implying that 
enhanced NOTCH signaling is mediated by SCL and is not dependent on secondary
genetic events. These data represent the basis for a novel pathway of SCL-induced
leukemogenesis and provide a functional link between SCL and NOTCH1 during this
process.

PMID: 17698635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2007 Oct;73(19):6072-7. Epub 2007 Aug 10.

Shuffling of promoters for multiple genes to optimize xylose fermentation in an
engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain.

Lu C(1), Jeffries T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706,
USA.

We describe here a useful metabolic engineering tool, multiple-gene-promoter
shuffling (MGPS), to optimize expression levels for multiple genes. This method
approaches an optimized gene overexpression level by fusing promoters of various 
strengths to genes of interest for a particular pathway. Selection of these
promoters is based on the expression levels of the native genes under the same
physiological conditions intended for the application. MGPS was implemented in a 
yeast xylose fermentation mixture by shuffling the promoters for GND2 and HXK2
with the genes for transaldolase (TAL1), transketolase (TKL1), and pyruvate
kinase (PYK1) in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain FPL-YSX3. This host strain
has integrated xylose-metabolizing genes, including xylose reductase, xylitol
dehydrogenase, and xylulose kinase. The optimal expression levels for TAL1, TKL1,
and PYK1 were identified by analysis of volumetric ethanol production by
transformed cells. We found the optimal combination for ethanol production to be 
GND2-TAL1-HXK2-TKL1-HXK2-PYK1. The MGPS method could easily be adapted for other 
eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms to optimize expression of genes for
industrial fermentation.

PMCID: PMC2074996
PMID: 17693563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Blood. 2007 Nov 15;110(10):3573-81. Epub 2007 Jul 20.

Aberrant mast-cell differentiation in mice lacking the stem-cell leukemia gene.

Salmon JM(1), Slater NJ, Hall MA, McCormack MP, Nutt SL, Jane SM, Curtis DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rotary Bone Marrow Research Laboratories, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne,
Australia.

The stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription 
factor expressed in erythroid, megakaryocyte, and mast-cell lineages. SCL is
essential for growth of megakaryocyte and erythroid progenitors. We have used a
conditional knockout of SCL (SCL(-/Delta)) to examine its function in mast cells,
critical effectors of the immune system. SCL(-/Delta) mice had markedly increased
numbers of mast-cell progenitors (MCPs) within the peritoneal fluid, bone marrow,
and spleen. Fractionation of bone marrow myeloid progenitors demonstrated that
these MCPs were present in the megakaryocyte-erythroid-restricted cell fraction. 
In contrast, unilineage MCPs from control mice were present in the cell fraction 
with granulocyte-macrophage potential. The aberrant mast-cell differentiation of 
SCL(-/Delta) megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors was associated with increased
expression of GATA-2. Despite increased numbers of MCPs in SCL(-/Delta) mice,
numbers of mature tissue mast cells were not increased unless SCL(-/Delta) mice
were treated with IL-3 and stem-cell factor. In part, this may be due to a
requirement for SCL in normal mast-cell maturation: SCL(-/Delta) mast cells had
reduced expression of the high-affinity IgE receptor and mast cell proteases,
MCP-5 and MCP-6. Together, these studies suggest that loss of SCL leads to
aberrant mast-cell differentiation of megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors.

PMID: 17644741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2351-60. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

Id1, but not Id3, directs long-term repopulating hematopoietic stem-cell
maintenance.

Perry SS(1), Zhao Y, Nie L, Cochrane SW, Huang Z, Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

E-proteins are widely expressed basic helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription
factors that regulate differentiation in many cell lineages, including lymphoid, 
muscle, and neuronal cells. E-protein function is controlled by HLH inhibitors
such as Id and SCL/TAL1 proteins, which recently have been suggested to play a
role in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) differentiation. However, the precise
stages when these proteins are expressed and their specific functions are not
entirely clear. Using a knock-in mouse model where the sequence for the enhanced 
green fluorescent protein (GFP) was inserted downstream of the Id1 promoter, we
were able to track Id1 expression on an individual cell basis and detected Id1
expression in long-term repopulating HSCs (LT-HSCs). Functional assays showed
that the Id1/GFP(+)Lin(-)Sca1(+)c-kit(Hi) population was highly enriched for
LT-HSCs. Consistent with this expression pattern, Id1 deficiency led to a 2-fold 
reduction in the number of LT-HSCs defined as
Lin(-)Sca1(+)c-kit(Hi)CD48(-)CD150(+). Primary bone marrow transplantation
studies revealed that Id1 is dispensable for short-term engraftment. In contrast,
both Id1(-/-) whole bone marrow and Lin(-)Sca1(+)c-kit(Hi)Thy1.1(Lo)-enriched
HSCs, but not Id3(-/-) marrow, displayed impaired engraftment relative to
wild-type controls in secondary transplantation assays. These findings suggest a 
unique role for Id1 in LT-HSC maintenance and hematopoietic development.

PMCID: PMC1988946
PMID: 17622570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Exp Hematol. 2007 May;35(5):735-47.

Interleukin-3 and erythropoietin cooperate in the regulation of the expression of
erythroid-specific transcription factors during erythroid differentiation.

Ghinassi B(1), Verrucci M, Jelicic K, Di Noia A, Migliaccio G, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
Sanità, Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize how interleukin-3 and erythropoietin regulate cell
fate by modulating the expression of lineage-specific transcription factors.
METHODS: This study analyzed mRNA and protein levels, gene transcription rates,
and mRNA and protein stabilities of erythroid-specific transcription factors in
lineage-restricted cells derived from the 32D cell line cultured either in
interleukin-3 or erythropoietin.
RESULTS: Erythroid 32D subclones expressed levels of Idl, Gata-2, and Scl
comparable and levels of Eklf and Gata-1 higher than those expressed by myeloid
subclones. While maintained in interleukin-3, erythroid cells remained immature
despite their high expression of Gata-1, Gata-2, Scl, Eklf, and Idl. Switching
the erythroid cells to erythropoietin induced cell maturation (within 48 hours)
and reduced expression of Gata-2 and Idl (in 24 hours) but did not alter the
expression of Gata-1. The effects of interleukin-3 were mostly mediated by
increases in transcription rates (Scl and Gata-2), and that of erythropoietin was
apparently due to increased mRNA and protein (Gata-1, Scl, and Eklf) stability.
In particular, erythropoietin increased the stability of the processed and
transcriptionally more active form of GATA-1 protein.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that interleukin-3 and erythropoietin
cooperate to establish the lineage-specific transcription factor milieu of
erythroid cells: interleukin-3 regulates mainly gene transcription and
erythropoietin consistently increases mRNA and protein stability.

PMID: 17577923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Dev Biol. 2007 Jul 15;307(2):179-94. Epub 2007 Apr 6.

SCL-GFP transgenic zebrafish: in vivo imaging of blood and endothelial
development and identification of the initial site of definitive hematopoiesis.

Zhang XY(1), Rodaway AR.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, The Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, 
School of Biomedical Sciences, New Hunt's House, Guy's Campus, London SE1 1UL,
UK.

The bHLH transcription factor SCL plays a central role in the generation of
hematopoietic cells in vertebrates. We modified a PAC containing the whole
zebrafish scl locus, inserting GFP into the first coding exon of scl. In
germline-transgenic zebrafish generated using this construct, GFP expression
completely recapitulates the endogenous expression of scl in blood, endothelium
and CNS. We performed in vivo timelapse imaging of blood and endothelial
precursor migration at the single-cell level and show that these cells migrate
from the posterior lateral plate mesoderm to their site of differentiation in the
intermediate cell mass. The anterior lateral plate domain of GFP expression gives
rise to primitive macrophages and the blood vessels of the head. In later
embryos, GFP expression identifies clusters of hematopoietic cells that develop
between the dorsal aorta and posterior cardinal veins after primitive
erythrocytes have entered circulation. Two treatments that block definitive
hematopoiesis (treatment with dioxin (TCDD), and injection of an antisense
morpholino oligonucleotide targeted to runx1) ablate these hematopoietic
clusters. This indicates that these clusters represent the first site of
definitive hematopoiesis in zebrafish. This site is anatomically homologous to
the proposed source of hematopoietic stem cells in amniotes, the
aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region. A second transgenic line, containing the
promoter of scl driving GFP, lacks expression in the definitive clusters.

PMID: 17559829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Blood. 2007 Oct 15;110(8):3036-8. Epub 2007 Jun 8.

Screening for leukemia- and clone-specific markers at birth in children with
T-cell precursor ALL suggests a predominantly postnatal origin.

Fischer S(1), Mann G, Konrad M, Metzler M, Ebetsberger G, Jones N, Nadel B,
Bodamer O, Haas OA, Schmitt K, Panzer-Grümayer ER.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria.

Childhood T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (TCP ALL) is an
aggressive disease with a presumably short latency that differs in many biologic 
respects from B-cell precursor (BCP) ALL. We therefore addressed the issue of in 
utero origin of this particular type of leukemia by tracing oncogenic mutations
and clone-specific molecular markers back to birth. These markers included
various first- and second-hit genetic alterations (TCRD-LMO2 breakpoint regions, 
n = 2; TAL1 deletions, n = 3; Notch1 mutations, n = 1) and nononcogenic T-cell
receptor rearrangements (n = 13) that were derived from leukemias of 16 children 
who were 1.5 to 11.2 years old at diagnosis of leukemia. Despite highly sensitive
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) approaches (1 cell with a specific marker among
100,000 normal cells), we identified the leukemic clone in the neonatal blood
spots in only 1 young child. These data suggest that in contrast to BCP ALL most 
TCP ALL cases are initiated after birth.

PMID: 17557895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Sep;72(3):514-25. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

Transcription factor binding to a putative double E-box motif represses CYP3A4
expression in human lung cells.

Biggs JS(1), Wan J, Cutler NS, Hakkola J, Uusimäki P, Raunio H, Yost GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
UT 84112-5820, USA.

Two vital enzymes of the CYP3A subfamily, CYP3A4 and CYP3A5, are differentially
expressed in the human lung. However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate
tissue-selective expression of the genes are poorly understood. The ability of
the 5' upstream promoter region of these two genes to drive luciferase reporter
activities in human lung A549 cells was dramatically different. The CYP3A5
promoter region activated luciferase gene expression by 10-fold over the
promoterless construct, whereas the CYP3A4 promoter did not drive expression.
Sequence comparisons of the promoters identified a 57-base pair insertion in the 
CYP3A4 promoter region (-71 to -127) that was absent in the CYP3A5 promoter.
Deletion of the 57-bp motif from CYP3A4 or insertion into the CYP3A5 promoter,
showed that this motif represses CYP3A4 expression in lung. EMSA analysis using
nuclear extracts from either A549 cells or human lung tissues showed two specific
protein/DNA complexes formed with the (32)P-labeled CYP3A4 57-bp oligonucleotide.
EMSA analyses identified two E-box motifs as the minimal specific cis-elements.
Supershift assays with antibodies directed against known double- or single-E-box 
binding factors (TAL1, deltaEF1, E2A, HEB, etc.) failed to identify this factor
as a previously characterized trans-acting double E-box binding protein. These
results demonstrated that the 5'-upstream region of CYP3A4 contains an active
putative double E-box repressor motif, not present in the 5'-upstream region of
the CYP3A5 gene, that attenuates CYP3A4 expression in the human lung. We believe 
that this is the first documented case in which a cytochrome P450 gene is
actively repressed in a tissue-specific manner.

PMID: 17548528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Br J Haematol. 2007 Jun;137(6):537-44.

Leukaemia-related gene expression in bone marrow cells from patients with the
preleukaemic disorder Shwachman-Diamond syndrome.

Rujkijyanont P(1), Beyene J, Wei K, Khan F, Dror Y.

Author information: 
(1)Marrow Failure and Myelodysplasia Program, Division of Haematology/Oncology,
Department of Paediatrics, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS) is an inherited bone marrow failure disorder
with cytopenia and a high propensity for myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and
leukaemia, particularly acute myeloid leukaemia. The mechanism of leukaemogenesis
in SDS is unknown. In accordance to the multi-hit theory of carcinogenesis, it is
likely that several molecular and cellular hits occur before MDS/leukaemia become
apparent. This study used oligonucleotide microarray to identify gene expression 
patterns, which were shown to be associated with leukaemogenesis, in marrow
mononuclear cells of nine SDS patients without overt transformation compared to
healthy controls. Among 154 known leukaemia-related genes, several oncogenes were
found to be upregulated, including LARG, TAL1 and MLL, and of several tumour
suppressor genes were downregulated, including DLEU1, RUNX1, FANCD2 and DKC1.
Real time polymerase chain reaction confirmed statistically higher expression of 
LARG and TAL1 in SDS marrows. We conclude that SDS marrow mononuclear cells
exhibit abnormal gene expression patterns, which might result in continuous
stimulation favouring evolution or progression of malignant clones. Additional
molecular and cytogenetic events are probably necessary for the malignant process
to be irreversible and complete.

PMID: 17539775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2610-9. Epub 2007 May 16.

p16INK4A tumor suppressor gene expression and CD3epsilon deficiency but not
pre-TCR deficiency inhibit TAL1-linked T-lineage leukemogenesis.

Fasseu M(1), Aplan PD, Chopin M, Boissel N, Bories JC, Soulier J, von Boehmer H, 
Sigaux F, Regnault A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U462,
Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France.

Inactivation of the CDKN2 genes that encode the p16(INK4A) and p14(ARF) proteins 
occurs in the majority of human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALLs).
Ectopic expression of TAL1 and LMO1 genes is linked to the development of T-ALL
in humans. In TAL1xLMO1 mice, leukemia develops in 100% of mice at 5 months. To
identify the molecular events crucial to leukemic transformation, we produced
several mouse models. We report here that expression of P16(INK4A) in developing 
TAL1xLMO1 thymocytes blocks leukemogenesis in the majority of the mice, and the
leukemias that eventually develop show P16(INK4A) loss of expression. Events
related to the T-cell receptor beta selection process are thought to be important
for leukemic transformation. We show here that the absence of the pTalpha chain
only slightly delays the appearance of TAL1xLMO1-induced T-ALL, which indicates a
minor role of the pTalpha chain. We also show that the CD3epsilon-mediated signal
transduction pathway is essential for this transformation process, since the
TAL1xLMO1xCD3epsilon-deficient mice do not develop T-ALL for up to 1 year.

PMCID: PMC1988920
PMID: 17507663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Haematologica. 2007 May;92(5):612-8.

Clearance of minimal residual disease after allogeneic stem cell transplantation 
and the prediction of the clinical outcome of adult patients with high-risk acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Spinelli O(1), Peruta B, Tosi M, Guerini V, Salvi A, Zanotti MC, Oldani E, Grassi
A, Intermesoli T, Micò C, Rossi G, Fabris P, Lambertenghi-Deliliers G, Angelucci 
E, Barbui T, Bassan R, Rambaldi A.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Units of Ospedali Riuniti Bergamo, 
Bergamo, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The molecular analysis of minimal residual disease
(MRD) may provide information on the risk of recurrence in patients with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The aim of this study was to correlate the kinetics
of MRD clearance after allogeneic transplantation with the clinical outcome of
adults with ALL.
DESIGN AND METHODS: MRD was evaluated by real-time quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (RQ-PCR) using probes derived from fusion chimeric genes (BCR/ABL and
MLL/AF4) (n=22) or rearrangements of the T-cell receptor or immunoglobulin genes 
(n=21). Forty-three adult patients with ALL were studied to correlate the
kinetics of MRD clearance before and after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation.
RESULTS: At 36 months, the overall survival of patients who underwent
transplantation in hematologic remission (n= 37) was 80% for those who were
PCR-negative before transplantation (n= 12) compared to 49% for PCR-positive
patients (n= 25)(p=0.17). For the same patients the cumulative incidence of
relapse was 0% and 46%, respectively (p=0.027). Moreover, the relapse rate of
patients who were PCR-negative at day +100 after transplantation was remarkably
low (7%) compared to that among patients who were PCR-positive (80%, p=0.0006).
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: The kinetics of MRD clearance may help to
identify patients at high risk of leukemia relapse after allogeneic stem cell
transplantation. Patients not achieving an early molecular remission after
transplantation require prompt and appropriate pre-emptive treatments such as
infusions of donor lymphocytes or new experimental drugs.

PMID: 17488684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Oncogene. 2007 Oct 18;26(48):6937-47. Epub 2007 May 7.

Overexpression of a transcription factor LYL1 induces T- and B-cell lymphoma in
mice.

Zhong Y(1), Jiang L, Hiai H, Toyokuni S, Yamada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Biology of Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

LYL1, a member of the class II basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, is
aberrantly expressed in a fraction of human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. 
Here, we generated transgenic mice ubiquitously overexpressing LYL1 using a
construct expressing full-length cDNA driven by a human elongation factor 1alpha 
promoter. Four independent lines exhibiting high LYL1 expression were
established. Of these transgenic mice, 96% displayed loss of hair with a short
kinked tail. Furthermore, 30% of them developed malignant lymphoma, with an
average latent period of 352 days. In these mice, histological examination
revealed tumor cell infiltration in multiple organs and immunohistochemical
analysis showed that the infiltrated tumor cells were either CD3 or
CD45R/B220-positive; fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis indicated that
each tumor consisted either of mainly CD4, CD8 double-positive T cells or mature 
B cells; the clonality of LYL1-induced lymphoma was confirmed by T-cell receptor 
rearrangement and immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene rearrangement analyses.
Mammalian two-hybrid analysis and luciferase assay suggested that excess LYL1
blocked the dimerization of E2A and thus inhibited the regulatory activity of E2A
on the CD4 promoter. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction results
showed that the expression of certain E2A/HEB target genes was downregulated.
Taken together, our results provide direct evidence that aberrant expression of
LYL1 plays a role in lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 17486074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. PLoS Biol. 2007 May;5(5):e132.

Distinct functions for different scl isoforms in zebrafish primitive and
definitive hematopoiesis.

Qian F(1), Zhen F, Xu J, Huang M, Li W, Wen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Immunology, Institute of Molecular
and Cell Biology, Singapore, Singapore.

The stem-cell leukemia (SCL, also known as TAL1) gene encodes a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor that is essential for the initiation of
primitive and definitive hematopoiesis, erythrocyte and megakarocyte
differentiation, angiogenesis, and astrocyte development. Here we report that the
zebrafish produces, through an alternative promoter site, a novel truncated scl
(tal1) isoform, scl-beta, which manifests a temporal and spatial expression
distinct from the previously described full-length scl-alpha. Functional analysis
reveals that while scl-alpha and -beta are redundant for the initiation of
primitive hematopoiesis, these two isoforms exert distinct functions in the
regulation of primitive erythroid differentiation and definitive hematopoietic
stem cell specification. We further demonstrate that differences in the protein
expression levels of scl-alpha and -beta, by regulating their protein stability, 
are likely to give rise to their distinct functions. Our findings suggest that
hematopoietic cells at different levels of hierarchy are likely governed by a
gradient of the Scl protein established through temporal and spatial patterns of 
expression of the different isoforms.

PMCID: PMC1858710
PMID: 17472439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Neoplasia. 2007 Apr;9(4):315-21.

Cre-loxP-mediated recombination between the SIL and SCL genes leads to a block in
T-cell development at the CD4- CD8- to CD4+ CD8+ transition.

Cheng Y(1), Zhang Z, Slape C, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Naval Medical Center, Building 8, Room 5101, 8901 Wisconsin Avenue,
Bethesda, MD 20889-5105, USA.

In the most common form of stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene rearrangement, an
interstitial deletion of 82 kb brings SCL under the control of regulatory
elements that normally govern expression of the ubiquitously expressed SCL
interrupting locus (SIL) gene, which is located directly upstream of SCL. To
investigate the effect of this fusion in a mouse model, a bacterial artificial
chromosome (BAC) clone containing both human SIL and SCL genes was isolated, and 
loxP sites were inserted into intron 1 of both the SIL and SCL genes,
corresponding to the sites at which recombination occurs in human T-cell acute
lymphocytic leukemia patients. This BAC clone was used to generate transgenic
SILloxloxSCL mice. These transgenic mice were subsequently bred to Lck-Cre mice
that express the Cre recombinase specifically in the thymus. The BAC transgene
was recombined between the two loxP sites in over 50% of the thymocytes from
SILloxloxSCL/Cre double-transgenic mice, bringing the SCL gene under the direct
control of SIL regulatory elements. Aberrant SCL gene expression in the thymus
was verified by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Using FACS
analysis, we found that mice carrying both SILloxloxSCL and Cre transgenes have
increased CD4-/CD8- thymocytes compared with transgene-negative mice. In the
spleen, these transgenic mice show a marked reduction in the number of mature
CD4+ or CD8+ cells. These results demonstrate that conditional activation of SCL 
under control of SIL regulatory elements can impair normal T-cell development.

PMCID: PMC1854848
PMID: 17460775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Genes Dev. 2007 Apr 15;21(8):942-55.

Single-stranded DNA-binding proteins regulate the abundance of LIM domain and LIM
domain-binding proteins.

Xu Z(1), Meng X, Cai Y, Liang H, Nagarajan L, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232,
USA.

The LIM domain-binding protein Ldb1 is an essential cofactor of LIM-homeodomain
(LIM-HD) and LIM-only (LMO) proteins in development. The stoichiometry of Ldb1,
LIM-HD, and LMO proteins is tightly controlled in the cell and is likely a
critical determinant of their biological actions. Single-stranded DNA-binding
proteins (SSBPs) were recently shown to interact with Ldb1 and are also important
in developmental programs. We establish here that two mammalian SSBPs, SSBP2 and 
SSBP3, contribute to an erythroid DNA-binding complex that contains the
transcription factors Tal1 and GATA-1, the LIM domain protein Lmo2, and Ldb1 and 
binds a bipartite E-box-GATA DNA sequence motif. In addition, SSBP2 was found to 
augment transcription of the Protein 4.2 (P4.2) gene, a direct target of the
E-box-GATA-binding complex, in an Ldb1-dependent manner and to increase
endogenous Ldb1 and Lmo2 protein levels, E-box-GATA DNA-binding activity, and
P4.2 and beta-globin expression in erythroid progenitors. Finally, SSBP2 was
demonstrated to inhibit Ldb1 and Lmo2 interaction with the E3 ubiquitin ligase
RLIM, prevent RLIM-mediated Ldb1 ubiquitination, and protect Ldb1 and Lmo2 from
proteasomal degradation. These results define a novel biochemical function for
SSBPs in regulating the abundance of LIM domain and LIM domain-binding proteins.

PMCID: PMC1847712
PMID: 17437998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Cell Cycle. 2007 Apr 15;6(8):927-30. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

The Notch1/c-Myc pathway in T cell leukemia.

Sharma VM(1), Draheim KM, Kelliher MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

The Notch receptor family and its ligands (Delta-like and Jagged) have been found
deregulated in several human cancers. We and the Aster/Pear group recently
identified c-myc as a direct transcriptional target gene of the Notch1 pathway in
T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Although the oncogenic roles of
c-Myc and Notch1 are established, a direct link between Notch1 and c-Myc had not 
been demonstrated. Importantly, our work in mouse tal1 tumor cell lines revealed 
that leukemic growth/survival remains dependent on the Notch1-c-Myc pathway.
Studies by the Efstratiadis group provide genetic evidence that the Notch1-c-Myc 
pathway also contributes to mouse mammary tumorigenesis. Taken together, these
studies demonstrate that Notch1 mediates T cell and epithelial cell
transformation at least in part by sustaining c-Myc lev.

PMID: 17404512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Development. 2007 May;134(9):1703-12. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

A Gata2 intronic enhancer confers its pan-endothelia-specific regulation.

Khandekar M(1), Brandt W, Zhou Y, Dagenais S, Glover TW, Suzuki N, Shimizu R,
Yamamoto M, Lim KC, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

GATA-2, a transcription factor that has been shown to play important roles in
multiple organ systems during embryogenesis, has been ascribed the property of
regulating the expression of numerous endothelium-specific genes. However, the
transcriptional regulatory hierarchy governing Gata2 activation in endothelial
cells has not been fully explored. Here, we document GATA-2 endothelial
expression during embryogenesis by following GFP expression in Gata2-GFP knock-in
embryos. Using founder transgenic analyses, we identified a Gata2 endothelium
enhancer in the fourth intron and found that Gata2 regulation by this enhancer is
restricted to the endocardial, lymphatic and vascular endothelium. Whereas
disruption of three ETS-binding motifs within the enhancer diminished its
activity, the ablation of its single E box extinguished endothelial
enhancer-directed expression in transgenic mice. Development of the endothelium
is known to require SCL (TAL1), and an SCL-E12 (SCL-Tcfe2a) heterodimer can bind 
the crucial E box in the enhancer in vitro. Thus, GATA-2 is expressed early in
lymphatic, cardiac and blood vascular endothelial cells, and the
pan-endothelium-specific expression of Gata2 is controlled by a discrete intronic
enhancer.

PMID: 17395646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(8):e56. Epub 2007 Mar 27.

Real-time PCR mapping of DNaseI-hypersensitive sites using a novel
ligation-mediated amplification technique.

Follows GA(1), Janes ME, Vallier L, Green AR, Gottgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK.
gf246@cam.ac.uk

Mapping sites within the genome that are hypersensitive to digestion with DNaseI 
is an important method for identifying DNA elements that regulate transcription. 
The standard approach to locating these DNaseI-hypersensitive sites (DHSs) has
been to use Southern blotting techniques, although we, and others, have recently 
published alternative methods using a range of technologies including
high-throughput sequencing and genomic array tiling paths. In this article, we
describe a novel protocol to use real-time PCR to map DHS. Advantages of the
technique reported here include the small cell numbers required for each
analysis, rapid, relatively low-cost experiments with minimal need for specialist
equipment. Presented examples include comparative DHS mapping of known TAL1/SCL
regulatory elements between human embryonic stem cells and K562 cells.

PMCID: PMC1885650
PMID: 17389645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Am J Clin Pathol. 2007 Apr;127(4):528-44.

Precursor T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoblastic lymphoma and acute
biphenotypic leukemias.

Han X(1), Bueso-Ramos CE.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Session 4 of the 2005 Society of Hematopathology/European Association for
Haematopathology Workshop focused on case presentations of precursor T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoblastic lymphoma (pre-T ALL/LBL) and acute
biphenotypic leukemia. Pre-T ALL represents approximately 15% of childhood and
25% of adult ALL cases. Pre-T LBL comprises 85% to 90% of LBL and frequently
manifests as a mediastinal mass. Gene expression studies have shown distinct
subtypes of LYL1+, HOX11+, TAL1+, and MLL+ pre-T ALL/LBL. HOX11 overexpression
may correlate with a good prognosis in adult pre-T ALL. ABL gene amplification
and NOTCH1 gene mutations in subsets of pre-T ALL/LBL suggest patients may
benefit from therapy with tyrosine kinase and gamma-secretase inhibitors,
respectively. Acute biphenotypic leukemias are characterized by a single
population of blasts that express myeloid, T- or B-lineage antigens in various
combinations and account for fewer than 4% of all acute leukemias. The blasts
have a high incidence of chromosome abnormalities. An accurate diagnosis of pre-T
ALL/LBL and acute biphenotypic leukemia requires a multiparametric approach,
including examination of morphologic features, immunophenotype, clinical
characteristics, and cytogenetic and molecular findings.

PMID: 17369128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Genesis. 2007 Mar;45(3):145-51.

Temporal regulation of Cre-recombinase activity in Scl-positive neurons of the
central nervous system.

Bradley CK(1), Takano EA, Göthert JR, Göttgens B, Green AR, Begley CG, van
Eekelen JA.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute for Child Health Research, Centre for Child Health
Research, University of Western Australia, Subiaco, Western Australia, Australia.

The Cre/LoxP system provides a powerful tool to investigate gene function in
vivo. This system requires Cre-recombinase expressing mouse lines that permit
control of gene recombination in a tissue-specific and time-dependent manner. To 
allow spatio-temporal gene deletion in specific central nervous system (CNS)
neuronal populations, we generated mice with a tamoxifen-inducible Cre
(Cre-ER(T)) transgene under control of the Scl/Tal1 neural promoter/enhancer
-0.9E3 (-0.9E3CreER(T) transgenic mice). Using Cre-reporter mice we have shown
that tamoxifen-mediated Cre-ER(T) recombination in -0.9E3CreER(T) mice
recapitulated the anticipated expression pattern of Scl in the caudal thalamus,
midbrain, hindbrain, and spinal cord. Cre-mediated recombination was also
effectively induced during embryogenesis and marked the same population of
neurons as observed in the adult. Additionally, we identified a
tamoxifen-independent constitutively active -0.9E3CreER(T) mouse line that will
be useful for gene deletion during early neurogenesis. These -0.9E3CreER(T) mice 
will provide tools to investigate the role of neuronal genes in the developing
and mature CNS. CNS.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17330263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2007 Apr;73(7):2061-6. Epub 2007 Feb 2.

Transposon mutagenesis to improve the growth of recombinant Saccharomyces
cerevisiae on D-xylose.

Ni H(1), Laplaza JM, Jeffries TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae L2612 transformed with genes for xylose reductase and
xylitol dehydrogenase (XYL1 and XYL2) grows well on glucose but very poorly on
d-xylose. When a gene for d-xylulokinase (XYL3 or XKS1) is overexpressed, growth 
on glucose is unaffected, but growth on xylose is blocked. Spontaneous or
chemically induced mutants of this engineered yeast that would grow on xylose
could, however, be obtained. We therefore used insertional transposon mutagenesis
to identify two loci that can relieve this xylose-specific growth inhibition. One
is within the open reading frame (ORF) of PHO13, and the other is approximately
500 bp upstream from the TAL1 ORF. Deletion of PHO13 or overexpression of TAL1
resulted in a phenotype similar to the insertional mutation events. Quantitative 
PCR showed that deletion of PHO13 increased transcripts for TAL1, indicating that
the growth inhibition imposed by the overexpression of XYL3 on xylose can be
relieved by an overexpression of transcripts for downstream enzymes. These
results may be useful in constructing better xylose-fermenting S. cerevisiae
strains.

PMCID: PMC1855673
PMID: 17277207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Leukemia. 2007 Apr;21(4):754-63. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

Ectopic retroviral expression of LMO2, but not IL2Rgamma, blocks human T-cell
development from CD34+ cells: implications for leukemogenesis in gene therapy.

Pike-Overzet K(1), de Ridder D, Weerkamp F, Baert MR, Verstegen MM, Brugman MH,
Howe SJ, Reinders MJ, Thrasher AJ, Wagemaker G, van Dongen JJ, Staal FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

The occurrence of leukemia in a gene therapy trial for SCID-X1 has highlighted
insertional mutagenesis as an adverse effect. Although retroviral integration
near the T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) oncogene LIM-only protein 2 
(LMO2) appears to be a common event, it is unclear why LMO2 was preferentially
targeted. We show that of classical T-ALL oncogenes, LMO2 is most highly
transcribed in CD34+ progenitor cells. Upon stimulation with growth factors
typically used in gene therapy protocols transcription of LMO2, LYL1, TAL1 and
TAN1 is most prominent. Therefore, these oncogenes may be susceptible to viral
integration. The interleukin-2 receptor gamma chain (IL2Rgamma), which is mutated
in SCID-X1, has been proposed as a cooperating oncogene to LMO2. However, we
found that overexpressing IL2Rgamma had no effect on T-cell development. In
contrast, retroviral overexpression of LMO2 in CD34+ cells caused severe
abnormalities in T-cell development, but B-cell and myeloid development remained 
unaffected. Our data help explain why LMO2 was preferentially targeted over many 
of the other known T-ALL oncogenes. Furthermore, during T-cell development
retrovirus-mediated expression of IL2Rgamma may not be directly oncogenic.
Instead, restoration of normal IL7-receptor signaling may allow progression of
T-cell development to stages where ectopic LMO2 expression causes aberrant
thymocyte growth.

PMID: 17268520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Apr;27(7):2687-97. Epub 2007 Jan 22.

TAL-1/SCL and its partners E47 and LMO2 up-regulate VE-cadherin expression in
endothelial cells.

Deleuze V(1), Chalhoub E, El-Hajj R, Dohet C, Le Clech M, Couraud PO, Huber P,
Mathieu D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier CNRS, UMR5535, Montpellier,
France.

The basic helix-loop-helix TAL-1/SCL essential for hematopoietic development is
also required during vascular development for embryonic angiogenesis. We reported
that TAL-1 acts positively on postnatal angiogenesis by stimulating endothelial
morphogenesis. Here, we investigated the functional consequences of TAL-1
silencing in human primary endothelial cells. We found that TAL-1 knockdown
caused the inhibition of in vitro tubulomorphogenesis, which was associated with 
a dramatic reduction in vascular endothelial cadherin (VE-cadherin) at
intercellular junctions. Consistently, silencing of TAL-1 as well as of its
cofactors E47 and LMO2 down-regulated VE-cadherin at both the mRNA and the
protein level. Endogenous VE-cadherin transcription could be activated in
nonendothelial HEK-293 cells by the sole concomitant ectopic expression of TAL-1,
E47, and LMO2. Transient transfections in human primary endothelial cells derived
from umbilical vein (HUVECs) demonstrated that VE-cadherin promoter activity was 
dependent on the integrity of a specialized E-box associated with a GATA motif
and was maximal with the coexpression of the different components of the TAL-1
complex. Finally, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that TAL-1 and its 
cofactors occupied the VE-cadherin promoter in HUVECs. Together, these data
identify VE-cadherin as a bona fide target gene of the TAL-1 complex in the
endothelial lineage, providing a first clue to TAL-1 function in angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1899886
PMID: 17242194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 16;104(3):840-5. Epub 2007 Jan 9.

The SCL transcriptional network and BMP signaling pathway interact to regulate
RUNX1 activity.

Pimanda JE(1), Donaldson IJ, de Bruijn MF, Kinston S, Knezevic K, Huckle L, Piltz
S, Landry JR, Green AR, Tannahill D, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB2 2XY, United Kingdom.

Hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) development is regulated by several signaling
pathways and a number of key transcription factors, which include Scl/Tal1,
Runx1, and members of the Smad family. However, it remains unclear how these
various determinants interact. Using a genome-wide computational screen based on 
the well characterized Scl +19 HSC enhancer, we have identified a related Smad6
enhancer that also targets expression to blood and endothelial cells in
transgenic mice. Smad6, Bmp4, and Runx1 transcripts are concentrated along the
ventral aspect of the E10.5 dorsal aorta in the aorta-gonad-mesonephros region
from which HSCs originate. Moreover, Smad6, an inhibitor of Bmp4 signaling, binds
and inhibits Runx1 activity, whereas Smad1, a positive mediator of Bmp4
signaling, transactivates the Runx1 promoter. Taken together, our results
integrate three key determinants of HSC development; the Scl transcriptional
network, Runx1 activity, and the Bmp4/Smad signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC1783401
PMID: 17213321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Jan 1;172(1):1-11.

Chromosome abnormalities in advanced stage lymphoblastic lymphoma of children and
adolescents: a report from CCG-E08.

Lones MA(1), Heerema NA, Le Beau MM, Sposto R, Perkins SL, Kadin ME, Kjeldsberg
CR, Meadows A, Siegel S, Buckley J, Abromowitch M, Kersey J, Bergeron S, Cairo
MS, Sanger WG.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Children's Hospital of Orange County/St. Joseph
Hospital, Orange, CA, USA. pubs@childrensoncologygroup.org
<pubs@childrensoncologygroup.org>

Among pediatric non-Hodgkin lymphomas, one of the most frequent types is
lymphoblastic lymphoma (LBL). Specific chromosome abnormalities are associated
with prognosis in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia, but have not been
evaluated for prognostic value in pediatric LBL. For the Children's Cancer Group 
protocol CCG-E-08 Etiologic Study of Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in Childhood, 13
patients were enrolled with cytogenetic analysis of LBL and on treatment protocol
CCG-502. Pathology material and karyotypes at initial diagnosis were given
central review. The patients were aged 6-13 years (median 9 years), with a
male-to-female ratio of 12:1. All patients had advanced disease. Disease relapsed
in six patients (event-free survival 54% +/- 14%, median 10.8 years). Chromosome 
abnormalities were identified in 11 (85%), and translocations at 14q11.2 likely
involving the T-cell receptor alpha/delta locus (TCR A/D) occurred in 4 (31%).
For patients with relapse, four had translocations t(1;14)(p32;q11.2),
t(8;14)(q24.1;q11.2), t(11;14)(p13;q11.2), or t(9;17)(q34;q23), involving
breakpoints in the regions of TAL1, MYC, LMO2, and NOTCH1, respectively.
Pediatric advanced LBLs have a high frequency of chromosome abnormalities; in
this limited study, these often involved translocations at 14q11.2, the site of
TCR A/D. Translocations possibly involving TAL1, MYC, LMO2, or NOTCH1 may have
contributed to poor outcome. Further studies are warranted in larger cohorts of
children and adolescents with LBL to evaluate the prognostic significance.

PMID: 17175373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Exp Hematol. 2006 Dec;34(12):1643-50.

The SCL 3' enhancer responds to Hedgehog signaling during hemangioblast
specification.

Hochman E(1), Kinston S, Harmelin A, Göttgens B, Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Section of Pediatric Malignancies, The Sheba Cancer Research
Center, Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center and Faculty of Medicine, 
Tel-Aviv University, Tel Hashomer, Israel.

OBJECTIVE: The Hedgehog family of intercellular proteins has a crucial role in
embryonic development. Recent experimental data suggests that the Hedgehog
pathway may play a role in early hematopoiesis and angiogenesis. Stem cell
leukemia (SCL), a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, is
essential for the specification and function of the hemangioblast. SCL expression
in early hematopoietic precursors and endothelium is directed by a 3' enhancer.
We hypothesized that the SCL 3' enhancer is regulated by Hedgehog signaling
during specification of mesoderm towards hemangioblastic fate.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Whole embryos derived from transgenic mouse lines carrying
reporter genes under the regulation of SCL 3' enhancer were cultured in the
presence of active Hedgehog peptide. Hedgehog transcriptional regulation of SCL
3' enhancer was studied by in vitro and in vivo binding and reporter assays.
RESULTS: Hedgehog induced expansion of cells in which the SCL 3' enhancer was
transcriptionally activated. A Gli-binding site within the 3' enhancer of SCL was
identified and Gli1 was demonstrated to bind and transactivate this enhancer in a
sequence-dependent manner. We further demonstrated that the core region of the
SCL 3' enhancer is transcriptionally regulated by Hedgehog in-vivo and that the
Gli-binding site located in this enhancer is essential for Hedgehog
transcriptional regulation in vitro.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that SCL may be a direct target of Hedgehog
signaling during hemangioblast specification.

PMID: 17157160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Gene Expr Patterns. 2007 Jan;7(3):215-26. Epub 2006 Oct 11.

lyl-1 and tal-1/scl, two genes encoding closely related bHLH transcription
factors, display highly overlapping expression patterns during cardiovascular and
hematopoietic ontogeny.

Giroux S(1), Kaushik AL, Capron C, Jalil A, Kelaidi C, Sablitzky F, Dumenil D,
Albagli O, Godin I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U790, Institut Gustave Roussy-PR1, 39 Rue Camille Desmoulins, 94805
Villejuif, France.

The TAL-1/SCL and LYL-1 genes encode two closely related basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors involved in child T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia through
chromosomal rearrangements and transcriptional deregulation. During ontogeny,
Tal-1/SCL is required for hematopoietic cell generation, both in the yolk sac,
where erythro-myeloid cells are first produced, then in the intra-embryonic
compartment, where hematopoietic stem cells independently arise. We describe here
the expression pattern of lyl-1 in mouse embryos from 7 to 14 days post coitus
using in situ hybridization, as well as beta-Galactosidase (beta-Gal) expression 
in lyl-1-lacZ knock-in embryos, which express a C-terminally truncated Lyl-1
protein fused to the beta-Galactosidase (Lyl-1Delta/beta-Gal). In addition, we
compare lyl-1 expression pattern with that of tal-1/scl. Similar to Tal-1/SCL,
Lyl-1 mRNA expression occurs in the developing cardiovascular and hematopoietic
systems. However, contrary to tal-1/scl, lyl-1 is not expressed in the developing
nervous system. In lyl-1-lacZ knock-in heterozygous and homozygous embryos,
beta-Gal expression completely correlates with Lyl-1 mRNA expression in the
intra-embryonic compartment and is present: (1) in the developing hematopoietic
system, precisely where hematopoietic stem cells emerge, and thereafter in the
fetal liver; (2) in the developing vascular system; and (3) in the endocardium.
In contrast, whereas Lyl-1 mRNA is expressed in yolk sac-derived endothelial and 
hematopoietic cells, Lyl-1Delta/beta-Gal is either absent or poorly expressed in 
these cell types, thus differing from Tal-1/SCL, which is highly expressed there 
at both mRNA and protein levels.

PMID: 17112790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Development. 2006 Dec;133(24):4913-23. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Novel binding partners of Ldb1 are required for haematopoietic development.

Meier N(1), Krpic S, Rodriguez P, Strouboulis J, Monti M, Krijgsveld J, Gering M,
Patient R, Hostert A, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus MC, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Ldb1, a ubiquitously expressed LIM domain binding protein, is essential in a
number of tissues during development. It interacts with Gata1, Tal1, E2A and Lmo2
to form a transcription factor complex regulating late erythroid genes. We
identify a number of novel Ldb1 interacting proteins in erythroleukaemic cells,
in particular the repressor protein Eto-2 (and its family member Mtgr1), the
cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk9, and the bridging factor Lmo4. MO-mediated
knockdowns in zebrafish show these factors to be essential for definitive
haematopoiesis. In accordance with the zebrafish results these factors are
coexpressed in prehaematopoietic cells of the early mouse embryo, although we
originally identified the complex in late erythroid cells. Based on the change in
subcellullar localisation of Eto-2 we postulate that it plays a central role in
the transition from the migration and expansion phase of the prehaematopoietic
cells to the establishment of definitive haematopoietic stem cells.

PMID: 17108004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Blood. 2007 Mar 15;109(6):2389-98. Epub 2006 Nov 7.

The transcription factors Scl and Lmo2 act together during development of the
hemangioblast in zebrafish.

Patterson LJ(1), Gering M, Eckfeldt CE, Green AR, Verfaillie CM, Ekker SC,
Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford University, John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Headington, Oxford, United Kingdom.

The transcription factors Scl and Lmo2 are crucial for development of all blood. 
An important early requirement for Scl in endothelial development has also been
revealed recently in zebrafish embryos, supporting previous findings in scl(-/-) 
embryoid bodies. Scl depletion culminates most notably in failure of dorsal aorta
formation, potentially revealing a role in the formation of hemogenic
endothelium. We now present evidence that the requirements for Lmo2 in zebrafish 
embryos are essentially the same as for Scl. The expression of important
hematopoietic regulators is lost, reduced, or delayed, panendothelial gene
expression is down-regulated, and aorta-specific marker expression is lost. The
close similarity of the phenotypes for Scl and Lmo2 suggest that they perform
these early functions in hemangioblast development within a multiprotein complex,
as shown for erythropoiesis. Consistent with this, we find that scl morphants
cannot be rescued by a non-Lmo2-binding form of Scl but can be rescued by
non-DNA-binding forms, suggesting tethering to target genes through DNA-binding
partners linked via Lmo2. Interestingly, unlike other hematopoietic regulators,
the Scl/Lmo2 complex does not appear to autoregulate, as neither gene's
expression is affected by depletion of the other. Thus, expression of these
critical regulators is dependent on continued expression of upstream regulators, 
which may include cell-extrinsic signals.

PMID: 17090656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Blood. 2007 Mar 1;109(5):1908-16. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

The paralogous hematopoietic regulators Lyl1 and Scl are coregulated by Ets and
GATA factors, but Lyl1 cannot rescue the early Scl-/- phenotype.

Chan WY(1), Follows GA, Lacaud G, Pimanda JE, Landry JR, Kinston S, Knezevic K,
Piltz S, Donaldson IJ, Gambardella L, Sablitzky F, Green AR, Kouskoff V, Göttgens
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Transcription factors are key regulators of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), yet 
the molecular mechanisms that control their expression are largely unknown.
Previously, we demonstrated that expression of Scl/Tal1, a transcription factor
required for the specification of HSCs, is controlled by Ets and GATA factors.
Here we characterize the molecular mechanisms controlling expression of Lyl1, a
paralog of Scl also required for HSC function. Two closely spaced promoters
directed expression to hematopoietic progenitor, megakaryocytic, and endothelial 
cells in transgenic mice. Conserved binding sites required for promoter activity 
were bound in vivo by GATA-2 and the Ets factors Fli1, Elf1, Erg, and PU.1.
However, despite coregulation of Scl and Lyl1 by the same Ets and GATA factors,
Scl expression was initiated prior to Lyl1 in embryonic stem (ES) cell
differentiation assays. Moreover, ectopic expression of Scl but not Lyl1 rescued 
hematopoietic differentiation in Scl-/- ES cells, thus providing a molecular
explanation for the vastly different phenotypes of Scl-/- and Lyl1-/- mouse
embryos. Furthermore, coregulation of Scl and Lyl1 later during development may
explain the mild phenotype of Scl-/- adult HSCs.

PMID: 17053063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Leukemia. 2007 Jan;21(1):121-8. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

Clinical, cytogenetic and molecular characteristics of 14 T-ALL patients carrying
the TCRbeta-HOXA rearrangement: a study of the Groupe Francophone de
Cytogénétique Hématologique.

Cauwelier B(1), Cavé H, Gervais C, Lessard M, Barin C, Perot C, Van den Akker J, 
Mugneret F, Charrin C, Pagès MP, Grégoire MJ, Jonveaux P, Lafage-Pochitaloff M,
Mozzicconacci MJ, Terré C, Luquet I, Cornillet-Lefebvre P, Laurence B, Plessis G,
Lefebvre C, Leroux D, Antoine-Poirel H, Graux C, Mauvieux L, Heimann P, Chalas C,
Clappier E, Verhasselt B, Benoit Y, Moerloose BD, Poppe B, Van Roy N,
Keersmaecker KD, Cools J, Sigaux F, Soulier J, Hagemeijer A, Paepe AD, Dastugue
N, Berger R, Speleman F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Recently, we and others described a new chromosomal rearrangement, that is,
inv(7)(p15q34) and t(7;7)(p15;q34) involving the T-cell receptor beta (TCRbeta)
(7q34) and the HOXA gene locus (7p15) in 5% of T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL) patients leading to transcriptional activation of especially
HOXA10. To further address the clinical, immunophenotypical and molecular genetic
findings of this chromosomal aberration, we studied 330 additional T-ALLs. This
revealed TCRbeta-HOXA rearrangements in five additional patients, which brings
the total to 14 cases in 424 patients (3.3%). Real-time quantitative PCR analysis
for HOXA10 gene expression was performed in 170 T-ALL patients and detected
HOXA10 overexpression in 25.2% of cases including all the cases with a
TCRbeta-HOXA rearrangement (8.2%). In contrast, expression of the short HOXA10
transcript, HOXA10b, was almost exclusively found in the TCRbeta-HOXA rearranged 
cases, suggesting a specific role for the HOXA10b short transcript in
TCRbeta-HOXA-mediated oncogenesis. Other molecular and/or cytogenetic aberrations
frequently found in subtypes of T-ALL (SIL-TAL1, CALM-AF10, HOX11, HOX11L2) were 
not detected in the TCRbeta-HOXA rearranged cases except for deletion 9p21 and
NOTCH1 activating mutations, which were present in 64 and 67%, respectively. In
conclusion, this study defines TCRbeta-HOXA rearranged T-ALLs as a distinct
cytogenetic subgroup by clinical, immunophenotypical and molecular genetic
characteristics.

PMID: 17039236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Genome Res. 2006 Oct;16(10):1310-9. Epub 2006 Sep 8.

Identifying gene regulatory elements by genomic microarray mapping of DNaseI
hypersensitive sites.

Follows GA(1), Dhami P, Göttgens B, Bruce AW, Campbell PJ, Dillon SC, Smith AM,
Koch C, Donaldson IJ, Scott MA, Dunham I, Janes ME, Vetrie D, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 2XY, United Kingdom. gf246@cam.ac.uk

The identification of cis-regulatory elements is central to understanding gene
transcription. Hypersensitivity of cis-regulatory elements to digestion with
DNaseI remains the gold-standard approach to locating such elements. Traditional 
methods used to identify DNaseI hypersensitive sites are cumbersome and can only 
be applied to short stretches of DNA at defined locations. Here we report the
development of a novel genomic array-based approach to DNaseI hypersensitive site
mapping (ADHM) that permits precise, large-scale identification of such sites
from as few as 5 million cells. Using ADHM we identified all previously
recognized hematopoietic regulatory elements across 200 kb of the mouse T-cell
acute lymphocytic leukemia-1 (Tal1) locus, and, in addition, identified two novel
elements within the locus, which show transcriptional regulatory activity. We
further validated the ADHM protocol by mapping the DNaseI hypersensitive sites
across 250 kb of the human TAL1 locus in CD34+ primary stem/progenitor cells and 
K562 cells and by mapping the previously known DNaseI hypersensitive sites across
240 kb of the human alpha-globin locus in K562 cells. ADHM provides a powerful
approach to identifying DNaseI hypersensitive sites across large genomic regions.

PMCID: PMC1581440
PMID: 16963707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Haematologica. 2006 Sep;91(9):1212-21.

The outcome of molecular-cytogenetic subgroups in pediatric T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: a retrospective study of patients treated according to
DCOG or COALL protocols.

van Grotel M(1), Meijerink JP, Beverloo HB, Langerak AW, Buys-Gladdines JG,
Schneider P, Poulsen TS, den Boer ML, Horstmann M, Kamps WA, Veerman AJ, van
Wering ER, van Noesel MM, Pieters R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, room Sp2456, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2006 Sep;91(9):1156A.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Subgroups of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL), defined according to recurrent cytogenetic aberrations, may have
different prognoses. The aim of this study was to determine the prognostic
relevance of molecular-cytogenetic abnormalities in pediatric patients using
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and fluorescence in situ
hybridization.
DESIGN AND METHODS: The patients were assigned to TAL1, HOX11/TLX1, HOX11L2/TLX3,
or CALM-AF10 subgroups. The cytogenetic subgroups were characterized in relation 
to immunophenotype and the expression of aberrantly expressed transcription
factors.
RESULTS: In our cohort study, CALM-AF10 was associated with an immature
immunophenotype and poor outcome (p=0.005). HOX11L2 was associated with both
immunophenotypically immature cases as well as cases committed to the
gammadelta-lineage. HOX11L2 was significantly associated with poor outcome
(p=0.01), independently of the expression of CD1 or the presence of NOTCH1
mutations. TAL1 abnormalities were associated with alphabeta-lineage commitment, 
and tended to be associated with a good outcome. Cells in HOX11 cases resembled
early CD1-positive cortical thymocytes without expression of Cytbeta and TCR
molecules. In relation to the expression of early T-cell transcription factors,
high TAL1 levels were found in immunophenotypically-advanced cases, whereas high 
LYL1 levels were found in immature subgroups.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: The reported outcomes for HOX11L2-rearranged
T-ALL cases are conflicting; the prognostic impact may depend on the therapy
given. In our cohort, this cytogenetic aberration was associated with a poor
outcome. Our data on CALM-AF10 rearranged T-ALL, albeit based on only three
patients, suggest that this type of leukemia is associated with a poor outcome.

PMID: 16956820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(21):8022-31. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Notch1 contributes to mouse T-cell leukemia by directly inducing the expression
of c-myc.

Sharma VM(1), Calvo JA, Draheim KM, Cunningham LA, Hermance N, Beverly L,
Krishnamoorthy V, Bhasin M, Capobianco AJ, Kelliher MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Recent work with mouse models and human leukemic samples has shown that
gain-of-function mutation(s) in Notch1 is a common genetic event in T-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). The Notch1 receptor signals through a
gamma-secretase-dependent process that releases intracellular Notch1 from the
membrane to the nucleus, where it forms part of a transcriptional activator
complex. To identify Notch1 target genes in leukemia, we developed mouse T-cell
leukemic lines that express intracellular Notch1 in a doxycycline-dependent
manner. Using gene expression profiling and chromatin immunoprecipitation, we
identified c-myc as a novel, direct, and critical Notch1 target gene in T-cell
leukemia. c-myc mRNA levels are increased in primary mouse T-cell tumors that
harbor Notch1 mutations, and Notch1 inhibition decreases c-myc mRNA levels and
inhibits leukemic cell growth. Retroviral expression of c-myc, like intracellular
Notch1, rescues the growth arrest and apoptosis associated with gamma-secretase
inhibitor treatment or Notch1 inhibition. Consistent with these findings,
retroviral insertional mutagenesis screening of our T-cell leukemia mouse model
revealed common insertions in either notch1 or c-myc genes. These studies define 
the Notch1 molecular signature in mouse T-ALL and importantly provide mechanistic
insight as to how Notch1 contributes to human T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC1636748
PMID: 16954387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Blood. 2006 Nov 15;108(10):3520-9. Epub 2006 Jul 27.

The cryptic chromosomal deletion del(11)(p12p13) as a new activation mechanism of
LMO2 in pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Van Vlierberghe P(1), van Grotel M, Beverloo HB, Lee C, Helgason T,
Buijs-Gladdines J, Passier M, van Wering ER, Veerman AJ, Kamps WA, Meijerink JP, 
Pieters R.

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus MC/Sophia Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatric
Oncology/Hematology, 3000 CB Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

To identify new cytogenetic abnormalities associated with leukemogenesis or
disease outcome, T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) patient samples were
analyzed by means of the array-comparative genome hybridization technique
(array-CGH). Here, we report the identification of a new recurrent and cryptic
deletion on chromosome 11 (del(11)(p12p13)) in about 4% (6/138) of pediatric
T-ALL patients. Detailed molecular-cytogenetic analysis revealed that this
deletion activates the LMO2 oncogene in 4 of 6 del(11)(p12p13)-positive T-ALL
patients, in the same manner as in patients with an LMO2 translocation (9/138).
The LMO2 activation mechanism of this deletion is loss of a negative regulatory
region upstream of LMO2, causing activation of the proximal LMO2 promoter. LMO2
rearrangements, including this del(11)(p12p13) and t(11;14) (p13;q11) or
t(7;11)(q35;p13), were found in the absence of other recurrent cytogenetic
abnormalities involving HOX11L2, HOX11, CALM-AF10, TAL1, MLL, or MYC. LMO2
abnormalities represent about 9% (13/138) of pediatric T-ALL cases and are more
frequent in pediatric T-ALL than appreciated until now.

PMID: 16873670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Blood. 2006 Nov 1;108(9):2998-3004. Epub 2006 Jul 18.

Low SCL/TAL1 expression reveals its major role in adult hematopoietic myeloid
progenitors and stem cells.

Brunet de la Grange P(1), Armstrong F, Duval V, Rouyez MC, Goardon N, Romeo PH,
Pflumio F.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Hématologie, Institut Cochin, Paris, France.

Stem cell leukemia/T cell acute leukemia 1 (SCL/TAL1) plays a key role in the
development of murine primitive hematopoiesis but its functions in adult
definitive hematopoiesis are still unclear. Using lentiviral delivery of
TAL1-directed shRNA in human hematopoietic cells, we show that decreased
expression of TAL1 induced major disorders at different levels of adult
hematopoietic cell development. Erythroid and myeloid cell production in cultures
was dramatically decreased in TAL1-directed shRNA-expressing cells, whereas
lymphoid B-cell development was normal. These results confirm the role of TAL1 in
the erythroid compartment and show TLA1's implication in the function of myeloid 
committed progenitors. Moreover, long-term cultures and transplantation of
TAL1-directed shRNA-expressing CD34+ cells into irradiated nonobese
diabetic-severe combined immunodeficient (NOD-SCID) mice led to dramatically low 
levels of human cells of all lineages including the B-lymphoid lineage, strongly 
suggesting that TAL1 has a role in the early commitment of hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs) in humans. Cultures and transplantation experiments performed with
mouse Sca1+ cells gave identical results. Altogether, these observations
definitively show that TAL1 participates in the regulation of hematopoiesis from 
HSCs to myeloid progenitors, and pinpoint TAL1 as a master protein of human and
murine adult hematopoiesis.

PMID: 16849639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Pathol. 2006 Sep;210(1):121-9.

Expression of the TAL1/SCL transcription factor in physiological and pathological
vascular processes.

Tang T(1), Shi Y, Opalenik SR, Brantley-Sieders DM, Chen J, Davidson JM, Brandt
SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
37232, USA.

The TAL1/SCL transcription factor is essential for haematopoietic commitment and 
vascular remodelling during embryonic development. To help clarify its role in
postnatal vascular processes, we characterized the expression of mouse Tal1
protein by immunocytochemistry in several experimental models of blood vessel
formation. In adult mice, Tal1 protein was expressed in rare microvascular
endothelial cells and in extravascular cells provisionally identified as
endothelial progenitors from their morphology, proximity to vessels and
expression of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2. The number of
Tal1-expressing endothelial cells increased significantly but transiently in all 
the models-hormone-induced ovulation, wound healing and tumour development.
Finally, Tal1 protein was detected in the nuclei of newly formed lymphatic
endothelial cells in tumour-bearing animals. These results show that TAL1 is
expressed by vascular endothelial cells and endothelial progenitors at sites of
physiological and pathological neovascularization and suggest a role for this
transcription factor in adult vasculogenesis. This work also provides the first
evidence for TAL1 expression in lymphangiogenesis.

Copyright (c) 2006 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published
by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 16841371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Biochem J. 2006 Oct 15;399(2):297-304.

Recruitment of the SWI/SNF protein Brg1 by a multiprotein complex effects
transcriptional repression in murine erythroid progenitors.

Xu Z(1), Meng X, Cai Y, Koury MJ, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

SWI/SNF complexes are involved in both activation and repression of
transcription. While one of two homologous ATPases, Brg1 [Brm (Brahma)-related
gene 1] or Brm, is required for their chromatin remodelling function, less is
known about how these complexes are recruited to DNA. We recently established
that a DNA-binding complex containing TAL1/SCL, E47, GATA-1, LMO2 and Ldb1
stimulates P4.2 (protein 4.2) transcription in erythroid progenitors via two E
box-GATA elements in the gene's proximal promoter. We show here that the SWI/SNF 
protein Brg1 is also associated with this complex and that both the E box and
GATA DNA-binding sites in these elements are required for Brg1 recruitment.
Further, Brg1 occupancy of the P4.2 promoter decreased with terminal erythroid
differentiation in association with increased P4.2 transcription, while enforced 
expression of Brg1 in murine erythroleukaemia cells reduced P4.2 gene expression.
Overexpression of Brg1 was associated with increased occupancy of the P4.2
promoter by the nuclear co-repressor mSin3A and HDAC2 (histone deacetylase 2) and
with reduced histone H3 and H4 acetylation. Finally, a specific HDAC inhibitor
attenuated Brg1-directed repression of P4.2 promoter activity in transfected
cells. These results provide insight into the mechanism by which SWI/SNF proteins
are recruited to promoters and suggest that transcription of P4.2, and most
likely other genes, is actively repressed until the terminal differentiation of
erythroid progenitors.

PMCID: PMC1609906
PMID: 16800816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Cancer Res. 2006 Jun 15;66(12):6014-7.

Tal1 transgenic expression reveals absence of B lymphocytes.

Palamarchuk A(1), Zanesi N, Aqeilan RI, Efanov A, Maximov V, Santanam U, Hagan
JP, Croce CM, Pekarsky Y.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, Human Cancer Genetics Program, OSU School of
Medicine, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

TAL1 oncogene encodes a helix-loop-helix transcription factor, Tal1, which is
required for blood cell development, and its activation is a frequent event in
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Tal1 interacts and inhibits other
helix-loop-helix factors such as E47 and HEB. To investigate the function of Tal1
in B cells, we generated Emu-TAL1 transgenic mouse line, expressing Tal1 in mouse
B-cell lineage. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis of
lymphocytes isolated from spleens of five out of five founders reveals complete
absence of IgM- or CD19-expressing cells. Only 2% to 3% of these cells were B220+
and 100% of B220+ cells were CD43+, indicating that these mice were able to make 
pro-B cells. Similarly, FACS analysis of bone marrow cells in Emu-TAL1 mice
revealed complete absence of B220+IgM+ and B220+CD19+ cells. Analysis of the
recombination status of IgH genes revealed the presence of D-J but absence or
drastic reduction of V-D-J rearrangements. Our results suggest that Tal1
overexpression in B cells results in a phenotype similar to that of B cells of
E47/E2A knockout animals. This represents first in vivo evidence that Tal1 can
completely inhibit E47/E2A function.

PMID: 16778172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Cancer Res. 2006 Jun 15;66(12):6008-13.

NFKB1 is a direct target of the TAL1 oncoprotein in human T leukemia cells.

Chang PY(1), Draheim K, Kelliher MA, Miyamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

We recently showed that a subset of human T acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) 
cell lines expresses low basal levels of p50, a nuclear factor-kappaB
(NF-kappaB)/Rel family member, resulting in their capacity to activate the
atypical p65:cRel complex rather than the classic p50:p65 dimer. Here, we show
that the transcription factor TAL1 (also known as SCL) binds to the promoter of
the NFKB1 gene that encodes p50 and represses its transcription to set up this
unique response in T-ALL cells. When TAL1 expression is reduced in CEM T leukemia
cells, basal NFKB1 expression is increased, and the levels of p65:cRel complex
and transcription of its target gene, such as intercellular adhesion molecule-1
(ICAM-1), are reduced in response to etoposide treatment. Moreover, a significant
negative correlation between NFKB1 and TAL1 or LMO1 was found in primary human
TAL1/LMO1 double-positive T-ALL samples previously described by Ferrando et al.
Thus, TAL1 modulates NFKB1 expression and an NF-kappaB-dependent transcriptional 
program in a subset of human T-cell leukemia cells.

PMID: 16778171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Blood. 2006 Oct 1;108(7):2248-56. Epub 2006 Jun 8.

A critical role for the transcription factor Scl in platelet production during
stress thrombopoiesis.

McCormack MP(1), Hall MA, Schoenwaelder SM, Zhao Q, Ellis S, Prentice JA, Clarke 
AJ, Slater NJ, Salmon JM, Jackson SP, Jane SM, Curtis DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Bone Marrow Research Laboratories, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne Health 
Research Directorate, c/o Royal Melbourne Hospital Post Office, Grattan St,
Parkville VIC 3050 Australia.

The generation of platelets from megakaryocytes in the steady state is regulated 
by a variety of cytokines and transcription factors, including thrombopoietin
(TPO), GATA-1, and NF-E2. Less is known about platelet production in the setting 
of stress thrombopoiesis, a pivotal event in the context of cytotoxic
chemotherapy. Here we show in mice that the transcription factor Scl is critical 
for platelet production after chemotherapy and in thrombopoiesis induced by
administration of TPO. Megakaryocytes from these mice showed appropriate
increases in number and ploidy but failed to shed platelets. Ultrastructural
examination of Scl-null megakaryocytes revealed a disorganized demarcation
membrane and reduction in platelet granules. Quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction showed that Scl-null platelets lacked NF-E2, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated Scl binding to the NF-E2 promoter in
the human megakaryoblastic-cell line Meg-01, along with its binding partners E47,
Lmo2, and the cofactors Ldb1 and GATA-2. These findings suggest that Scl acts
up-stream of NF-E2 expression to control megakaryocyte development and platelet
release in settings of thrombopoietic stress.

PMCID: PMC1895552
PMID: 16763211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Dev Biol. 2006 Sep 1;297(1):44-58. Epub 2006 May 5.

Endothelium is required for the promotion of interrenal morphogenetic movement
during early zebrafish development.

Liu YW(1), Guo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Tunghai University, Taichung 40704, Taiwan R.O.C. 
dlslys@thu.edu.tw

The adrenal cortex has a complex vasculature that is essential for growth, tissue
maintenance, and access of secreted steroids to the bloodstream. However, the
interaction between vasculature and adrenal cortex during early organogenesis
remains largely unclear. In this study, we focused on the zebrafish counterpart
of adrenal cortex, interrenal tissue, to explore the possible role of endothelium
in the development of steroidogenic tissues. The ontogeny of interrenal tissue
was found to be tightly associated with the endothelial cells (ECs) that
constitute the axial vessels. The early interrenal primordia emerge as two
clusters of cells that migrate centrally and converge at the midline, whereas the
central convergence was abrogated in the avascular cloche (clo) mutant. Neither
loss of blood circulation nor perturbations of vessel assembly could account for 
the interrenal convergence defect, implying a role of endothelial signaling prior
to the formation of axial blood vessels. Moreover, as the absence of trunk
endothelium in clo mutant was rescued by the forced expression of SCL, the
interrenal fusion defect could be alleviated. We thus conclude that endothelial
signaling is involved in the morphogenetic movement of early interrenal tissue.

PMID: 16753140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Stem Cells. 2006 Sep;24(9):2014-22. Epub 2006 May 25.

Tal1/Scl gene transduction using a lentiviral vector stimulates highly efficient 
hematopoietic cell differentiation from common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus)
embryonic stem cells.

Kurita R(1), Sasaki E, Yokoo T, Hiroyama T, Takasugi K, Imoto H, Izawa K, Dong Y,
Hashiguchi T, Soda Y, Maeda T, Suehiro Y, Tanioka Y, Nakazaki Y, Tani K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Division of Molecular and Clinical Genetics,
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan.

The development of embryonic stem cell (ESC) therapies requires the establishment
of efficient methods to differentiate ESCs into specific cell lineages. Here, we 
report the in vitro differentiation of common marmoset (CM) (Callithrix jacchus) 
ESCs into hematopoietic cells after exogenous gene transfer using vesicular
stomatitis virus-glycoprotein-pseudotyped lentiviral vectors. We transduced
hematopoietic genes, including tal1/scl, gata1, gata2, hoxB4, and lhx2, into CM
ESCs. By immunochemical and morphological analyses, we demonstrated that
overexpression of tal1/scl, but not the remaining genes, dramatically increased
hematopoiesis of CM ESCs, resulting in multiple blood-cell lineages. Furthermore,
flow cytometric analysis demonstrated that CD34, a hematopoietic stem/progenitor 
cell marker, was highly expressed in tal1/scl-overexpressing embryoid body cells.
Similar results were obtained from three independent CM ESC lines. These results 
suggest that transduction of exogenous tal1/scl cDNA into ESCs is a promising
method to induce the efficient differentiation of CM ESCs into hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells.

PMID: 16728561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 May 15;12(10):3043-9.

NOTCH1 mutations in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia: prognostic significance 
and implication in multifactorial leukemogenesis.

Zhu YM(1), Zhao WL, Fu JF, Shi JY, Pan Q, Hu J, Gao XD, Chen B, Li JM, Xiong SM, 
Gu LJ, Tang JY, Liang H, Jiang H, Xue YQ, Shen ZX, Chen Z, Chen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Shanghai Rui Jin Hospital, Medical School of Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China.

Erratum in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 15;15(4):1506.

PURPOSE: NOTCH signaling pathway is essential in T-cell development and NOTCH1
mutations are frequently present in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). 
To gain insight into its clinical significance, NOTCH1 mutation was investigated 
in 77 patients with T-ALL.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Detection of NOTCH1 mutation was done using reverse
transcription-PCR amplification and direct sequencing, and thereby compared
according to the clinical/biological data of the patients.
RESULTS: Thirty-two mutations were identified in 29 patients (with dual mutations
in 3 cases), involving not only the heterodimerization and proline/glutamic
acid/serine/threonine domains as previously reported but also the transcription
activation and ankyrin repeat domains revealed for the first time. These
mutations were significantly associated with elevated WBC count at diagnosis and 
independently linked to short survival time. Interestingly, the statistically
significant difference of survival according to NOTCH1 mutations was only
observed in adult patients (>18 years) but not in pediatric patients (< or = 18
years), possibly due to the relatively good overall response of childhood T-ALL
to the current chemotherapy. NOTCH1 mutations could coexist with HOX11, HOX11L2, 
or SIL-TAL1 expression. The negative effect of NOTCH1 mutation on prognosis was
potentiated by HOX11L2 but was attenuated by HOX11.
CONCLUSION: NOTCH1 mutation is an important prognostic marker in T-ALL and its
predictive value could be even further increased if coevaluated with other
T-cell-related regulatory genes. NOTCH pathway thus acts combinatorially with
oncogenic transcriptional factors on T-ALL pathogenesis.

PMID: 16707600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Blood. 2006 Sep 1;108(5):1533-41. Epub 2006 May 4.

Tetracycline-controlled transgenic targeting from the SCL locus directs
conditional expression to erythrocytes, megakaryocytes, granulocytes, and
c-kit-expressing lineage-negative hematopoietic cells.

Bockamp E(1), Antunes C, Maringer M, Heck R, Presser K, Beilke S, Ohngemach S,
Alt R, Cross M, Sprengel R, Hartwig U, Kaina B, Schmitt S, Eshkind L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology/Mouse Genetics, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, 
Obere Zahlbacher Str 67, 55131 Mainz, Germany. bockamp@mail.uni-mainz.de

The stem cell leukemia gene SCL, also known as TAL-1, encodes a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor expressed in erythroid, myeloid,
megakaryocytic, and hematopoietic stem cells. To be able to make use of the
unique tissue-restricted and spatio-temporal expression pattern of the SCL gene, 
we have generated a knock-in mouse line containing the tTA-2S tetracycline
transactivator under the control of SCL regulatory elements. Analysis of this
mouse using different tetracycline-dependent reporter strains demonstrated that
switchable transgene expression was restricted to erythrocytes, megakaryocytes,
granulocytes, and, importantly, to the c-kit-expressing and lineage-negative cell
fraction of the bone marrow. In addition, conditional transgene activation also
was detected in a very minor population of endothelial cells and in the kidney.
However, no activation of the reporter transgene was found in the brain of adult 
mice. These findings suggested that the expression of tetracycline-responsive
reporter genes recapitulated the known endogenous expression pattern of SCL. Our 
data therefore demonstrate that exogenously inducible and reversible expression
of selected transgenes in myeloid, megakaryocytic, erythroid, and
c-kit-expressing lineage-negative bone marrow cells can be directed through SCL
regulatory elements. The SCL knock-in mouse presented here represents a powerful 
tool for studying normal and malignant hematopoiesis in vivo.

PMID: 16675709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Leukemia. 2006 Jul;20(7):1261-9. Epub 2006 May 4.

MTB, the murine homolog of condensin II subunit CAP-G2, represses transcription
and promotes erythroid cell differentiation.

Xu Y(1), Leung CG, Lee DC, Kennedy BK, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Institute for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

Chromosome condensation is essential for proper segregation of duplicated sister 
chromatids in mitosis. Mammalian erythroid maturation is also associated with
gradual nuclear condensation. However, few proteins that are directly involved in
chromosome condensation during erythropoiesis have been identified. In this
report, we show that MTB (more than blood), which was initially isolated in a
yeast two-hybrid screen for proteins that interact with the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein stem cell leukemia (SCL), and later identified as
the murine homolog of the condensin II subunit CAP-G2, participates in erythroid 
cell development. MTB interacts with SCL and another hematopoietic bHLH protein, 
E12, and is recruited to the nucleus by SCL and E12. In addition, MTB can repress
SCL/E12-mediated transcriptional activation. Consistent with the model that MTB
may function together with SCL/E12 heterodimer during erythroid cell development,
MTB is highly expressed in the erythroid lineage and is upregulated upon
erythroid differentiation. Moreover, overexpression of MTB promotes the terminal 
differentiation of the murine erythroleukemia erythroid cell line. Together,
these findings demonstrate that the condensin II subunit MTB/mCAP-G2 plays a
novel function during erythropoiesis and suggest that key hematopoietic
transcription factors such as SCL and E12 may regulate the terminal
differentiation of hematopoietic cells through the interaction with condensin
complexes.

PMID: 16673016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Blood. 2006 Aug 15;108(4):1251-9. Epub 2006 Apr 20.

Role of a 5'-enhancer in the transcriptional regulation of the human endothelial 
cell protein C receptor gene.

Mollica LR(1), Crawley JT, Liu K, Rance JB, Cockerill PN, Follows GA, Landry JR, 
Wells DJ, Lane DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College London, UK.
l.mollica@imperial.ac.uk

The endothelial cell protein C receptor (EPCR) is expressed by endothelial cells 
of large blood vessels and by hematopoietic stem cells. DNaseI hypersensitive
(DH) site mapping across 38 kb of the human EPCR gene (hEPCR) locus identified 3 
potential regulatory elements. By itself, the DH region spanning the proximal
promoter (PP) was unable to direct cell-specific transcription in transgenic
mice. A second DH element, located upstream of PP and termed -5.5HS was
hypersensitive only in endothelial cells (ECs) and immature hematopoietic cell
lines. Transgenes expressing LacZ under the control of -5.5HS coupled to either
PP or the SV40 promoter were able to direct beta-galactosidase activity to the
endothelium of large vessels during embryogenesis and adulthood. The -5.5HS
exhibited enhancer activity that was conferred by the interplay of transcription 
factors interacting with conserved Ets and composite GATA/Tal1 motifs. The third 
DH element, located in intron 2, was primarily hypersensitive in EPCR-negative
cells, and capable of initiating antisense transcription, suggesting a role in
hEPCR silencing. This study identifies critical elements required for the tissue 
specificity of hEPCR and suggests a mechanism for endothelial and hematopoietic
stem cell-specific transcriptional regulation that reflects the common origin of 
these cell types.

PMID: 16627757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Eur J Neurosci. 2006 Apr;23(7):1677-89.

The essential haematopoietic transcription factor Scl is also critical for
neuronal development.

Bradley CK(1), Takano EA, Hall MA, Göthert JR, Harvey AR, Begley CG, van Eekelen 
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute for Child Health Research and Centre for Child Health
Research at the University of Western Australia, Subiaco WA 6008, Australia.

Abstract The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Scl displays
tissue-restricted expression and is critical for the establishment of the
haematopoietic system; loss of Scl results in embryonic death due to absolute
anaemia. Scl is also expressed in neurons of the mouse diencephalon,
mesencephalon and metencephalon; however, its requirement in those sites remains 
to be determined. Here we report conditional deletion of Scl in neuronal
precursor cells using the Cre/LoxP system. Neuronal-Scl deleted mice died
prematurely, were growth retarded and exhibited an altered motor phenotype
characterized by hyperactivity and circling. Moreover, ablation of Scl in the
nervous system affected brain morphology with abnormal neuronal development in
brain regions known to express Scl under normal circumstances; there was an
almost complete absence of Scl-null neurons in the hindbrain and partial loss of 
Scl-null neurons in the thalamus and midbrain from early neurogenesis onwards.
Our results demonstrate a crucial role for Scl in the development of
Scl-expressing neurons, including gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic
interneurons. Our study represents one of the first demonstrations of functional 
overlap of a single bHLH protein that regulates neural and haematopoietic cell
development. This finding underlines Scl's critical function in cell fate
determination of mesodermal as well as neuroectodermal tissues.

PMID: 16623824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Blood. 2006 Aug 1;108(3):986-92. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Transcriptional regulatory networks downstream of TAL1/SCL in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Palomero T(1), Odom DT, O'Neil J, Ferrando AA, Margolin A, Neuberg DS, Winter SS,
Larson RS, Li W, Liu XS, Young RA, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, 1150 St Nicholas Ave, New 
York, NY 10032, USA.

Aberrant expression of 1 or more transcription factor oncogenes is a critical
component of the molecular pathogenesis of human T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL); however, oncogenic transcriptional programs downstream of T-ALL
oncogenes are mostly unknown. TAL1/SCL is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factor oncogene aberrantly expressed in 60% of human T-ALLs. We
used chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) on chip to identify 71 direct
transcriptional targets of TAL1/SCL. Promoters occupied by TAL1 were also
frequently bound by the class I bHLH proteins E2A and HEB, suggesting that
TAL1/E2A as well as TAL1/HEB heterodimers play a role in transformation of T-cell
precursors. Using RNA interference, we demonstrated that TAL1 is required for the
maintenance of the leukemic phenotype in Jurkat cells and showed that TAL1
binding can be associated with either repression or activation of genes whose
promoters occupied by TAL1, E2A, and HEB. In addition, oligonucleotide microarray
analysis of RNA from 47 primary T-ALL samples showed specific expression
signatures involving TAL1 targets in TAL1-expressing compared with -nonexpressing
human T-ALLs. Our results indicate that TAL1 may act as a bifunctional
transcriptional regulator (activator and repressor) at the top of a complex
regulatory network that disrupts normal T-cell homeostasis and contributes to
leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1895859
PMID: 16621969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 15;66(8):4167-72.

Hemangioblastomas share protein expression with embryonal hemangioblast
progenitor cell.

Gläsker S(1), Li J, Xia JB, Okamoto H, Zeng W, Lonser RR, Zhuang Z, Oldfield EH, 
Vortmeyer AO.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institutes of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Hemangioblastomas are central nervous system (CNS) tumors of unknown
histogenesis, which can occur sporadically or in von Hippel-Lindau disease.
Hemangioblastomas are composed of neoplastic "stromal" cells of unknown origin,
accompanied by intensive reactive angiogenesis. Failure to specify the cytologic 
origin of the stromal cell has precluded the development of nonsurgical therapies
and limits understanding of its basic biology. We report that the stromal cells
express proteins (Scl, brachyury, Csf-1R, Gata-1, Flk-1, and Tie-2) that
characterize embryonic progenitor cells with hemangioblastic differentiation
potential and conclude that embryonic progenitors with hemangioblast potential
represent a possible cytologic equivalent of the stromal cell. We also identified
a new autocrine/paracrine stimulatory loop between the receptor Tie-2 and the
hypoxia-inducible factor target Ang-1, which, combined with previous
observations, suggests that a variety of autocrine loops may be initiated in
hemangioblastomas, depending on the differentiation status of the tumor cells and
the extent of HIF downstream activation. Finally, the consistent identification
of Scl in the stromal cells may help explain the unique and characteristic
topographical distribution of hemangioblastomas within the CNS.

PMID: 16618738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Apr 18;103(16):6338-43. Epub 2006 Apr 10.

Absence of the transcription factor CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha results 
in loss of myeloid identity in bcr/abl-induced malignancy.

Wagner K(1), Zhang P, Rosenbauer F, Drescher B, Kobayashi S, Radomska HS, Kutok
JL, Gilliland DG, Krauter J, Tenen DG.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Room 954, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.

The lineage-determining transcription factor CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha
(C/EBPalpha) is required for myeloid differentiation. Decreased function or
expression of C/EBPalpha is often found in human acute myeloid leukemia. However,
the precise impact of C/EBPalpha deficiency on the maturation arrest in
leukemogenesis is not well understood. To address this question, we used a murine
transplantation model of a bcr/abl-induced myeloproliferative disease. The
expression of bcr/abl in C/EBPalphapos fetal liver cells led to a chronic myeloid
leukemia-like disease. Surprisingly, bcr/abl-expressing C/EBPalpha-/- fetal liver
cells failed to induce a myeloid disease in transplanted mice, but caused a
fatal, transplantable erythroleukemia instead. Accordingly, increased expression 
of the transcription factors SCL and GATA-1 in hematopoietic precursor cells of
C/EBPalpha-/-R01-EY-11298 ) fetal livers was found. The mechanism for the lineage
shift from myeloid to erythroid leukemia was studied in a bcr/abl-positive cell
line. Consistent with findings of the transplant model, expression of C/EBPalpha 
and GATA-1 was inversely correlated. Id1, an inhibitor of erythroid
differentiation, was identified as a critical direct target of C/EBPalpha.
Down-regulation of Id1 by RNA interference impaired C/EBPalpha-induced
granulocytic differentiation. Taken together, our study provides evidence that
myeloid lineage identity of malignant hematopoietic progenitor cells requires the
residual expression of C/EBPalpha.

PMCID: PMC1458879
PMID: 16606850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(7):2615-25.

Transcriptional link between blood and bone: the stem cell leukemia gene and its 
+19 stem cell enhancer are active in bone cells.

Pimanda JE(1), Silberstein L, Dominici M, Dekel B, Bowen M, Oldham S, Kallianpur 
A, Brandt SJ, Tannahill D, Göttgens B, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2XY, United Kingdom.

Blood and vascular cells are generated during early embryogenesis from a common
precursor, the hemangioblast. The stem cell leukemia gene (SCL/tal 1) encodes a
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that is essential for the normal
development of blood progenitors and blood vessels. We have previously
characterized a panel of SCL enhancers including the +19 element, which directs
expression to hematopoietic stem cells and endothelium. Here we demonstrate that 
SCL is expressed in bone primordia during embryonic development and in adult
osteoblasts. Despite consistent expression in cells of the osteogenic lineage,
SCL protein is not required for bone specification of embryonic stem cells. In
transgenic mice, the SCL +19 core enhancer directed reporter gene expression to
vascular smooth muscle and bone in addition to blood and endothelium. A 644-bp
fragment containing the SCL +19 core enhancer was active in both blood and bone
cell lines and was bound in vivo by a common array of Ets and GATA transcription 
factors. Taken together with the recent observation that a common progenitor can 
give rise to blood and bone cells, our results suggest that the SCL +19 enhancer 
targets a mesodermal progenitor capable of generating hematopoietic, vascular,
and osteoblastic progeny.

PMCID: PMC1430329
PMID: 16537906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Eukaryot Cell. 2006 Mar;5(3):518-29.

Posttranslational, translational, and transcriptional responses to nitric oxide
stress in Cryptococcus neoformans: implications for virulence.

Missall TA(1), Pusateri ME, Donlin MJ, Chambers KT, Corbett JA, Lodge JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saint Louis University
School of Medicine, 1402 S. Grand Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63104, USA.

The ability of the fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans to evade the mammalian
innate immune response and cause disease is partially due to its ability to
respond to and survive nitrosative stress. In this study, we use proteomic and
genomic approaches to elucidate the response of C. neoformans to nitric oxide
stress. This nitrosative stress response involves both transcriptional,
translational, and posttranslational regulation. Proteomic and genomic analyses
reveal changes in expression of stress response genes. In addition, genes
involved in cell wall organization, respiration, signal transduction, transport, 
transcriptional control, and metabolism show altered expression under nitrosative
conditions. Posttranslational modifications of transaldolase (Tal1), aconitase
(Aco1), and the thiol peroxidase, Tsa1, are regulated during nitrosative stress. 
One stress-related protein up-regulated in the presence of nitric oxide stress is
glutathione reductase (Glr1). To further investigate its functional role during
nitrosative stress, a deletion mutant was generated. We show that this glr1Delta 
mutant is sensitive to nitrosative stress and macrophage killing in addition to
being avirulent in mice. These studies define the response to nitrosative stress 
in this important fungal pathogen.

PMCID: PMC1398057
PMID: 16524907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Mech Dev. 2006 Apr;123(4):277-87. Epub 2006 Mar 9.

Knockdown of zebrafish crim1 results in a bent tail phenotype with defects in
somite and vascular development.

Kinna G(1), Kolle G, Carter A, Key B, Lieschke GJ, Perkins A, Little MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Qld 4072, Australia.

The Crim1 gene encodes a transmembrane protein containing six cysteine-rich
repeats similar to those found in the BMP antagonist, chordin (chd). To
investigate its physiological role, zebrafish crim1 was cloned and shown to be
both maternally and zygotically expressed during zebrafish development in sites
including the vasculature, intermediate cell mass, notochord, and otic vesicle.
Bent or hooked tails with U-shaped somites were observed in 85% of morphants from
12 hpf. This was accompanied by a loss of muscle pioneer cells. While morpholino 
knockdown of crim1 showed some evidence of ventralisation, including expansion of
the intermediate cell mass (ICM), reduction in head size bent tails and
disruption to the somites and notochord, this did not mimic the classically
ventralised phenotype, as assessed by the pattern of expression of the dorsal
markers chordin, otx2 and the ventral markers eve1, pax2.1, tal1 and gata1
between 75% epiboly and six-somites. From 24 hpf, morphants displayed an
expansion of the ventral mesoderm-derived ICM, as evidenced by expansion of tal1,
lmo2 and crim1 itself. Analysis of the crim1 morphant phenotype in Tg(fli:EGFP)
fish showed a clear reduction in the endothelial cells forming the intersegmental
vessels and a loss of the dorsal longitudinal anastomotic vessel (DLAV). Hence,
the primary role of zebrafish crim1 is likely to be the regulation of somitic and
vascular development.

PMID: 16524703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Blood. 2006 Jun 15;107(12):4678-86. Epub 2006 Mar 2.

The SCL relative LYL-1 is required for fetal and adult hematopoietic stem cell
function and B-cell differentiation.

Capron C(1), Lécluse Y, Kaushik AL, Foudi A, Lacout C, Sekkai D, Godin I, Albagli
O, Poullion I, Svinartchouk F, Schanze E, Vainchenker W, Sablitzky F,
Bennaceur-Griscelli A, Duménil D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicicale (INSERM) U362,
Institut Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) arise, self-renew, or give rise to all
hematopoietic lineages through the effects of transcription factors activated by 
signaling cascades. Lyl-1 encodes a transcription factor containing a basic
helix-hoop-helix (bHLH) motif closely related to scl/tal, which controls numerous
decisions in embryonic and adult hematopoiesis. We report here that Lyl-1 null
mice are viable and display normal blood cell counts, except for a reduced number
of B cells resulting from a partial block after the pro-B stage. Nevertheless,
the deletion of Lyl-1 results in a diminution in the frequency of immature
progenitors (Lin(-), CD34(-), sca-1(+), c-kit(+) [LSK], and LSK-side population
[LSK-SP]) and in S(12) colony-forming unit (CFU-S(12)) and long-term
culture-initiating cell (LTC-IC) content in embryonic day 14 fetal liver (E14 FL)
and adult bone marrow (BM). More important, Lyl-1(-/-) E14 FL cells and BM are
severely impaired in their competitive reconstituting abilities, especially with 
respect to B and T lineage reconstitution. Thus, ablation of Lyl-1 quantitatively
and functionally affects HSCs, a cell population that transcribes Lyl-1 more
actively than their differentiated progenies. Our results demonstrate for the
first time that Lyl-1 functions are important for HSC properties and B-cell
differentiation and that they are largely distinct from scl functions.

PMID: 16514064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Dev Growth Differ. 2006 Feb;48(2):117-28.

Generation of new human embryonic stem cell lines with diploid and triploid
karyotypes.

Baharvand H(1), Ashtiani SK, Taee A, Massumi M, Valojerdi MR, Yazdi PE, Moradi
SZ, Farrokhi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cells, Royan Institute, Tehran, Iran. baharvand50@yahoo.com

Human pluripotent embryonic stem cells (hESC) have great promise for research
into human developmental biology and the development of cell therapies for the
treatment of diseases. To meet the increased demand for characterized hESC lines,
we present the derivation and characterization of five hESC lines on mouse
embryonic fibroblast cells. Our stem cell lines are characterized by morphology, 
long-term expansion, and expression profiles of a number of specific markers,
including TRA-1-60, TRA-1-81, alkaline phosphatase, connexin 43, OCT-4, NANOG,
CXCR4, NODAL, LEFTY2, THY-1, TDGF1, PAX6, FOXD3, SOX2, EPHA2, FGF4, TAL1, AC133
and REX-1. The pluripotency of the cell line was confirmed by spontaneous
differentiation under in vitro conditions. Whereas all of the cell lines
expressed all the characteristics of undifferentiated pluripotent hESC, two of
the cell lines carried a triploid karyotype.

PMID: 16512855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Am J Gastroenterol. 2006 Mar;101(3):581-92. Epub 2006 Feb 8.

A study of candidate genotypes associated with dyspepsia in a U.S. community.

Camilleri CE(1), Carlson PJ, Camilleri M, Castillo EJ, Locke GR 3rd, Geno DM,
Stephens DA, Zinsmeister AR, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Research Unit, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 200 First
Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Gastroenterol. 2006 Mar;101(3):593-5.

BACKGROUND: The role of genetic predisposition to the development of dyspepsia is
unclear. Recently, a significant association was reported with CC genotype of
GNbeta3.
AIM: To explore the association of candidate genotypes altering adrenergic,
serotonergic, CCKergic, and G protein functions, and dyspepsia in a sample from a
U.S. community.
METHODS: Dyspeptics and healthy controls were identified among community
respondents who had been randomly selected to complete validated questionnaires. 
Other diseases were excluded by face-to-face history and physical examination.
Polymorphisms of candidate genes for alpha(2A), alpha(2C), 5-HT(1A), 5-HT(2A),
5-HT(2C), CCK-1 receptors and CCK promoter, GNbeta3 protein, and SERT-promoter
(SERT-P) were studied. The association between polymorphisms and meal-related or 
meal-unrelated dyspepsia, high somatic symptom scores, and somatization were
evaluated using Fisher's exact test.
RESULTS: DNA was available from 41 dyspeptics and 47 healthy controls from
Olmsted County. Community dyspepsia unrelated to meals was associated with both
homozygous GNbeta3 protein 825T and C alleles. There were no significant
associations with meal-related dyspepsia. Using Rome II subgroups, the same
genotype was associated with dysmotility-like and other dyspepsia. Higher
somatization scores were not significantly associated with any of the candidate
genes when considered as single factors.
CONCLUSION: Meal-unrelated dyspepsia in a U.S. community study is associated with
the homozygous 825T or C alleles of GNbeta3 protein. Candidate genes controlling 
adrenergic, serotonergic, and CCKergic functions do not appear to be associated
with dyspepsia.

PMID: 16464220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. EMBO J. 2006 Jan 25;25(2):357-66. Epub 2006 Jan 12.

ETO2 coordinates cellular proliferation and differentiation during
erythropoiesis.

Goardon N(1), Lambert JA, Rodriguez P, Nissaire P, Herblot S, Thibault P, Dumenil
D, Strouboulis J, Romeo PH, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Hématologie, Institut Cochin, INSERM U567, CNRS UMR 8104,
Université Paris V, Paris, France.

The passage from proliferation to terminal differentiation is critical for normal
development and is often perturbed in malignancies. To define the molecular
mechanisms that govern this process during erythropoiesis, we have used
tagging/proteomics approaches and characterized protein complexes nucleated by
TAL-1/SCL, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that specifies the
erythrocytic lineage. In addition to known TAL-1 partners, GATA-1, E2A, HEB, LMO2
and Ldb1, we identify the ETO2 repressor as a novel component recruited to TAL-1 
complexes through interaction with E2A/HEB. Ectopic expression and siRNA
knockdown experiments in hematopoietic progenitor cells show that ETO2 actively
represses erythroid TAL-1 target genes and governs the expansion of erythroid
progenitors. At the onset of erythroid differentiation, a change in the
stoichiometry of ETO2 within the TAL-1 complex activates the expression of known 
erythroid-specific TAL-1 target genes and of Gfi-1b and p21(Cip), encoding two
essential regulators of erythroid cell proliferation. These results suggest that 
the dynamics of ETO2 recruitment within nuclear complexes couple cell
proliferation to cell differentiation and determine the onset of terminal
erythroid maturation.

PMCID: PMC1383517
PMID: 16407974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Oncogene. 2006 May 18;25(21):3023-31.

p16Ink4a or p19Arf loss contributes to Tal1-induced leukemogenesis in mice.

Shank-Calvo JA(1), Draheim K, Bhasin M, Kelliher MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, 01650, USA.

Analysis of the INK4A/ARF locus in human T-ALL patients revealed frequent
deletions in exon 2, the exon common to both p16(INK4A) and p14(ARF). Other
studies have described selective deletion of exon 1beta of p14(ARF) or
methylation of the p16(INK4A) promoter. Therefore, it is unclear from these
studies whether loss of p16(INK4A) and/or p14(ARF) contributes to the development
of T-ALL. To elucidate the relative contribution of the ink4a/arf locus to T-cell
leukemogenesis, we mated our tal1 transgenic mice to ink4a/arf-/-, p16(ink4a)-/-,
and p19(arf)-/- mice and generated tal1/ink4a/arf+/-, tal1/p16(ink4a)+/-, and
tal1/p19(arf)+/- mice. Each of these mice developed T-cell leukemia rapidly,
indicating that loss of either p16(ink4a) or p19(arf) cooperates with Tal1 to
induce leukemia in mice. Preleukemic studies reveal that Tal1 expression
stimulates entry into the cell cycle and thymocyte apoptosis in vivo.
Interestingly, mice expressing a DNA-binding mutant of Tal1 do not exhibit
increases in S phase cells. The S phase induction is accompanied by an increase
in thymocyte apoptosis in tal1 transgenic mice. Whereas apoptosis is reduced to
wild-type levels in tal1/ink4a/arf-/- mice, S phase induction remains unaffected.
Thus, Tal1 stimulates cell cycle entry independent of the ink4a/arf locus, but
its ability to induce apoptosis is Ink4a/Arf-dependent.

PMID: 16407836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Blood. 2006 Apr 15;107(8):3313-20. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Cross talk among Notch3, pre-TCR, and Tal1 in T-cell development and
leukemogenesis.

Talora C(1), Cialfi S, Oliviero C, Palermo R, Pascucci M, Frati L, Vacca A,
Gulino A, Screpanti I.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Patologia, University La Sapienza,
Viale Regina Elena 32400161 Roma, Italy.

Integrated pathways are believed to determine hematopoietic cell fate and/or
neoplastic transformation. Notch signaling has been shown to regulate T-cell
differentiation and leukemogenesis. However, specific target genes and molecular 
partners are not fully elucidated. We show that Notch3 activation sustains
aberrant SCL/Tal1 overexpression and phosphorylation in mature thymocytes.
Furthermore, we define the role of SCL/Tal1 as a component of an activator
complex, including phosphorylated Tal1 and Sp1, that specifically enhances cyclin
D1 expression and demonstrate that Tal1/Sp1 specifically co-occupy the D1
promoter in vivo, only in the presence of pre-T-cell receptor (TCR). We therefore
conclude not only that cyclin D1 is a target of the Tal1/Sp1 complex, but also
that Notch3-dependent activation of pre-TCR/ERK signaling regulates SCL/Tal1
function.

PMID: 16368887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. PLoS Biol. 2006 Jan;4(1):e10.

Ets1-related protein is a key regulator of vasculogenesis in zebrafish.

Sumanas S(1), Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, USA.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2006 Jan;4(1):e24.

During embryonic development, multiple signaling pathways control specification, 
migration, and differentiation of the vascular endothelial cell precursors,
angioblasts. No single gene responsible for the commitment of mesenchymal cells
to the angioblast cell fate has been identified as yet. Here we report
characterization and functional studies of Etsrp, a novel zebrafish ETS domain
protein. etsrp embryonic expression is only restricted to vascular endothelial
cells and their earliest precursors. Morpholino knockdown of Etsrp protein
function resulted in the complete absence of circulation in zebrafish embryos.
Angioblasts in etsrp-morpholino-injected embryos (morphants) failed to undergo
migration and differentiation and did not coalesce into functional blood vessels.
Expression of all vascular endothelial molecular markers tested was severely
reduced in etsrp morphants, whereas hematopoietic markers were not affected.
Overexpression of etsrp RNA caused multiple cell types to express vascular
endothelial markers. etsrp RNA restored expression of vascular markers in cloche 
mutants, defective in hematopoietic and endothelial cell formation, arguing that 
etsrp functions downstream of cloche in angioblast formation. etsrp gene function
was also required for endothelial marker induction by the vascular endothelial
growth factor (vegf) and stem cell leukemia (scl/tal1). These results demonstrate
that Etsrp is necessary and sufficient for the initiation of vasculogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1310653
PMID: 16336046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005 Dec;71(12):8249-56.

Improvement of xylose uptake and ethanol production in recombinant Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae through an inverse metabolic engineering approach.

Jin YS(1), Alper H, Yang YT, Stephanopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Room 56-469, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

We used an inverse metabolic engineering approach to identify gene targets for
improved xylose assimilation in recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Specifically, we created a genomic fragment library from Pichia stipitis and
introduced it into recombinant S. cerevisiae expressing XYL1 and XYL2. Through
serial subculturing enrichment of the transformant library, 16 transformants were
identified and confirmed to have a higher growth rate on xylose. Sequencing of
the 16 plasmids isolated from these transformants revealed that the majority of
the inserts (10 of 16) contained the XYL3 gene, thus confirming the previous
finding that XYL3 is the consensus target for increasing xylose assimilation.
Following a sequential search for gene targets, we repeated the complementation
enrichment process in a XYL1 XYL2 XYL3 background and identified 15 fast-growing 
transformants, all of which harbored the same plasmid. This plasmid contained an 
open reading frame (ORF) designated PsTAL1 based on a high level of homology with
S. cerevisiae TAL1. To further investigate whether the newly identified PsTAL1
ORF is responsible for the enhanced-growth phenotype, we constructed an
expression cassette containing the PsTAL1 ORF under the control of a constitutive
promoter and transformed it into an S. cerevisiae recombinant expressing XYL1,
XYL2, and XYL3. The resulting recombinant strain exhibited a 100% increase in the
growth rate and a 70% increase in ethanol production (0.033 versus 0.019 g
ethanol/g cells . h) on xylose compared to the parental strain. Interestingly,
overexpression of PsTAL1 did not cause growth inhibition when cells were grown on
glucose, unlike overexpression of the ScTAL1 gene. These results suggest that
PsTAL1 is a better gene target for engineering of the pentose phosphate pathway
in recombinant S. cerevisiae.

PMCID: PMC1317456
PMID: 16332810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Nature. 2005 Nov 17;438(7066):360-3.

Specification of astrocytes by bHLH protein SCL in a restricted region of the
neural tube.

Muroyama Y(1), Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH, Rowitch DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney
Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Astrocytes are the most abundant and functionally diverse glial population in the
vertebrate central nervous system (CNS). However, the mechanisms underlying
astrocyte specification are poorly understood. It is well established that
cellular diversification of neurons in the embryo is generated by
position-dependent extrinsic signals and combinatorial interactions of
transcription factors that direct specific cell fates by suppressing alternative 
fates. It is unknown whether a comparable process determines embryonic astrocyte 
identity. Indeed, astrocyte development is generally thought to take place in a
position-independent manner. Here we show multiple functions of Stem cell
leukaemia (Scl, also known as Tal1), which encodes a basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factor, in the regulation of both astrocyte versus
oligodendrocyte cell fate acquisition and V2b versus V2a interneuron cell fate
acquisition in the p2 domain of the developing vertebrate spinal cord. Our
findings demonstrate a regionally restricted transcriptional programme necessary 
for astrocyte and V2b interneuron development, with striking parallels to the
involvement of SCL in haematopoiesis. They further indicate that acquisition of
embryonic glial subtype identity might be regulated by genetic interactions
between SCL and the transcription factor Olig2 in the ventral neural tube.

PMID: 16292311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(23):10235-50.

ETO-2 associates with SCL in erythroid cells and megakaryocytes and provides
repressor functions in erythropoiesis.

Schuh AH(1), Tipping AJ, Clark AJ, Hamlett I, Guyot B, Iborra FJ, Rodriguez P,
Strouboulis J, Enver T, Vyas P, Porcher C.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

Lineage specification and cellular maturation require coordinated regulation of
gene expression programs. In large part, this is dependent on the activator and
repressor functions of protein complexes associated with tissue-specific
transcriptional regulators. In this study, we have used a proteomic approach to
characterize multiprotein complexes containing the key hematopoietic regulator
SCL in erythroid and megakaryocytic cell lines. One of the novel SCL-interacting 
proteins identified in both cell types is the transcriptional corepressor ETO-2. 
Interaction between endogenous proteins was confirmed in primary cells. We then
showed that SCL complexes are shared but also significantly differ in the two
cell types. Importantly, SCL/ETO-2 interacts with another corepressor, Gfi-1b, in
red cells but not megakaryocytes. The SCL/ETO-2/Gfi-1b association is lost during
erythroid differentiation of primary fetal liver cells. Genetic studies of
erythroid cells show that ETO-2 exerts a repressor effect on SCL target genes. We
suggest that, through its association with SCL, ETO-2 represses gene expression
in the early stages of erythroid differentiation and that alleviation/modulation 
of the repressive state is then required for expression of genes necessary for
terminal erythroid maturation to proceed.

PMCID: PMC1291220
PMID: 16287841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Leukemia. 2006 Jan;20(1):82-6.

Cyclin D2 dysregulation by chromosomal translocations to TCR loci in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemias.

Clappier E(1), Cuccuini W, Cayuela JM, Vecchione D, Baruchel A, Dombret H, Sigaux
F, Soulier J.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Rearrangements and Cancer Group, INSERM U728 and Institut Universitaire
d'Hematologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis and Paris 7 University, Paris, France.

Strong expression of at least one of the three D-type cyclins is common in human 
cancers. While the cyclin D1 and D3 genes (CCND1 and CCND3) are recurrently
involved in genomic rearrangements, especially in B-cell lymphoid neoplasias, no 
clear involvement of the cyclin D2 gene (CCND2) has been reported to date. Here, 
we identified chromosomal translocations targeting the CCND2 locus at 12p13, and 
the T-cell receptor beta (TCRB) or the TCRA/D loci in T-cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemias (T-ALLs). Expression analysis demonstrated dramatic cyclin D2
overexpression in the translocated cases (n=3) compared to other T-ALLs (total,
n=89). In order to evaluate dysregulation in T-ALL with respect to normal T-cell 
differentiation, we analyzed CCND2 expression in normal purified human thymic
subpopulations. CCND2 levels were downregulated through progression from the
early stages of human T-cell differentiation, further suggesting that the massive
and sustained expression in the CCND2-rearranged T-ALL cases was oncogenic.
Association with other oncogene expression (TAL1, HOXAs, or TLX3/HOX11L2), NOTCH1
activating mutations, and/or CDKN2A/p16/ARF deletion, showed that cyclin D2
dysregulation could contribute to multi-event oncogenesis in various T-ALL
groups. This report is the first clear evidence of a direct involvement of cyclin
D2 in human cancer due to recurrent somatic genetic alterations.

PMID: 16270038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Dev Dyn. 2006 Jan;235(1):60-7.

The 5' zebrafish scl promoter targets transcription to the brain, spinal cord,
and hematopoietic and endothelial progenitors.

Jin H(1), Xu J, Qian F, Du L, Tan CY, Lin Z, Peng J, Wen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Immunology, Institute of Molecular
and Cell Biology, Proteos, Singapore.

The stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription 
factor and is essential for embryonic angiogenesis, hematopoietic stem cell
specification, and erythrocyte maturation. Here, we report the isolation and
characterization of the zebrafish scl promoter. We show that a 5-kilobase (kb)
genomic fragment immediately upstream of the translation start site is capable of
targeting the enhanced green fluorescence protein (EGFP) expression to the
anterior and posterior lateral mesoderm where the endogenous scl normally
expresses. Detailed analysis of the stable transgenic fish reveals that this 5-kb
upstream sequence is sufficient to direct the EGFP transcription to the brain,
spinal cord, and hematopoietic-endothelial progenitors, possibly the
hemangioblast, but not primitive erythrocyte, suggesting that the zebrafish scl
transcription in hematopoietic-endothelial progenitors and erythrocyte is
regulated by distinct cis element(s). Our study has defined the cis regulatory
element(s) for zebrafish scl expression in the brain, spinal cord, and
hematopoietic-endothelial progenitors and established a valuable transgenic line 
Tg(5'5kbscl:EGFP) for studying hematopoietic lineage development.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16258937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Biol Reprod. 2006 Feb;74(2):295-306. Epub 2005 Oct 12.

Efficient and repetitive production of hematopoietic and endothelial cells from
feeder-free monolayer culture system of primate embryonic stem cells.

Zhang H(1), Saeki K, Kimura A, Saeki K, Nakahara M, Doshi M, Kondo Y, Nakano T,
Yuo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Research Institute, International Medical Center of 
Japan, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan.

Retraction in
    Biol Reprod. 2006 Sep;75(3):487.

We have established an innovative culture system for the efficient
differentiation of hematopoietic and endothelial cells from primate embryonic
stem (ES) cells without feeder cells, embryoid bodies, or cell-sorting processes.
After several days' culture in murine stromal OP9-conditioned medium supplemented
with a cytokine cocktail on collagen-coated dishes, ES cells differentiated into 
a very unique population of cells with a finger-like appearance. These
finger-like cells were positive for mesodermal and/or hemangioblastic markers of 
kinase insert domain receptor (KDR) and T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1
(TAL1), and produced large amounts of protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor
type, C-positive hematopoietic cells. These hematopoietic cells showed the
morphology of immature hematopoietic cells, formed blast cell colonies with high 
efficiency, and were positive for CD34 antigen, KDR, TAL1, and GATA binding
protein 1, suggesting that these blast cells are equivalent to the multipotent
hematopoietic progenitor cells. Moreover, they produced functional macrophages in
murine stromal MS-5-conditioned medium and primitive erythroblasts in the
presence of erythropoietin. The finger-like cells, putative mesodermal
progenitors and/or hemangioblasts, actively proliferated and repetitively
produced hematopoietic cells as long as they were maintained on the original
dish. By contrast, the majority of the finger-like cells differentiated into
endothelial cells with specific markers and specific functions after transfer to 
fresh dishes, indicating that conditions established in the original dish
supported the proliferation and hematopoietic differentiation of the finger-like 
cells. Our method provides a highly controllable culture protocol for repetitive 
production of hematopoietic and endothelial cells from feeder-free monolayer
cultivation of primate ES cells.

PMID: 16221992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 16;280(50):41636-44. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

Distinct roles for SCL in erythroid specification and maturation in zebrafish.

Juarez MA(1), Su F, Chun S, Kiel MJ, Lyons SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology and Cellular 
and Molecular Biology Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109,
USA.

The stem cell leukemia (SCL) transcription factor is essential for vertebrate
hematopoiesis. Using the powerful zebrafish model for embryonic analysis, we
compared the effects of either reducing or ablating Scl using morpholino-modified
antisense RNAs. Ablation of Scl resulted in the loss of primitive and definitive 
hematopoiesis, consistent with its essential role in these processes.
Interestingly, in embryos with severely reduced Scl levels, erythroid progenitors
expressing gata1 and embryonic globin developed. Erythroid maturation was
deficient in these Scl hypomorphs, supporting that Scl was required both for the 
erythroid specification and for the maturation steps, with maturation requiring
higher Scl levels than specification. Although all hematopoietic functions were
rescued by wild-type Scl mRNA, an Scl DNA binding mutant rescued primitive and
definitive hematopoiesis but did not rescue primitive erythroid maturation.
Together, we showed that there is a distinct Scl hypomorphic phenotype and
demonstrated that distinct functions are required for the roles of Scl in the
specification and differentiation of primitive and definitive hematopoietic
lineages. Our results revealed that Scl participates in multiple processes
requiring different levels and functions. Further, we identified an Scl
hypomorphic phenotype distinct from the null state.

PMID: 16210319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Blood. 2006 Jan 15;107(2):781-5. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

Activating Notch1 mutations in mouse models of T-ALL.

O'Neil J(1), Calvo J, McKenna K, Krishnamoorthy V, Aster JC, Bassing CH, Alt FW, 
Kelliher M, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Recent studies have demonstrated that most patients with T-cell acute lymphocytic
leukemia (T-ALL) have activating mutations in NOTCH1. We sought to determine
whether these mutations are also acquired in mouse models of T-ALL. We sequenced 
the heterodimerization domain and the PEST domain of Notch1 in our mouse model of
TAL1-induced leukemia and found that 74% of the tumors harbor activating
mutations in Notch1. Cell lines derived from these tumors undergo G(0)/G(1)
arrest and apoptosis when treated with a gamma-secretase inhibitor. In addition, 
we found activating Notch1 mutations in 31% of thymic lymphomas that occur in
mice deficient for various combinations of the H2AX, Tp53, and Rag2 genes. Thus, 
Notch1 mutations are often acquired as a part of the molecular pathogenesis of
T-ALLs that develop in mice with known predisposing genetic alterations.

PMCID: PMC1895623
PMID: 16166587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 1;65(17):7596-602.

The proto-oncogene ERG in megakaryoblastic leukemias.

Rainis L(1), Toki T, Pimanda JE, Rosenthal E, Machol K, Strehl S, Göttgens B, Ito
E, Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Safra Children's Hospital and
Hematology Institute, Sheba Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center,
Tel-Hashomer, Israel.

Aneuploidy is one of the hallmarks of cancer. Acquired additions of chromosome 21
are a common finding in leukemias, suggesting a contributory role to
leukemogenesis. About 10% of patients with a germ line trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)
are born with transient megakaryoblastic leukemia. We and others have shown
acquired mutations in the X chromosome gene GATA1 in all these cases. The gene or
genes on chromosome 21 whose overexpression promote the megakaryoblastic
phenotype are presently unknown. We propose that ERG, an Ets transcription factor
situated on chromosome 21, is one such candidate. We show that ERG is expressed
in hematopoietic stem cells, megakaryoblastic cell lines, and in primary leukemic
cells from Down syndrome patients. ERG expression is induced upon megakaryocytic 
differentiation of the erythroleukemia cell lines K562 and UT-7, and forced
expression of ERG in K562 cells induces erythroid to megakaryoblastic phenotypic 
switch. We also show that ERG activates the gpIb megakaryocytic promoter and
binds the gpIIb promoter in vivo. Furthermore, both ERG and ETS2 bind in vivo the
hematopoietic enhancer of SCL/TAL1, a key regulator of hematopoietic stem cell
and megakaryocytic development. We propose that trisomy 21 facilitates the
occurrence of megakaryoblastic leukemias through a shift toward the
megakaryoblastic lineage caused by the excess expression of ERG, and possibly by 
other chromosome 21 genes, such as RUNX1 and ETS2, in hematopoietic progenitor
cells, coupled with a differentiation arrest caused by the acquisition of
mutations in GATA1.

PMID: 16140924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Stem Cells Dev. 2005 Aug;14(4):402-7.

Adult scl+/+ murine hemangioblasts persist in allogeneic mutant blastocysts but
fail to rescue the scl-/- phenotype.

Huss R(1), Renner-Müller I, Buchstaller A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich, Munich,
Germany. ralf.huss@roche.com

Isolated and expanded scl (+) adult murine progenitors show a strong endothelial 
and hematopoietic differentiation potential and have been considered to be the
adult equivalent of the hemangioblast. These unique cells may provide effective
therapeutic approaches to tissue damage resulting from hypoxemia or chronic
ischemia. Here, we study the fate of adult scl (+/+) during development and their
ability to reverse genetic defects in scl expression. scl (+/+) adult stem cells 
(clone RM26) did not persist during embryonic development after injection into
blastocysts of allogeneic wild-type mice on day E 3.5. However, GFP(+)-marked scl
(+/+) cells were detected in all possible genotypes from allogeneic scl (+/+)
intercrosses (scl (+/+), scl (+/-), scl (-/-) on day E 9.5 after the cloned cells
were injected into scl-mutant blastocysts on day E 3.5. Nevertheless, there was
no indication of phenotypic rescue of the mutant blastocysts despite the
continued presence of scl (+/+) RM26 cells in the allogeneic embryonic
environment. The results show that differentiated stem cells providing a
defective gene may exert effects during development when there is a reparative
demand, but they are not capable of reversing the effects of a mutant phenotype
during embryonic development. These effects should be considered when evaluating 
the efficacy of stem cells for therapeutic reversal of inborn errors of
development.

PMID: 16137229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005 Oct 15;45(5):616-22.

State of the Art and Future Needs in Cytogenetic/Molecular Genetics/Arrays in
childhood lymphoma: summary report of workshop at the First International
Symposium on childhood and adolescent non-Hodgkin lymphoma, April 9, 2003, New
York City, NY.

Heerema NA(1), Bernheim A, Lim MS, Look AT, Pasqualucci L, Raetz E, Sanger WG,
Cairo MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
heerema-1@medctr.osu.edu

BACKGROUND: A significant number of studies describe the cytogenetics and
molecular genetics of adult non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL); however, similar
knowledge is lacking regarding pediatric NHL.
METHODS: A workshop to discuss the "State of the Art and Future Needs in
Cytogenetic/Molecular Genetics/Arrays" in pediatric NHL was held in conjunction
with the First International Symposium on Childhood and Adolescent Non-Hodgkin
Lymphoma on April 9, 2003 in New York City.
RESULTS: Cytogenetic characteristics of pediatric NHL include 14q11.2
rearrangements in T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphomas (LBL), ALK
rearrangements in anaplastic large cell lymphomas (ALCL), and CMYC translocations
in both Burkitt and Burkitt-like lymphomas (BL/BLL). Pediatric diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is cytogenetically different from DLBCL in adults,
suggesting a different disease in children. Microarray studies demonstrate three 
types of T-cell leukemia, the leukemic counterpart of LBL, that block T-cell
differentiation at different stages of T-cell development, corresponding to LYL, 
TAL1, and HOX-expressing leukemias. ALCL cell lines have a unique expression
profile compared to normal T-cells. Germinal centers of BL have CMYC expression
signatures, indicating that CMYC expression is ectopic and does not reflect the
physiology of the normal cell counterpart.
CONCLUSIONS: Additional cytogenetic, molecular and microarray investigations of
NHL in children are vital to better understand these diseases, their etiology,
and differences from adult NHL. A greater understanding of pediatric NHL will
lead to disease-specific and patient-individualized therapies of these diseases.

PMID: 16127683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Immunol Res. 2005;32(1-3):57-74.

Developmental relationship between hematopoietic and endothelial cells.

Lugus JJ(1), Park C, Choi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Blood (hematopoietic cells) and blood vessels (endothelial cells) develop from
mesoderm via a transitional progenitor known as the hemangioblast. Flk-1, a
receptor tyrosine kinase, and Scl, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor,
are two critical molecules functioning in this process. Recent studies have shown
that Flk-1 expressing mesoderm contributes to the circulatory system, including
hematopoietic, endothelial, smooth muscle, skeletal muscle, and cardiac muscle
cells. Our studies suggest that hemangioblast specification within Flk-1
expressing mesoderm is regulated by Scl expression. Herein, we review studies
that have utilized transgenic mouse models as well as an in vitro model of
embryonic stem cell differentiation, both of which have greatly contributed to
the current understanding of the cellular and molecular pathways regulating
hemangioblast development and differentiation.

PMID: 16106059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Apr;34(4):236-9.

[Advances of lymphoblastic lymphoma and its molecular genetics].

[Article in Chinese]

Pan Y(1), Li GD, Liu WP.

Author information: 
(1)panyun09@163.com

PMID: 16091181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Stem Cells. 2005 Oct;23(9):1378-88. Epub 2005 Jul 28.

Transgenic analysis of the stem cell leukemia +19 stem cell enhancer in adult and
embryonic hematopoietic and endothelial cells.

Silberstein L(1), Sánchez MJ, Socolovsky M, Liu Y, Hoffman G, Kinston S, Piltz S,
Bowen M, Gambardella L, Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge 
University, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK.

Appropriate transcriptional regulation is critical for the biological functions
of many key regulatory genes, including the stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene. As
part of a systematic dissection of SCL transcriptional regulation, we have
previously identified a 5,245-bp SCL +18/19 enhancer that targeted embryonic
endothelium together with embryonic and adult hematopoietic progenitors and stem 
cells (HSCs). This enhancer is proving to be a powerful tool for manipulating
hematopoietic progenitors and stem cells, but the design and interpretation of
such transgenic studies require a detailed understanding of enhancer activity in 
vivo. In this study, we demonstrate that the +18/19 enhancer is active in mast
cells, megakaryocytes, and adult endothelium. A 644-bp +19 core enhancer
exhibited similar temporal and spatial activity to the 5,245-bp +18/19 fragment
both during development and in adult mice. Unlike the +18/19 enhancer, the +19
core enhancer was only active in adult mice when linked to the eukaryotic
reporter gene human placental alkaline phosphatase. Activity of a single core
enhancer in HSCs, endothelium, mast cells, and megakaryocytes suggests possible
overlaps in their respective transcriptional programs. Moreover, activity in a
proportion of thymocytes and other SCL-negative cell types suggests the existence
of a silencer elsewhere in the SCL locus.

PMID: 16051983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Aug;25(15):6355-62.

Functional but abnormal adult erythropoiesis in the absence of the stem cell
leukemia gene.

Hall MA(1), Slater NJ, Begley CG, Salmon JM, Van Stekelenburg LJ, McCormack MP,
Jane SM, Curtis DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rotary Bone Marrow Research Laboratories, P.O. Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Grattan St., Parkville, Melbourne 3050, Australia.

Previous studies have indicated that the stem cell leukemia gene (SCL) is
essential for both embryonic and adult erythropoiesis. We have examined
erythropoiesis in conditional SCL knockout mice for at least 6 months after loss 
of SCL function and report that SCL was important but not essential for the
generation of mature red blood cells. Although SCL-deleted mice were mildly
anemic with increased splenic erythropoiesis, they responded appropriately to
endogenous erythropoietin and hemolytic stress, a measure of late erythroid
progenitors. However, SCL was more important for the proliferation of early
erythroid progenitors because the predominant defects in SCL-deleted
erythropoiesis were loss of in vitro growth of the burst-forming erythroid unit
and an in vivo growth defect revealed by transplant assays. With respect to
erythroid maturation, SCL-deleted proerythroblasts could generate more mature
erythroblasts and circulating red blood cells. However, SCL was required for
normal expression of TER119, one of the few proposed target genes of SCL. The
unexpected finding that SCL-independent erythropoiesis can proceed in the adult
suggests that alternate factors can replace the essential functions of SCL and
raises the possibility that similar mechanisms also explain the relatively minor 
defects previously observed in SCL-null hematopoietic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC1190361
PMID: 16024775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2003 May;19(3):312-6.

[The investigation of hematopoietic capacity of HPP-CFC derived from murine
embryonic stem cells in vitro and in vivo].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu B(1), Hou CM, Wu Y, Zhang SX, Mao N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing
100850, China.

The hematopoietic system of the mouse arises from extraembryonic mesoderm that
migrate through primitive streak to the presumptive yolk sac at day 7.0 of
gestation. However, the mechanisms regulating mesoderm commitment to
hematopoietic lineages remain poorly understood. Previous studies demonstrated
that the development kinetics and growth factor responsiveness of hematopoietic
precursors derived from embryonic stem cells (ES cells) is similar to that found 
in the yolk sac, indicating that the onset of hematopoiesis within the embryoid
bodies (EBs) parallels that found in the embryo. Furthermore, in vitro
differentiation of ES cells to hematopoietic cells is valuable for establishment 
of therapeutic clone against a variety of hematological disorders. Despite the
identification of multipotential hematopoietic progenitors in EBs, a subset of
more primitive progenitors, identical to the high proliferative potential
colony-forming cells (HPP-CFC) derived from human and murine hematopoietic
tissues, have not been clearly identified regarding particular their replating
potential in vitro. HPP-CFC is among the most primitive hematopoietic multipotent
precursors cultured in vitro. In this study, our aim was to investigate the in
vitro and in vivo hematopoietic capacity of HPP-CFC within the day 12 EBs, rather
than the expansion of more committed progenitors. In this study the HPP-CFC could
be detected within EBs differentiated for 5 to 14 days of murine ES cells, but
the development dynamics of the HPP-CFC differed greatly among distinct serum
lots. Qualitatively HPP-CFC is capable of forming secondary colonies. As to our
expectation the ES cells-derived HPP-CFC demonstrated similar regeneration
capacity to those from yolk sac, giving rise to secondary granulocyte,
erythrocyte, macrophage and mast cells, however largely differed from the
counterparts of adult bone marrow. In addition, by RT-PCR ES cells-derived
HPP-CFC were found to express transcription factors associated closely with stem 
cell proliferation including SCL, GATA-2 and AML1 as well as various receptors of
hematopoietic growth factors such as c-kit, GM-CSF receptor and interleukin 3
receptor et al. Finally, in order to understand the in vivo hematopoietic
capacity of the ES cells-derived HPP-CFC, spleen colony-forming unit (CFU-S)
assay was performed. Nevertheless, typical CFU-S was not observed after
transplantation of the day 12 EB cells or HPP-CFC colonies into lethally
irradiated adult murine. In conclusion the HPP-CFC differentiated from murine ES 
cells displayed robust hematopoietic activity in vitro, however their in vivo
reconstitution ability was not detected. The difference between in vitro and in
vivo hematopoietic activities of ES cells-derived primitive hematopoietic
precursors deserves further investigation.

PMID: 15969013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Blood. 2005 Oct 1;106(7):2318-28. Epub 2005 Jun 16.

SCL/TAL1 expression level regulates human hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal
and engraftment.

Reynaud D(1), Ravet E, Titeux M, Mazurier F, Rénia L, Dubart-Kupperschmitt A,
Roméo PH, Pflumio F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Institut Cochin, U567 Institut National de la Santé 
et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS) UMR 8104, Paris, France.

The fate of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is regulated through a combinatorial 
action of proteins that determine their self-renewal and/or their commitment to
differentiation. Stem cell leukemia/T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia 1
(SCL/TAL1), a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, plays key roles
in controlling the development of primitive and definitive hematopoiesis during
mouse development but its function in adult HSCs is still a matter of debate. We 
report here that the lentiviral-mediated enforced expression of TAL1 in human
CD34+ cells marginally affects in vitro the differentiation of committed
progenitors, whereas in vivo the repopulation capacity of the long-term SCID
(severe combined immunodeficient) mouse-repopulating cells (LT-SRCs) is enhanced.
As a consequence, the production of SRC-derived multipotent progenitors as well
as erythroid- and myeloid-differentiated cells is increased. Looking at the
lymphoid compartment, constitutive TAL1-enforced expression impairs B- but not
T-cell differentiation. Expression of a mutant TAL1 protein that cannot bind DNA 
specifically impairs human LT-SRC amplification, indicating a DNA-binding
dependent effect of TAL1 on primitive cell populations. These results indicate
that TAL1 expression level regulates immature human hematopoietic cell
self-renewal and that this regulation requires TAL1 DNA-binding activity.

PMID: 15961517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Cell Biol Int. 2005 Aug;29(8):654-61.

In vitro hematopoietic differentiation of human embryonic stem cells induced by
co-culture with human bone marrow stromal cells and low dose cytokines.

Wang J(1), Zhao HP, Lin G, Xie CQ, Nie DS, Wang QR, Lu GX.

Author information: 
(1)National Stem Cell Engineering Centre, Institute of Human Reproductive and
Stem Cell Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China.

Human embryonic stem (hES) cells randomly differentiate into multiple cell types 
during embryoid body (EB) development and limited studies have focused on
directed hematopoietic differentiation. Here, we report that the treatment of hES
cells during EBs development with a combination of low dose hematopoietic
cytokines, including stem cell factor (SCF), Flt-3 ligand, vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) and human bone marrow stromal cells (hBMSCs), generated cell
clusters that contained 8.81% KDR-positive hemangioblasts, 9.94% CD34-positive
hematopoietic stem cells and 25.7% CD45-positive mature hematopoietic cells, and 
expressed hematopoietic genes such as KDR, stem cell leukemia (scl) and
runt-related transcription factor 1 (Runx1). We provide the first evidence for
the role of the cytokine-hBMSCs combination in promoting hematopoietic
differentiation of hES cells, and thus provide the potential for generation of
hematopoietic cells, as well as for understanding early developmental events that
govern the initiation of hematopoiesis in humans.

PMID: 15950498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Chem Biol Interact. 2005 May 30;153-154:187-95. Epub 2005 Apr 13.

Therapy-related myeloid leukaemia: a model for leukemogenesis in humans.

Larson RA(1), Le Beau MM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine and Cancer Research
Center, University of Chicago, MC-2115, 5341 S. Maryland Avenue, Chicago, IL
60637, USA. rlarson@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu

Therapy-related myeloid leukemia (t-AML) is a distinctive clinical syndrome
occurring after exposure to chemotherapy (CT) or radiotherapy (RT). We studied
306 consecutive patients referred to the University of Chicago with cytogenetic
analyses. Since 1972, 141 males and 165 females with a median age of 51 years
(range: 3-83 years) at primary diagnosis and 58 years (range: 6-86 years) at
secondary diagnosis were analyzed. Patients had received various cytotoxic agents
including alkylating agents (240 patients, 78%) and topoisomerase II inhibitors
(115 patients, 39%). One hundred and twenty-one (40%) had received CT alone, 43
(14%) had received RT alone, and 139 (45%) had received both modalities. At
diagnosis of t-AML, 282 (92%) had clonal abnormalities involving chromosome 5
(n=63), chromosome 7 (n=85), both chromosomes 5 and 7 (n=66), recurring balanced 
rearrangements (n=31), or other clonal abnormalities (n=39); 24 had a normal
karyotype. Abnormalities of chromosomes 5 and/or 7 accounted for 76% of all cases
with an abnormal karyotype. Seventeen patients had developed t-AML after
autologous stem cell transplantation, but no unique pattern of cytogenetic
abnormalities was observed. Patients presenting with acute leukemia were more
likely to have a balanced rearrangement than those presenting with myelodysplasia
(28% versus 4%, p<0.0001). Shorter latency was observed for patients with
balanced rearrangements (median: 28 months versus 67 months; p<0.0001). Median
survival after diagnosis of t-AML was 8 months; survival at 5 years was less than
10%. To gain insights into the molecular basis of this disease, we performed gene
expression profiling of CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells from t-AML patients.
We found distinct subtypes of t-AML that have characteristic gene expression
patterns. Common to each of the subgroups are gene expression patterns typical of
arrested differentiation in early progenitor cells. Leukemias with a -5/del(5q)
have a higher expression of genes involved in cell cycle control (CCNA2, CCNE2,
CDC2), checkpoints (BUB1), or growth (MYC), and loss of expression of the gene
encoding interferon consensus sequence-binding protein (ICSBP). A second subgroup
of t-AML is characterized by down-regulation of transcription factors involved in
early hematopoiesis (TAL1, GATA1, and EKLF) and overexpression of proteins
involved in signaling pathways in myeloid cells (FLT3) and cell survival (BCL2). 
Establishing the molecular pathways involved in t-AML may facilitate the
identification of selectively expressed genes that can be exploited for the
development of targeted therapies.

PMID: 15935816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 1;65(11):4515-9.

Akt phosphorylates Tal1 oncoprotein and inhibits its repressor activity.

Palamarchuk A(1), Efanov A, Maximov V, Aqeilan RI, Croce CM, Pekarsky Y.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The helix-loop-helix transcription factor Tal1 is required for blood cell
development and its activation is a frequent event in T-cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia. The Akt (protein kinase B) kinase is a key player in transduction of
antiapoptotic and proliferative signals in T cells. Because Tal1 has a putative
Akt phosphorylation site at Thr90, we investigated whether Akt regulates Tal1.
Our results show that Akt specifically phosphorylates Thr90 of the Tal1 protein
within its transactivation domain in vitro and in vivo. Coimmunoprecipitation
experiments showed the presence of Tal1 in Akt immune complexes, suggesting that 
Tal1 and Akt physically interact. We further showed that phosphorylation of Tal1 
by Akt causes redistribution of Tal1 within the nucleus. Using luciferase assay, 
we showed that phosphorylation of Tal1 by Akt decreased repressor activity of
Tal1 on EpB42 (P4.2) promoter. Thus, these data indicate that Akt interacts with 
Tal1 and regulates Tal1 by phosphorylation at Thr90 in a phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase-dependent manner.

PMID: 15930267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;25(12):5215-25.

Transcriptional regulation of the SCL locus: identification of an enhancer that
targets the primitive erythroid lineage in vivo.

Delabesse E(1), Ogilvy S, Chapman MA, Piltz SG, Gottgens B, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Hematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, United Kingdom.

The stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene, also known as TAL-1, encodes a basic
helix-loop-helix protein that is essential for the formation of all hematopoietic
lineages, including primitive erythropoiesis. Appropriate transcriptional
regulation is essential for the biological functions of SCL, and we have
previously identified five distinct enhancers which target different subdomains
of the normal SCL expression pattern. However, it is not known whether these SCL 
enhancers also regulate neighboring genes within the SCL locus, and the erythroid
expression of SCL remains unexplained. Here, we have quantitated transcripts from
SCL and neighboring genes in multiple hematopoietic cell types. Our results show 
striking coexpression of SCL and its immediate downstream neighbor, MAP17,
suggesting that they share regulatory elements. A systematic survey of histone H3
and H4 acetylation throughout the SCL locus in different hematopoietic cell types
identified several peaks of histone acetylation between SIL and MAP17, all of
which corresponded to previously characterized SCL enhancers or to the MAP17
promoter. Downstream of MAP17 (and 40 kb downstream of SCL exon 1a), an
additional peak of acetylation was identified in hematopoietic cells and was
found to correlate with expression of SCL but not other neighboring genes. This
+40 region is conserved in human-dog-mouse-rat sequence comparisons, functions as
an erythroid cell-restricted enhancer in vitro, and directs beta-galactosidase
expression to primitive, but not definitive, erythroblasts in transgenic mice.
The SCL +40 enhancer provides a powerful tool for studying the molecular and
cellular biology of the primitive erythroid lineage.

PMCID: PMC1140604
PMID: 15923636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. EMBO J. 2005 Jul 6;24(13):2354-66. Epub 2005 May 26.

GATA-1 forms distinct activating and repressive complexes in erythroid cells.

Rodriguez P(1), Bonte E, Krijgsveld J, Kolodziej KE, Guyot B, Heck AJ, Vyas P, de
Boer E, Grosveld F, Strouboulis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

GATA-1 is essential for the generation of the erythroid, megakaryocytic,
eosinophilic and mast cell lineages. It acts as an activator and repressor of
different target genes, for example, in erythroid cells it represses cell
proliferation and early hematopoietic genes while activating erythroid genes, yet
it is not clear how both of these functions are mediated. Using a biotinylation
tagging/proteomics approach in erythroid cells, we describe distinct GATA-1
interactions with the essential hematopoietic factor Gfi-1b, the repressive MeCP1
complex and the chromatin remodeling ACF/WCRF complex, in addition to the known
GATA-1/FOG-1 and GATA-1/TAL-1 complexes. Importantly, we show that FOG-1 mediates
GATA-1 interactions with the MeCP1 complex, thus providing an explanation for the
overlapping functions of these two factors in erythropoiesis. We also show that
subsets of GATA-1 gene targets are bound in vivo by distinct complexes, thus
linking specific GATA-1 partners to distinct aspects of its functions. Based on
these findings, we suggest a model for the different roles of GATA-1 in erythroid
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1173143
PMID: 15920471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Aug 15;308(2):381-93.

Shb promotes blood vessel formation in embryoid bodies by augmenting vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor-2 and platelet-derived growth factor
receptor-beta signaling.

Rolny C(1), Lu L, Agren N, Nilsson I, Roe C, Webb GC, Welsh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Box 571, BMC, Husargatan 3, 751 23
Uppsala, Sweden.

The mechanisms controlling blood vessel formation during early embryonal
development have only partly been elucidated. Shb is an adaptor protein
previously implicated in the angiogenic response to vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF). To elucidate a possible role of Shb in embryonic vascular
development, wild-type and SH2 domain mutated (R522K) Shb were overexpressed in
murine embryonic stem (ES) cells. Embryoid bodies (EBs) differentiating from
Shb-overexpressing ES cells in vitro were stained for CD31 or VEGFR-2 to
visualize the formation of vascular structures. We found that Shb promotes the
outgrowth of blood vessels in EBs both in the absence and presence of growth
factors. This response may be the consequence of an increased number of VEGFR-2
positive cells at an early stage of EB development, a finding corroborated by
both immunostaining and real-time RT-PCR. In addition, Shb overexpression
upregulated the expression of PDGFR-beta, CD31, CD41 and Tal1. Cells
co-expressing VEGFR-2 and PDGFR-beta were commonly observed when Shb was
overexpressed and inhibition of PDGF-BB signaling reduced the amount of VEGFR-2
mRNA under these conditions. EBs expressing the Shb R522K-mutant did not form
vascular structures. Microarray analysis of VEGFR-2/CD31 positive cells after 6
days of differentiation revealed numerous changes of expression of genes relating
to an endothelial/hematopoietic phenotype in response to Shb overexpression. The 
findings suggest that Shb may play a crucial role during early ES cell
differentiation to vascular structures by transducing VEGFR-2 and PDGFR-beta
signals.

PMID: 15919073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Stem Cells. 2005 Jun-Jul;23(6):852-60.

SCL expression at critical points in human hematopoietic lineage commitment.

Zhang Y(1), Payne KJ, Zhu Y, Price MA, Parrish YK, Zielinska E, Barsky LW, Crooks
GM.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, M.S.#62, 4650 Sunset Boulevard, Los Angeles,
CA 90027, USA.

The stem cell leukemia (SCL or tal-1) gene was initially identified as a
translocation partner in a leukemia that possessed both lymphoid and myeloid
differentiation potential. Mice that lacked SCL expression showed a complete
block in hematopoiesis; thus, SCL was associated with hematopoietic stem cell
(HSC) function. More recent studies show a role for SCL in murine erythroid
differentiation. However, the expression pattern and the role of SCL during early
stages of human hematopoietic differentiation are less clear. In this study we
chart the pattern of human SCL expression from HSCs, through developmentally
sequential populations of lymphoid and myeloid progenitors to mature cells of the
hematopoietic lineages. Using recently defined surface immunophenotypes, we
fluorescence-activated cell-sorted (FACS) highly purified populations of primary 
human hematopoietic progenitors for reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of SCL expression. Our data show that SCL mRNA is
easily detectable in all hematopoietic populations with erythroid potential,
including HSCs, multipotential progenitors, common myeloid progenitors,
megakaryocyte/erythrocyte progenitors, and nucleated erythroid lineage cells. SCL
mRNA expression was present but rapidly downregulated in the common lymphoid
progenitor and granulocyte/monocyte progenitor populations that lack erythroid
potential. SCL expression was undetectable in immature cells of nonerythroid
lineages, including pro-B cells, early thymic progenitors, and myeloid precursors
expressing the M-CSF receptor. SCL expression was also absent from all mature
cells of the nonerythroid lineages. Although low levels of SCL were detected in
lymphoid- and myeloid-restricted progenitors, our studies show that abundant SCL 
expression is normally tightly linked with erythroid differentiation potential.

PMID: 15917481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Exp Hematol. 2005 Jun;33(6):641-51.

Transcriptional control of fetal liver hematopoiesis: dominant negative effect of
the overexpression of the LIM domain mutants of LMO2.

Terano T(1), Zhong Y, Toyokuni S, Hiai H, Yamada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Biology of Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Yoshida Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The LIM-finger protein LMO2 forms a transcription factor complex with 
other hematopoietic regulator proteins, such as TAL1 (SCL), LDB1, GATA1, 2, and
3, in the promoters of several erythroid genes. To elucidate the functional role 
of two LIM domains in LMO2, we introduced deletion or mutation in each of the LIM
domains and analyzed their phenotypic effects on the hematopoietic system when
overexpressed in vivo or in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Protein interactions of LIM-modified LMO2 constructs with 
TAL1, LDB1, and GATAs were examined in an immunoprecipitation assay. In vivo
hematopoiesis in transgenic mice with wild-type and LIM-modified Lmo2 was studied
morphologically and by measuring the progenitor cells in fetal liver. Their
effects on the erythroid differentiation of the dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO)-induced 
murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells were evaluated.
RESULTS: Deletion of the LIM2 domain, but not of the LIM1 domain, abolished its
binding of GATA proteins. Overexpression of wild-type LMO2 is known to have
dominant negative inhibitory effects on erythropoietic development. Enforced
expression of LMO2 constructs with mutant or absent LIM2 but with an intact LIM1 
domain resulted in fetal death, small livers and hearts, and decreased
hematopoiesis, as well as a hypoplastic thymus. DMSO-induced erythroid
differentiation of the MEL cells was inhibited by the overexpressed LMO2 with
mutant LIM2 but not by the LMO2 with modified LIM1.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of the LMO2 with modified LIM2 inhibited hematopoiesis
probably by interfering with the formation of the physiological complex or by
replacing the functional LMO2 with mutants with reduced affinity to GATA
proteins. In this experiment, no evident effect of the LMO2 with modified LIM1
could be observed.

PMID: 15911088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Oncogene. 2005 Aug 25;24(36):5561-75.

G1/S transcriptional networks modulated by the HOX11/TLX1 oncogene of T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Riz I(1), Hawley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, The George Washington University
Medical Center, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

The HOX11/TLX1 homeobox gene is aberrantly expressed in a subset of T-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Here, we employed oligonucleotide microarrays to 
compare the expression profiles of the K3P and Sil leukemic cell lines
originating from patients with HOX11+ T-ALL to that of Jurkat cells, which
originated from a distinct subtype of T-ALL (TAL1+). To distinguish potential
HOX11 target genes from those characteristic of the stage of HOX11 leukemic
arrest, we also performed gene expression analysis on Jurkat cells, genetically
engineered to express exogenous HOX11. The resulting HOX11 gene expression
signature, which was validated for representative signaling pathways by transient
transfection of reporter constructs, was characterized by elevated expression of 
transcriptional programs involved in cell proliferation, including those
regulated by E2F, c-Myc and cAMP response element-binding protein. We
subsequently showed that ectopic HOX11 expression resulted in
hyperphosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein (Rb), which correlated with
inhibition of the major Rb serine/threonine phosphatase PP1. HOX11 also inhibited
PP2A serine/threonine phosphatase activity concomitant with stimulation of the
AKT/PKB signaling cascade. These results suggest that transcriptional
deregulation of G1/S growth-control genes, mediated in large part through
blockade of PP1/PP2A phosphatase activity, plays an important role in HOX11
pathobiology.

PMCID: PMC2408753
PMID: 15897879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 May 12;33(8):e78.

Using a microfluidic device for 1 microl DNA microarray hybridization in 500 s.

Wei CW(1), Cheng JY, Huang CT, Yen MH, Young TH.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Applied Sciences, Academia Sinica Taipei 11529, Taiwan.

This work describes a novel and simple modification of the current microarray
format. It reduces the sample/reagent volume to 1 microl and the hybridization
time to 500 s. Both 20mer and 80mer oligonucleotide probes and singly labeled
20mer and 80mer targets, representative of the T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 
1 (TAL1) gene, have been used to elucidate the performance of this hybridization 
approach. In this format, called shuttle hybridization, a conventional flat glass
DNA microarray is integrated with a PMMA microfluidic chip to reduce the sample
and reagent consumption to 1/100 of that associated with the conventional format.
A serpentine microtrench is designed and fabricated on a PMMA chip using a widely
available CO2 laser scriber. The trench spacing is compatible with the inter-spot
distance in standard microarrays. The microtrench chip and microarray chip are
easily aligned and assembled manually so that the microarray is integrated with a
microfluidic channel. Discrete sample plugs are employed in the microchannel for 
hybridization. Flowing through the microchannel with alternating depths and
widths scrambles continuous sample plug into discrete short plugs. These plugs
are shuttled back and forth along the channel, sweeping over microarray probes
while re-circulation mixing occurs inside the plugs. Integrating the microarrays 
into the microfluidic channel reduces the DNA-DNA hybridization time from 18 h to
500 s. Additionally, the enhancement of DNA hybridization reaction by the
microfluidic device is investigated by determining the coefficient of variation
(CV), the growth rate of the hybridization signal and the ability to discriminate
single-base mismatch. Detection limit of 19 amol was obtained for shuttle
hybridization. A 1 mul target was used to hybridize with an array that can hold
5000 probes.

PMCID: PMC1110744
PMID: 15891111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2005 Mar;43(3):170-3.

[A tal-1 deletion as real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction target for 
detection of minimal residual disease in T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang L(1), Zhang LP, Li ZG, Cheng YF, Tian KG, Lu AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing 100044,
China.

OBJECTIVE: Hematologic relapse remains the greatest obstacle to the cure of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), especially T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL) in children. Recent studies have shown that patients with increased risk 
of relapse can be identified by measuring residual leukemic cells, called minimal
residual disease (MRD), during clinical remission. Current polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) methods, however, for measuring MRD are cumbersome and
time-consuming. To improve and simplify MRD assessment, the author developed a
real-time quantitative PCR (RQ-PCR) assay for the detection of leukemic cells
that harbor the tal-1 deletion. In addition, the author discussed the
significance of MRD levels at different stages in treatment and prognosis of
children with T-ALL.
METHODS: A total of 50 consecutively enrolled patients with T-ALL were analysed
for detection of leukemic cells harboring the most common tal-1 deletion. Serial 
dilutions of leukemic DNA were studied to find the sensitivity of detection with 
RQ-PCR assay. The MRD of 28 samples in clinical remission from 10 patients were
quantified by RQ-PCR assay and limiting dilution assay. The results detected by
both methods were compared statistically with correlation analysis.
RESULTS: (1) A total of 10 patients presented tal-1 deletion involving the sildb1
breakpoint rearranged to tal1db1 in 50 cases with T-ALL. The breakpoints of
relapsed samples are the same as those of the corresponding diagnostic samples;
(2) The RQ-PCR assay had a sensitivity of detection of one leukemic cell among
100,000 normal cells. In 24 samples, MRD levels > 10(-5) could be detected with
both methods. The percentages of leukemic cells measured by the two methods
correlated well (r = 0.898, P < 0.001); (3) The MRD levels of 3 patients out of
the 8 cases undergoing disciplinary regimen were over 10(-4) at the end of
induction chemotherapy. They all relapsed in bone marrow during chemotherapy. The
higher the MRD levels, the earlier the relapse. The other 5 patients with MRD
levels < 10(-4) had been relapse-free survival (RFS) for 4-59 months, one of whom
with increased MRD levels > 10(-4) for twice at the continuation stage had been
RFS for 27 months till now.
CONCLUSIONS: The sildb1-taldb1 deletion presents in 20% of T-ALL, and is an ideal
PCR marker for its specificity, uniform and stability; The tal-1 RQ-PCR can be
used for the rapidly, sensitively and accurately quantitative assessment of MRD
in T-ALL with the tal-1 deletion. MRD levels at different stages of chemotherapy 
have different significance in prognosis and treatment.

PMID: 15833185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Blood. 2005 Aug 1;106(3):860-70. Epub 2005 Apr 14.

Hematopoietic differentiation of human embryonic stem cells progresses through
sequential hematoendothelial, primitive, and definitive stages resembling human
yolk sac development.

Zambidis ET(1), Peault B, Park TS, Bunz F, Civin CI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Hematopoiesis, Sidney Kimmel comprehensive Cancer
Center at John Hokins, The John Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
ezambid1@jhmi.edu

We elucidate the cellular and molecular kinetics of the stepwise differentiation 
of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) to primitive and definitive
erythromyelopoiesis from human embryoid bodies (hEBs) in serum-free clonogenic
assays. Hematopoiesis initiates from CD45 hEB cells with emergence of
semiadherent mesodermal-hematoendothelial (MHE) colonies that can generate
endothelium and form organized, yolk sac-like structures that secondarily
generate multipotent primitive hematopoietic stem progenitor cells (HSPCs),
erythroblasts, and CD13+CD45+ macrophages. A first wave of hematopoiesis follows 
MHE colony emergence and is predominated by primitive erythropoiesis
characterized by a brilliant red hemoglobinization, CD71/CD325a (glycophorin A)
expression, and exclusively embryonic/fetal hemoglobin expression. A second wave 
of definitive-type erythroid burst-forming units (BFU-e's), erythroid
colony-forming units (CFU-e's), granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming cells
(GM-CFCs), and multilineage CFCs follows next from hEB progenitors. These stages 
of hematopoiesis proceed spontaneously from hEB-derived cells without requirement
for supplemental growth factors during hEB differentiation. Gene expression
analysis of differentiating hEBs revealed that initiation of hematopoiesis
correlated with increased levels of SCL/TAL1, GATA1, GATA2, CD34, CD31, and the
homeobox gene-regulating factor CDX4 These data indicate that hematopoietic
differentiation of hESCs models the earliest events of embryonic and definitive
hematopoiesis in a manner resembling human yolk sac development, thus providing a
valuable tool for dissecting the earliest events in human HSPC genesis.

PMCID: PMC1895146
PMID: 15831705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Apr 26;102(17):6068-73. Epub 2005 Apr 12.

Cre/lox-regulated transgenic zebrafish model with conditional myc-induced T cell 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Langenau DM(1), Feng H, Berghmans S, Kanki JP, Kutok JL, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We have created a stable transgenic rag2-EGFP-mMyc zebrafish line that develops
GFP-labeled T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), allowing visualization
of the onset and spread of this disease. Here, we show that leukemias from this
transgenic line are highly penetrant and render animals moribund by 80.7 +/- 17.6
days of life (+/-1 SD, range = 50-158 days). These T cell leukemias are clonally 
aneuploid, can be transplanted into irradiated recipient fish, and express the
zebrafish orthologues of the human T-ALL oncogenes tal1/scl and lmo2, thus
providing an animal model for the most prevalent molecular subgroup of human
T-ALL. Because T-ALL develops very rapidly in rag2-EGFP-mMyc transgenic fish (in 
which "mMyc" represents mouse c-Myc), this line can only be maintained by in
vitro fertilization. Thus, we have created a conditional transgene in which the
EGFP-mMyc oncogene is preceded by a loxed dsRED2 gene and have generated stable
rag2-loxP-dsRED2-loxP-EGFP-mMyc transgenic zebrafish lines, which have red
fluorescent thymocytes and do not develop leukemia. Transgenic progeny from one
of these lines can be induced to develop T-ALL by injecting Cre RNA into
one-cell-stage embryos, demonstrating the utility of the Cre/lox system in the
zebrafish and providing an essential step in preparing this model for chemical
and genetic screens designed to identify modifiers of Myc-induced T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC1087915
PMID: 15827121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Dev Biol. 2005 Mar 1;279(1):169-78.

VEGF directs newly gastrulated mesoderm to the endothelial lineage.

Giles PB(1), Candy CL, Fleming PA, Owens RW, Argraves WS, Drake CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and the Cardiovascular Developmental Biology
Center, Medical University of South Carolina, 173 Ashley Avenue, Charleston, SC
29425, USA.

Herein, we investigated the role of VEGF signaling in the earliest events in
vasculogenesis and found that it exerts critical effects shortly after mesodermal
cells form by gastrulation. We showed that VEGF treatment of embryos caused an
increase in the population of newly gastrulated mesodermal (NGM) cells that
express the transcription factor TAL1. This increase in TAL1-positive cells was
attributed to VEGF induction of VEGF receptor-2 (Flk1)-positive NGM cells that
would normally not have been induced due to the limited availability of VEGF in
the NGM. Evidence that VEGF-mediated induction of NGM cells is relevant to the
endothelial lineage is the finding that induced TAL1-positive cells in the NGM
formed ectopic structures whose cells exhibited characteristics of endothelial
cells, including the ability to integrate into the vascular network and express
the QH1 antigen. Finally, we showed that VEGF-induced TAL1 expression in the NGM 
which resulted in the formation of ectopic structures was mediated by Flk1 but
not Flt1 signaling. In summary, we have established that VEGF signaling is
critical to allocation of NGM to the endothelial lineage.

PMID: 15708566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Development. 2005 Mar;132(5):1117-26. Epub 2005 Feb 2.

RBPjkappa-dependent Notch function regulates Gata2 and is essential for the
formation of intra-embryonic hematopoietic cells.

Robert-Moreno A(1), Espinosa L, de la Pompa JL, Bigas A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre Oncologia Molecular, IDIBELL-Institut de Recerca Oncologica,
Hospitalet, Barcelona 08907, Spain.

Definitive hematopoiesis in the mouse embryo originates from the aortic floor in 
the P-Sp/AGM region in close association with endothelial cells. An important
role for Notch1 in the control of hematopoietic ontogeny has been recently
established, although its mechanism of action is poorly understood. Here, we show
detailed analysis of Notch family gene expression in the aorta endothelium
between embryonic day (E) 9.5 and E10.5. Since Notch requires binding to
RBPjkappa transcription factor to activate transcription, we analyzed the aorta
of the para-aortic splanchnopleura/AGM in RBPjkappa mutant embryos. We found
specific patterns of expression of Notch receptors, ligands and Hes genes that
were lost in RBPjkappa mutants. Analysis of these mutants revealed the absence of
hematopoietic progenitors, accompanied by the lack of expression of the
hematopoietic transcription factors Aml1/Runx1, Gata2 and Scl/Tal1. We show that 
in wild-type embryos, a few cells lining the aorta endothelium at E9.5
simultaneously expressed Notch1 and Gata2, and demonstrate by chromatin
immunoprecipitation that Notch1 specifically associated with the Gata2 promoter
in E9.5 wild-type embryos and 32D myeloid cells, an interaction lost in
RBPjkappamutants. Consistent with a role for Notch1 in regulating Gata2, we
observe increased expression of this gene in 32D cells expressing activated
Notch1. Taken together, these data strongly suggest that activation of Gata2
expression by Notch1/RBPjkappa is a crucial event for the onset of definitive
hematopoiesis in the embryo.

PMID: 15689374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Blood. 2005 May 15;105(10):3862-70. Epub 2005 Jan 27.

SCL/Tal-1 is essential for hematopoietic commitment of the hemangioblast but not 
for its development.

D'Souza SL(1), Elefanty AG, Keller G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene and Cell Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10029, USA.

In this report, we have defined the stage at which Scl functions in the
establishment of the hematopoietic system and provide evidence that its primary
role is in the generation of the hematopoietic lineages from a progenitor called 
the blast colony-forming cell (BL-CFC), a cell considered to be the in vitro
equivalent of the hemangioblast. Using an embryonic stem (ES) cell line in which 
lacZ cDNA has been targeted to the Scl locus, we show that most of the BL-CFCs
are detected in the SCL/lacZ- population, indicating that this progenitor does
not express Scl. In the blast colony assay, Scl-/- cells initiate colony growth
but are unable to generate endothelial and hematopoietic progeny and thus form
colonies consisting of vascular smooth muscle cells only. The capacity to give
rise to blast colonies can be rescued by retroviral transduction of a wild-type
Scl gene into Scl-/- FLK-1+ cells, suggesting that the BL-CFC is generated in
this population. Finally, we show that Scl-/- endothelial cells display a growth 
deficiency in monolayer cultures that can be partially overcome by maintaining
this population as 3-dimensional aggregates indicating that specific cellular
interactions are required for maintenance of the Scl-/- endothelial lineage in
vitro.

PMCID: PMC1895073
PMID: 15677567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Blood. 2005 May 15;105(10):3871-4. Epub 2005 Jan 27.

Tie2Cre-mediated gene ablation defines the stem-cell leukemia gene
(SCL/tal1)-dependent window during hematopoietic stem-cell development.

Schlaeger TM(1), Mikkola HK, Gekas C, Helgadottir HB, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney St,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The stem-cell leukemia gene (SCL/tal1) is essential for the formation of all
blood lineages. SCL is first expressed in mesodermal cells that give rise to
embryonic blood cells, and continues to be expressed in fetal and adult
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). However, SCL is not required for the maintenance
of established long-term repopulating (LTR) HSCs in the adult. The time point at 
which HSC development becomes SCL independent has not been defined. Tyrosine
kinase with immunoglobulin and epidermal growth factor homology domains-2 (Tie2) 
expression appears in hemogenic and vasculogenic sites shortly after SCL. We
therefore used the Tie2Cre mouse to inactivate SCL early during embryonic and
fetal hematopoiesis. Tie2Cre completely inactivated SCL in yolk sac, the
aortagonad-mesonephros (AGM) region, and fetal liver hematopoietic cells and
circulating blood cells. However, the fetal liver was colonized by functional
LTR-HSCs. Yet SCL remained crucial for proper differentiation of both primitive
and definitive red cells and megakaryocytes. These results indicate that the
SCL-dependent phase of HSC development ends before Tie2Cre-mediated gene ablation
becomes effective.

PMID: 15677556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):12956-66. Epub 2005 Jan 27.

Tal1/SCL binding to pericentromeric DNA represses transcription.

Wen J(1), Huang S, Pack SD, Yu X, Brandt SJ, Noguchi CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Branch, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

Tal1/SCL is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor critical for normal
hematopoiesis. To understand the mechanisms underlying transcriptional regulation
by Tal1/SCL, we combined an in vitro DNA binding strategy and an in vivo
chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis to search for Tal1/SCL target regions in
K562 erythroleukemia cells. A 0.4-kb genomic DNA clone containing two Tal1/SCL
binding E-boxes and GATA- and SATB1-binding motifs (EEGS) was identified that
localized to the pericentromeric region with high homology to satellite 2 DNA.
Pericentric DNA is related to heterochromatin and gene inactivation. We found
that Tal1/SCL could complex with the histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9)-specific
methyltransferase Suv39H1. Binding of Tal1/SCL to EEGS chromatin correlated with 
hypermethylation of H3K9 and the association of heterochromatin protein HP1 to
this region. In Rep4 reporter gene assays, EEGS affected repression in a manner
dependent on the expression level of Tal1/SCL that was accompanied by increased
H3K9 methylation in chromatin associated with EEGS and a linked promoter. A
specific histone deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A, relieved
Tal1/SCL-mediated repression by EEGS. In addition, SATB1 bound EEGS chromatin and
promoted Tal1/SCL EEGS-dependent repression. We expand the list of potential
interacting partners for Tal1/SCL by demonstrating direct associations of
Tal1/SCL with SATB1 and with Suv39H1. These results reveal a novel mechanism of
action for Tal1/SCL and implicate heterochromatin-like silencing via a cis-acting
binding motif for transcriptional repression.

PMID: 15677454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Blood. 2005 Feb 1;105(3):1365; author reply 1365-6.

SCL/Tal1 and lymphoid versus myeloid lineage assignment.

Hall M, Curtis D.

Comment on
    Blood. 2004 May 1;103(9):3336-41.

PMID: 15659617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Blood. 2005 May 1;105(9):3502-11. Epub 2005 Jan 11.

Scl is required for dorsal aorta as well as blood formation in zebrafish embryos.

Patterson LJ(1), Gering M, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford University, John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

Blood and endothelial cells arise in close association in developing embryos,
possibly from a shared precursor, the hemangioblast, or as hemogenic endothelium.
The transcription factor, Scl/Tal1 (stem cell leukemia protein), is essential for
hematopoiesis but thought to be required only for remodeling of endothelium in
mouse embryos. By contrast, it has been implicated in hemangioblast formation in 
embryoid bodies. To resolve the role of scl in endothelial development, we
knocked down its synthesis in zebrafish embryos where early precursors and later 
phenotypes can be more easily monitored. With respect to blood, the zebrafish
morphants phenocopied the mouse knockout and positioned scl in the genetic
hierarchy. Importantly, endothelial development was also clearly disrupted.
Dorsal aorta formation was substantially compromised and gene expression in the
posterior cardinal vein was abnormal. We conclude that scl is especially critical
for the development of arteries where adult hematopoietic stem cells emerge,
implicating scl in the formation of hemogenic endothelium.

PMID: 15644413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Blood. 2005 Apr 15;105(8):3072-8. Epub 2005 Jan 6.

Impact of TCR status and genotype on outcome in adult T-cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia: a LALA-94 study.

Asnafi V(1), Buzyn A, Thomas X, Huguet F, Vey N, Boiron JM, Reman O, Cayuela JM, 
Lheritier V, Vernant JP, Fiere D, Macintyre E, Dombret H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Necker-Enfants-Malades, Saint Louis, France.

Patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALLs) within the Leucemies 
Aigues Lymphoblastiques de l'Adulte-94 (LALA-94) prospective trial were treated
with a 4-drug per 4-week induction, with intermediate-dose cytarabine and
mitoxantrone salvage treatment for patients not achieving complete remission (CR)
in 1 course. Only the latter received allografts, if possible, thus providing an 
informative setting for assessing early response. Representative patients with
T-ALL (91 patients) were classified into surface T-cell receptor (TCR)-expressing
T-ALL patients (TCRalphabeta+ or TCRgammadelta+), pre-alphabeta T-ALL patients
(cTCRbeta+, TCR-), and immature (IM) cTCRbeta-, TCR- T-ALL patients; 81 patients 
underwent genotyping for SIL-TAL1, CALM-AF10, HOX11, and HOX11L2. Overall, CR was
obtained in 81 (89%) patients; relapse rate was 62% at 4 years and overall
survival (OS) rate was 38%. CR rate was significantly lower in IM T-ALL patients 
after 1 course (45% vs 87%; P < .001) and after salvage (74% vs 97%; P = .002),
with the latter inducing a higher rate of CR (9 [64%] of 14) than initial
induction. Once CR was obtained, cumulative relapse rates were similar for IM,
pre-alphabeta, and TCR+ T-ALL patients (P = .51), but were higher in HOX11L2
(83%) and SIL-TAL1 (82%) T-ALL patients compared with other genetic subgroups
(48%; P = .05). This was associated with an inferior OS for HOX11L2 T-ALLs (13%
vs 47% in HOX11L2-T-ALLs; P = .009). The majority of patients with HOX11 T-ALL
underwent allografting, predominantly in second CR, but were not associated with 
a superior OS. Both TCR and genotypic stratification can therefore contribute to 
risk-adapted management of adult T-ALLs.

PMID: 15637138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Stem Cells. 2005;23(1):134-43.

Enforced expression of PU.1 rescues osteoclastogenesis from embryonic stem cells 
lacking Tal-1.

Tsuneto M(1), Tominaga A, Yamazaki H, Yoshino M, Orkin SH, Hayashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, School
of Life Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, 86 Nishi-Machi, Yonago,
Tottori, 683-8503, Japan. tsune13@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

Transcription factor T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1 (Tal-1) is essential for
the specification of hematopoietic development. Mice lacking Tal1 fail to
generate any hematopoietic precursors. Using our co-culture system with stromal
cells, we demonstrate that enforced expression of the transcription factor PU.1
under tetracycline control in Tal1-null embryonic stem (ES) cells rescues the
development of osteoclasts and macrophage-like phagocytes. It was low efficiency 
compared with wild-type ES cells; other hematopoietic lineage cells of
granulocytes, B cells, mast cells, megakaryocytes, and erythroid cells were not
generated. Osteoclasts developed in this culture were multinucleated and
competent for bone resorption. Their development depended on macrophage
colony-stimulating factor and receptor activator of nuclear factor kappaB ligand.
The majority of cells with the potential to differentiate into osteoclasts
expressed fetal liver kinase 1 (Flk-1) and could be isolated using anti-Flk-1
antibody. These results suggest that the expression of PU.1 is a critical event
for osteoclastogenesis and that Tal-1 may lie upstream of PU.1 in a regulatory
hierarchy during osteoclastogenesis.

PMID: 15625130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Dev Biol. 2005 Jan 15;277(2):522-36.

Zebrafish scl functions independently in hematopoietic and endothelial
development.

Dooley KA(1), Davidson AJ, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard Medical School, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

The SCL transcription factor is critically important for vertebrate hematopoiesis
and angiogenesis, and has been postulated to induce hemangioblasts, bipotential
precursors for blood and endothelial cells. To investigate the function of scl
during zebrafish hematopoietic and endothelial development, we utilized
site-directed, anti-sense morpholinos to inhibit scl mRNA. Knockdown of scl
resulted in a loss of primitive and definitive hematopoietic cell lineages.
However, the expression of early hematopoietic genes, gata2 and lmo2, was
unaffected, suggesting that hematopoietic cells were present but unable to
further differentiate. Using gene expression analysis and visualization of vessel
formation in live animals harboring an lmo2 promoter-green fluorescent protein
reporter transgene (Tg(lmo2:EGFP)), we show that angioblasts were specified
normally in the absence of scl, but later defects in angiogenesis were evident.
While scl was not required for angioblast specification, forced expression of
exogenous scl caused an expansion of both hematopoietic and endothelial gene
expression, and a loss of somitic tissue. In cloche and spadetail mutants, forced
expression of scl resulted in an expansion of hematopoietic but not endothelial
tissue. Surprisingly, in cloche, lmo2 was not induced in response to scl
over-expression. Taken together, these findings support distinct roles for scl in
hematopoietic and endothelial development, downstream of hemangioblast
development.

PMID: 15617691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Dev Dyn. 2005 Feb;232(2):487-97.

Vascular gene expression and phenotypic correlation during differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells.

Gerecht-Nir S(1), Dazard JE, Golan-Mashiach M, Osenberg S, Botvinnik A, Amariglio
N, Domany E, Rechavi G, Givol D, Itskovitz-Eldor J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa 31096,
Israel.

The study of the cascade of events of induction and sequential gene activation
that takes place during human embryonic development is hindered by the
unavailability of postimplantation embryos at different stages of development.
Spontaneous differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) can occur by
means of the formation of embryoid bodies (EBs), which resemble certain aspects
of early embryos to some extent. Embryonic vascular formation, vasculogenesis, is
a sequential process that involves complex regulatory cascades. In this study,
changes of gene expression along the development of human EBs for 4 weeks were
studied by large-scale gene screening. Two main clusters were identified-one of
down-regulated genes such as POU5, NANOG, TDGF1/Cripto (TDGF,
teratocarcinoma-derived growth factor-1), LIN28, CD24, TERF1 (telomeric repeat
binding factor-1), LEFTB (left-right determination, factor B), and a second of
up-regulated genes such as TWIST, WNT5A, WT1, AFP, ALB, NCAM1. Focusing on the
vascular system development, genes known to be involved in vasculogenesis and
angiogenesis were explored. Up-regulated genes include vasculogenic growth
factors such as VEGFA, VEGFC, FIGF (VEGFD), ANG1, ANG2, TGFbeta3, and PDGFB, as
well as the related receptors FLT1, FLT4, PDGFRB, TGFbetaR2, and TGFbetaR3, other
markers such as CD34, VCAM1, PECAM1, VE-CAD, and transcription factors TAL1,
GATA2, and GATA3. The reproducibility of the array data was verified
independently and illustrated that many genes known to be involved in vascular
development are activated during the differentiation of hESCs in culture. Hence, 
the analysis of the vascular system can be extended to other differentiation
pathways, allocating human EBs as an in vitro model to study early human
development.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15614775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Chembiochem. 2005 Jan;6(1):104-13.

Role of DNA sequence in the binding specificity of synthetic
basic-helix-loop-helix domains.

Beltran AC(1), Dawson PE, Gottesfeld JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain defines a class of transcription factors
that are essential for the regulation of many genes involved in cell
differentiation and development. To determine the role of the DNA sequence in
driving dimerization specificity of bHLH transcription factors, we analyzed the
DNA sequence in and around a consensus hexanucleotide binding site (E-box). The
bHLH domains of two transcription factors, E12 and TAL1, were chemically
synthesized. The minimal DNA binding domain for both the E12 homodimer and the
E12-TAL1 heterodimer was determined, thereby extending the E-box by two base
pairs. Additional studies indicate that the presence of a thymine in the first
flanking position 5' to the E-box prevents DNA binding of both dimer complexes.
The presence of a thymine or cytosine in a flanking position two bases 5' to the 
E-box decreases the affinity for the E12 homodimer twofold but completely
inactivates DNA binding for the E12-TAL1 heterodimer. Access to synthetic DNA and
protein enabled the analysis of specific interactions between a conserved
arginine residue in the basic helix of each bHLH domain and adenine in a flanking
position two bases 5' to the E-box. Our results indicate a key role of the DNA
sequence in driving dimerization specificity among bHLH transcription factors.

PMID: 15593070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Leuk Res. 2004 Nov;28(11):1227-37.

Analysis of the relationship between Scl transcription factor complex protein
expression patterns and the effects of LiCl on ATRA-induced differentiation in
blast cells from patients with acute myeloid leukemia.

Rice AM(1), Holtz KM, Karp J, Rollins S, Sartorelli AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cancer Center, Yale University School of Medicine,
333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Exogenous expression of the transcription factor Scl (Tal1) in WEHI-3B D+
myelomonocytic leukemia cells interferes with their capacity to respond to
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) induced differentiation; combination of ATRA with 
LiCl, however, circumvents the inhibition of differentiation produced by Scl. To 
gain information on the possible involvement of this transcription factor in the 
non-responsiveness of acute myelocytic leukemia (AML) patients to ATRA, we
compared the endogenous expression levels of Scl and its transcription complex
partners [i.e., Rbtn1 (LMO1), Rbtn2 (LMO2), Ldb1, and GATA family proteins] in
leukemic blast cells from patients with AML and acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL), and determined the effects of lithium chloride alone or in combination
with ATRA on the capacity of blast cells to differentiate during short-term ex
vivo culture. Levels of Scl, Rbtn2, GATA1, and Ldb1 expression were comparable in
AML and APL blasts, while the levels of expression of Rbtn1, GATA2, and GATA3
were absent or markedly lower in APL cells. Differentiation markers (cell surface
myeloid antigens CD11b, CD15, CD14, and CD33) were also analyzed in blast cells. 
ATRA produced changes in at least one surface antigen differentiation marker in
89% of patient blasts, while LiCl caused such changes in 72% of the leukemic
cells of patients. The combination of LiCl and ATRA induced the differentiation
of leukemic blasts from 94% of patients. Although the expression of the
transcription factors did not act as individual predictors of responsiveness or
non-responsiveness to the inducers of differentiation, ATRA or ATRA plus LiCl,
the addition of LiCl to ATRA increased the differentiation response over that of 
ATRA alone in a number of leukemic samples. These findings suggest that the
combination of LiCl and ATRA may produce some clinical benefit in the treatment
of the myeloid leukemias.

PMID: 15380350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Blood. 2005 Jan 15;105(2):617-26. Epub 2004 Sep 16.

Human embryonic stem cell-derived CD34+ cells: efficient production in the
coculture with OP9 stromal cells and analysis of lymphohematopoietic potential.

Vodyanik MA(1), Bork JA, Thomson JA, Slukvin II.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Wisconsin National Primate
Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53792-8550, USA.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells have the potential to serve as an alternative source of
hematopoietic precursors for transplantation and for the study of hematopoietic
cell development. Using coculture of human ES (hES) cells with OP9 bone marrow
stromal cells, we were able to obtain up to 20% of CD34+ cells and isolate up to 
10(7) CD34+ cells with more than 95% purity from a similar number of initially
plated hES cells after 8 to 9 days of culture. The hES cell-derived CD34+ cells
were highly enriched in colony-forming cells, cells expressing
hematopoiesis-associated genes GATA-1, GATA-2, SCL/TAL1, and Flk-1, and retained 
clonogenic potential after in vitro expansion. CD34+ cells displayed the
phenotype of primitive hematopoietic progenitors as defined by co-expression of
CD90, CD117, and CD164, along with a lack of CD38 expression and contained
aldehyde dehydrogenase-positive cells as well as cells with verapamil-sensitive
ability to efflux rhodamine 123. When cultured on MS-5 stromal cells in the
presence of stem cell factor, Flt3-L, interleukin 7 (IL-7), and IL-3, isolated
CD34+ cells differentiated into lymphoid (B and natural killer cells) as well as 
myeloid (macrophages and granulocytes) lineages. These data indicate that CD34+
cells generated through hES/OP9 coculture display several features of definitive 
hematopoietic stem cells.

PMID: 15374881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;24(17):7491-502.

Decoding hematopoietic specificity in the helix-loop-helix domain of the
transcription factor SCL/Tal-1.

Schlaeger TM(1), Schuh A, Flitter S, Fisher A, Mikkola H, Orkin SH, Vyas P,
Porcher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer 
Institute, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA.

The helix-loop-helix (HLH) domain is employed by many transcription factors that 
control cell fate choice in multiple developmental settings. Previously, we
demonstrated that the HLH domain of the class II basic HLH (bHLH) protein
SCL/Tal-1 is critical for hematopoietic specification. We have now identified
residues in this domain that are essential for restoring hematopoietic
development to SCL-/- embryonic stem cells and sufficient to convert a
muscle-specific HLH domain to one able to rescue hematopoiesis. Most of these
critical residues are distributed in the loop of SCL, with one in helix 2. This
is in contrast to the case for MyoD, the prototype of class II bHLH proteins,
where the loop seems to serve mainly as a linker between the two helices. Among
the identified residues, some promote heterodimerization with the bHLH partners
of SCL (E12/E47), while others, unimportant for this property, are still crucial 
for the biological function of SCL. Importantly, the residue in helix 2
specifically promotes interaction with a known partner of SCL, the LIM-only
protein LMO2, a finding that strengthens genetic evidence that these proteins
interact. Our data highlight the functional complexity of bHLH proteins, provide 
mechanistic insight into SCL function, and strongly support the existence of an
active SCL/LMO2-containing multiprotein complex in early hematopoietic cells.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Microbiology

PMCID: PMC506978
PMID: 15314159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Methods Mol Biol. 2004;267:287-96.

Multiple gene expression by chromosomal integration and CRE-loxP-mediated marker 
recycling in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Johansson B(1), Hahn-Hägerdal B.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia, Universidade do Minho, Campus de Gualtar, Braga,
Portugal.

Multiple gene expression can be introduced in a yeast strain with using only two 
markers by means of the two new vectors described, the expression vector pB3 PGK 
and the CRE recombinase vector pCRE3. The pB3 PGK has a zeocin-selectable marker 
flanked by loxP sequences and an expression cassette consisting of the strong
PGK1 promoter and the GCY1 terminator. The gene of interest (YFG1) is cloned
between the promoter and terminator of pB3 PGK. The pB3 PGK-YFG1 is integrated
into the genome by a single restriction cut within the YFG1 gene and integrated
in the YFG1 locus. The strain is further transformed with the pCRE3 vector. The
CRE recombinase expressed from this vector removes the zeocin marker and makes it
possible to use the pB3 PGK vector over again in the same strain after curing of 
the pCRE3 vector. The 2 micro -based pCRE3 carries the aureobasidin A, zeocin and
URA3 markers. pCRE3 is easily cured by growth in nonselective medium without
active counterselection. The screening for loss of the chromosomal zeocin marker,
as well as curing of the pCRE3 vector, is done in one step, by scoring zeocin
sensitivity. This can be done because the zeocin marker is present in both the
pB3 PGK and pCRE3. The S. cerevisiae pentose phosphate pathway genes RK11, RPE1, 
TAL1, and TKL1 were cloned in pB3 PGK and integrated in the locus of the
respective gene, resulting in simultaneous overexpression of the genes in the
xylose-fermenting S. cerevisiae strain TMB3001.

PMID: 15269432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Vox Sang. 2004 Jul;87 Suppl1:15-9.

Transcriptional regulation of haematopoiesis.

Göttgens B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge University, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK. bg200@cam.ac.uk

PMID: 15200597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Haematologica. 2004 Jun;89(6):671-8.

Two dual-color split signal fluorescence in situ hybridization assays to detect
t(5;14) involving HOX11L2 or CSX in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

van Zutven LJ(1), Velthuizen SC, Wolvers-Tettero IL, van Dongen JJ, Poulsen TS,
MacLeod RA, Beverloo HB, Langerak AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The t(5;14)(q35;q32) is a novel cryptic translocation 
in pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), involving HOX11L2 or
CSX on 5q35. The 14q32 breakpoints are heterogeneous. Because the
t(5;14)(q35;q32) is hard to detect using conventional karyotyping, it is easily
missed in routine diagnostics. Here we describe the development and application
of split signal fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assays for both HOX11L2
and CSX, for detection of t(5;14) possibly present in T-ALL patients.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We developed and validated two split signal FISH assays for
metaphase and interphase detection of t(5;14) in T-ALL patients. We also
investigated the involvement of IGH on 14q32. In addition, HOX11L2 and SIL-TAL1
expression was studied using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR).
RESULTS: The FISH assays were validated on cell lines and T-ALL patients. We did 
not identify cases with a t(5;14)(q35;q32) involving CSX, but we did identify 5
cases of t(5;14) involving HOX11L2 out of 32 T-ALL cases studied; in each case
the 14q32 breakpoint was found to be centromeric to the IGH region. All 5
positive cases showed HOX11L2 expression, as did 1 case without t(5;14)(q35;q32).
Cases with t(5;14)(q35;q32) involving HOX11L2 did not show TAL1 abnormalities,
whereas 5 HOX11L2 negative cases did.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: Using the newly developed and validated FISH
probe sets, we identified 5 new cases of t(5;14) involving HOX11L2 both on
metaphases and interphases. The incidence of the t(5;14)(q35;q32) involving CSX
is probably low. RT-PCR results suggest that TAL1 and HOX11L2 expression, or TAL1
aberrations and the t(5;14)(q35;q32) involving HOX11L2 are mutually exclusive.

PMID: 15194534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Cancer Cell. 2004 Jun;5(6):587-96.

TAL1/SCL induces leukemia by inhibiting the transcriptional activity of E47/HEB.

O'Neil J(1), Shank J, Cusson N, Murre C, Kelliher M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Activation of the basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) gene TAL1 (or SCL) is a frequent 
gain-of-function mutation in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). To
provide genetic evidence that tal1/scl induces leukemia by interfering with E47
and HEB, we expressed tal1/scl in an E2A or HEB heterozygous background. These
mice exhibit disease acceleration and perturbed thymocyte development due to
repression of E47/HEB target genes. In tal1/scl thymocytes, we find the
corepressor mSin3A bound to the CD4 enhancer, whereas an E47/HEB/p300 complex is 
detected in wild-type thymocytes. Furthermore, tal1/scl tumors are sensitive to
pharmacologic inhibition of HDAC and undergo apoptosis. These data demonstrate
that tal1/scl induces leukemia by repressing E47/HEB and suggest that HDAC
inhibitors may prove efficacious in T-ALL patients who express TAL1/SCL.

PMID: 15193261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Development. 2004 Jun;131(11):2749-62.

A hierarchical order of factors in the generation of FLK1- and SCL-expressing
hematopoietic and endothelial progenitors from embryonic stem cells.

Park C(1), Afrikanova I, Chung YS, Zhang WJ, Arentson E, Fong Gh Gh, Rosendahl A,
Choi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, 660 South Euclid Avenue, Campus Box
8118, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The receptor tyrosine kinase FLK1 and the transcription factor SCL play crucial
roles in the establishment of hematopoietic and endothelial cell lineages in
mice. We have previously used an in vitro differentiation model of embryonic stem
(ES) cells and demonstrated that hematopoietic and endothelial cells develop via 
sequentially generated FLK1(+) and SCL(+) cells. To gain a better understanding
of cellular and molecular events leading to hematopoietic specification, we
examined factors necessary for FLK1(+) and SCL(+) cell induction in serum-free
conditions. We demonstrate that bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 4 was required
for the generation of FLK1(+) and SCL(+) cells, and that vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) was necessary for the expansion and differentiation of
SCL-expressing hematopoietic progenitors. Consistently, Flk1-deficient ES cells
responded to BMP4 and generated TER119(+) and CD31(+) cells, but they failed to
expand in response to VEGF. The Smad1/5 and map kinase pathways were activated by
BMP4 and VEGF, respectively. The overexpression of SMAD6 in ES cells resulted in 
a reduction of FLK1(+) cells. In addition, a MAP kinase kinase 1 specific
inhibitor blocked the expansion of SCL(+) cells in response to VEGF. Finally,
VEGF mediated expansion of hematopoietic and endothelial cell progenitors was
inhibited by TGFbeta1, but was augmented by activin A. Our studies suggest that
hematopoietic and endothelial commitment from the mesoderm occurs via
BMP4-mediated signals and that expansion and/or differentiation of such
progenitors is achieved by an interplay of VEGF, TGFbeta1 and activin A
signaling.

PMID: 15148304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Leuk Res. 2004 Apr;28(4):399-403.

Combination of all-trans retinoic acid and lithium chloride surmounts a retinoid 
differentiation block induced by expression of Scl and Rbtn2 transcription
factors in myeloid leukemia cells.

Rice AM(1), Li J, Sartorelli AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Developmental Therapeutics Program, Cancer
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

We have previously shown that forced expression of the transcription factor Scl
in WEHI-3B D(+) cells prevents ATRA-induced cell differentiation. We now find
that the overexpression of Rbtn2 also interferes with induction of
differentiation by ATRA. Addition of LiCl to ATRA treatment restored the capacity
of both Scl- and Rbtn2-expressing cells to respond to the retinoid in a
synergistic manner. Similar results were obtained with Scl-transfected HL60 cells
where its expression diminished responsiveness to ATRA. These findings suggest
that if Scl and/or Rbtn2 are involved in the non-responsiveness of AML patients
to ATRA-induced differentiation, addition of LiCl may reverse insensitivity.

PMID: 15109540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Kidney Int. 2004 Apr;65(4):1162-9.

Kidney, blood, and endothelium: developmental expression of stem cell leukemia
during nephrogenesis.

Dekel B(1), Hochman E, Sanchez MJ, Maharshak N, Amariglio N, Green AR, Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Laboratory, Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical
Center, Tel Hashomer, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel. bmdekel@wicc.weizmann.ac.il

Erratum in
    Kidney Int. 2004 Jun;65(6):2465-6.

BACKGROUND: In vertebrates the hematopoietic and renal tissues share a common
mesodermal origin. Recently, we have analyzed global gene expression during human
nephrogenesis and observed up-regulation of stem cell leukemia (SCL), a
transcription factor critical for hematopoietic and endothelial lineage
specification. Here we characterize the expression of SCL along with its distinct
3' hematopoietic and endothelial enhancer (SCL 3'En) during kidney development.
METHODS: mRNA and protein expression of SCL were examined in developing murine
and human kidneys by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry. The activity of SCL 3'En was examined by
X-galactosidase (X-gal) staining of embryonic kidneys obtained from SCL
+6E5/lacZ/3'En transgenic mice and by reporter lacZ assay in various renal cell
lines.
RESULTS: We found developmental regulation of SCL mRNA with highest levels of
expression in embryonic day 17 (E17) mouse kidneys and lowest in postnatal and
adult kidneys. Immunostaining of human fetal kidneys demonstrated the protein
predominantly in the nephrogenic cortex and particularly in mesenchymal cells and
developing glomeruli. Similarly, SCL +6E5/lacZ/3'En transgenic kidneys showed
prominent lacZ staining in cells resembling undifferentiated mesoderm cells in
close proximity to S and comma-shaped primitive nephrons and in peritubular and
glomerular vessel endothelium. The SCL 3'En was activated in the human embryonic 
kidney cell line (HEK 293), but not in cell lines derived from adult kidney.
CONCLUSION: These observations suggest a possible role for SCL in renal
vasculogenesis. Undifferentiated mesenchymal cells expressing SCL during early
nephrogenesis might represent putative progenitors that can simultaneously give
rise to kidney, blood, and endothelium.

PMID: 15086455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Blood. 2004 Dec 15;104(13):4173-80. Epub 2004 Mar 30.

Age-related phenotypic and oncogenic differences in T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemias may reflect thymic atrophy.

Asnafi V(1), Beldjord K, Libura M, Villarese P, Millien C, Ballerini P, Kuhlein
E, Lafage-Pochitaloff M, Delabesse E, Bernard O, Macintyre E.

Author information: 
(1)Necker-Enfants-Malades and Trousseau, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris,
INSERM EMIU210 and Université Paris V, Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France.

Postnatal thymic involution occurs progressively throughout the first 3 decades
of life. It predominantly affects T-cell receptor (TCR) alphabeta-lineage
precursors, with a consequent proportional increase in multipotent thymic
precursors. We show that T-acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALLs) demonstrate a
similar shift with age from predominantly TCR expressing to an immature
(IM0/delta/gamma) stage of maturation arrest. Half demonstrate HOX11, HOX11L2,
SIL-TAL1, or CALM-AF10 deregulation, with each being associated with a specific, 
age-independent stage of maturation arrest. HOX11 and SIL-TAL represent
alphabeta-lineage oncogenes, whereas HOX11L2 expression identifies an
intermediate alphabeta/gammadelta-lineage stage of maturation arrest. In keeping 
with preferential alphabeta-lineage involution, the incidence of SIL-TAL1 and
HOX11L2 deregulation decreased with age. In contrast, HOX11 deregulation became
more frequent, suggesting longer latency. TAL1/LMO1 deregulation is more frequent
in alphabeta-lineage T-ALL, when it is predominantly due to SIL-TAL1
rearrangements in children but to currently unknown mechanisms in adolescents and
adults. LMO2 was more frequently coexpressed with LYL1, predominantly in
IM0/delta/gamma adult cases, than with TAL1. These age-related changes in
phenotype and oncogenic pathways probably reflect progressive changes in the
thymic population at risk of malignant transformation.

PMID: 15054041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Leukemia. 2004 May;18(5):895-908.

Split-signal FISH for detection of chromosome aberrations in acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia.

van der Burg M(1), Poulsen TS, Hunger SP, Beverloo HB, Smit EM, Vang-Nielsen K,
Langerak AW, van Dongen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Chromosome aberrations are frequently observed in precursor-B-acute lymphoblastic
leukemias (ALL) and T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALL). These
translocations can form leukemia-specific chimeric fusion proteins or they can
deregulate expression of an (onco)gene, resulting in aberrant expression or
overexpression. Detection of chromosome aberrations is an important tool for risk
classification. We developed rapid and sensitive split-signal fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) assays for six of the most frequent chromosome aberrations
in precursor-B-ALL and T-ALL. The split-signal FISH approach uses two
differentially labeled probes, located in one gene at opposite sites of the
breakpoint region. Probe sets were developed for the genes TCF3 (E2A) at 19p13,
MLL at 11q23, ETV6 at 12p13, BCR at 22q11, SIL-TAL1 at 1q32 and TLX3 (HOX11L2) at
5q35. In normal karyotypes, two colocalized green/red signals are visible, but a 
translocation results in a split of one of the colocalized signals. Split-signal 
FISH has three main advantages over the classical fusion-signal FISH approach,
which uses two labeled probes located in two genes. First, the detection of a
chromosome aberration is independent of the involved partner gene. Second,
split-signal FISH allows the identification of the partner gene or chromosome
region if metaphase spreads are present, and finally it reduces false-positivity.

PMID: 15042105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Genome Res. 2004 Mar;14(3):472-7.

zPicture: dynamic alignment and visualization tool for analyzing conservation
profiles.

Ovcharenko I(1), Loots GG, Hardison RC, Miller W, Stubbs L.

Author information: 
(1)Energy, Environment, Biology and Institutional Computing, Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory, Livermore, California 94550, USA.

Comparative sequence analysis has evolved as an essential technique for
identifying functional coding and noncoding elements conserved throughout
evolution. Here, we introduce zPicture, an interactive Web-based sequence
alignment and visualization tool for dynamically generating conservation profiles
and identifying evolutionarily conserved regions (ECRs). zPicture is highly
flexible, because critical parameters can be modified interactively, allowing
users to differentially predict ECRs in comparisons of sequences of different
phylogenetic distances and evolutionary rates. We demonstrate the application of 
this module to identify a known regulatory element in the HOXD locus, in which
functional ECRs are difficult to discern against the highly conserved genomic
background. zPicture also facilitates transcription factor binding-site analysis 
via the rVista tool portal. We present an example of the HBB complex when
zPicture/rVista combination specifically pinpoints to two ECRs containing GATA-1,
NF-E2, and TAL1/E47 binding sites that were identified previously as
transcriptional enhancers. In addition, zPicture is linked to the UCSC Genome
Browser, allowing users to automatically extract sequences and gene annotations
for any recorded locus. Finally, we describe how this tool can be efficiently
applied to the analysis of nonvertebrate genomes, including those of microbial
organisms.

PMCID: PMC353235
PMID: 14993211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Feb;12(1):39-43.

[Expression of SCL gene in bone marrow stromal cells from patients with
leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Z(1), Li YQ, Wu XL, Yang LJ, Cheng SH, Zhang H, Zhu KE, Han ZC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Medical College, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, 
China.

In order to investigate expression of SCL (stem cell leukemia) gene in bone
marrow stromal cells (BMSC) and bone marrow cells from patients with leukemia and
normal individuals, bone marrow mononuclear cells from AML (18 cases), CML (17
cases), ALL (7 cases) and normal individuals (33 cases) were cultured long-term
in vitro. Nonadherent cells (hematopoietic cells) and amplified adherent cells
(BMSC) were collected respectively. RT-PCR-ELISA assay was then performed to
detect expression of SCL gene. The expression ratio of SCL gene were analyzed and
its expression level was normalized by beta(2)M gene acting as an internal
reference for the purpose of semi-quantitative analysis. The results indicated
that the expression ratio of SCL gene was lower in BMSC from AML (27.8%) and CML 
(11.8%) than that in normal controls (69.7%, P < 0.05), while was higher in the
nonadherent cells from CML (64.3%) than that in its corresponding BMSC (P <
0.05). Semi-quantitative analysis showed that SCL gene expression level in
nonadherent cells from AML was higher than that in its corresponding BMSC (P <
0.05). In conclusion, the low-level expression state of SCL gene in BMSC from
patients with AML and CML may be involved in the abnormal regulation of
hematopoiesis in myelocytic leukemia.

PMID: 14989766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Lancet. 2004 Feb 14;363(9408):535-6.

Prognostic importance of TLX1 (HOX11) oncogene expression in adults with T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Ferrando AA(1), Neuberg DS, Dodge RK, Paietta E, Larson RA, Wiernik PH, Rowe JM, 
Caligiuri MA, Bloomfield CD, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Harvard School 
of Public Health, 44 Binney Street, Mayer-630, Boston 02115, MA, USA.

The activation of oncogenic transcription factors defines distinct molecular
subsets of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and has prognostic relevance in
children. We investigated the prognostic effect of the expression levels of eight
oncogenic transcription factors--TLX1 (HOX11), TLX3 (HOX11L2), TAL1, TAL2, LYL1, 
OLIG2 (BHLHB1), LMO1, and LMO2--in 52 adults with T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia. The leukaemia-specific survival rate for the 16 TLX1-positive patients
was 88% (90% CI 73-100%), compared with 56% (42-70%) for all other cases
(p=0.019). Only the TLX1 oncogene expression subgroup showed difference in
leukaemia-specific survival. Our results suggest that overexpression of TLX1
confers a good outlook for adults with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.
Furthermore, our findings lead to questions about whether stem-cell
transplantation in first remission is necessary for effective treatment of
patients in the low-risk subgroup of patients with TLX1 oncogene expression.

PMID: 14975618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Cell Sci. 2004 Mar 1;117(Pt 7):1161-71. Epub 2004 Feb 17.

The bHLH TAL-1/SCL regulates endothelial cell migration and morphogenesis.

Lazrak M(1), Deleuze V, Noel D, Haouzi D, Chalhoub E, Dohet C, Robbins I, Mathieu
D.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 5535, Institut de Génétique Moléculaire, IFR122, 1919 Route de Mende,
Montpellier, France.

The basic helix-loop-helix tal-1 gene (or scl), known for its fundamental role in
embryonic and adult hematopoiesis in vertebrates, is also required for embryonic 
vascular remodeling. In adults, TAL-1 protein is undetectable in quiescent
endothelium but it is present in newly formed vessels including tumoral
vasculature, indicating its involvement in angiogenesis. Here, we demonstrate
that TAL-1 expression is tightly regulated during in vitro angiogenesis: it is
low during the initial step of migration and is upregulated during formation of
capillary-like structures. We investigated whether ectopic expression of either
wild-type TAL-1 or a dominant-negative mutant lacking the DNA-binding domain
(Delta-bas) modulates the activity of human primary endothelial cells in the
angiogenic processes of migration, proliferation and cell morphogenesis.
Overexpression of either wild-type or Delta-bas TAL-1 affected chemotactic
migration of primary endothelial cells without modifying their proliferative
properties. Ectopic expression of wild-type TAL-1 accelerated the formation of
capillary-like structures in vitro and, in vivo, enhanced vascularisation in mice
(Matrigel implants) associated with a general enlargement of capillary lumens.
Importantly, transduction of the mutant Delta-bas completely impaired in vitro
angiogenesis and strongly inhibited vascularisation in mice. Taken together, our 
data show that TAL-1 modulates the angiogenic response of endothelial cells by
stimulating cell morphogenesis and by influencing their behavior in migration.
This study highlights the importance of TAL-1 regulation in postnatal vascular
remodeling and provides the first physiological evidence that links TAL-1
activity to endothelial cell morphogenic processes.

PMID: 14970264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Mar;24(5):1870-83.

The scl +18/19 stem cell enhancer is not required for hematopoiesis:
identification of a 5' bifunctional hematopoietic-endothelial enhancer bound by
Fli-1 and Elf-1.

Göttgens B(1), Broccardo C, Sanchez MJ, Deveaux S, Murphy G, Göthert JR,
Kotsopoulou E, Kinston S, Delaney L, Piltz S, Barton LM, Knezevic K, Erber WN,
Begley CG, Frampton J, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University
of Cambridge, United Kingdom. bg200@cam.ac.uk

Analysis of cis-regulatory elements is central to understanding the genomic
program for development. The scl/tal-1 transcription factor is essential for
lineage commitment to blood cell formation and previous studies identified an scl
enhancer (the +18/19 element) which was sufficient to target the vast majority of
hematopoietic stem cells, together with hematopoietic progenitors and
endothelium. Moreover, expression of scl under control of the +18/19 enhancer
rescued blood progenitor formation in scl(-/-) embryos. However, here we
demonstrate by using a knockout approach that, within the endogenous scl locus,
the +18/19 enhancer is not necessary for the initiation of scl transcription or
for the formation of hematopoietic cells. These results led to the identification
of a bifunctional 5' enhancer (-3.8 element), which targets expression to
hematopoietic progenitors and endothelium, contains conserved critical Ets sites,
and is bound by Ets family transcription factors, including Fli-1 and Elf-1.
These data demonstrate that two geographically distinct but functionally related 
enhancers regulate scl transcription in hematopoietic progenitors and endothelial
cells and suggest that enhancers with dual hematopoietic-endothelial activity may
represent a general strategy for regulating blood and endothelial development.

PMCID: PMC350551
PMID: 14966269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Leukemia. 2004 Apr;18(4):709-19.

Rearranged T-cell receptor beta genes represent powerful targets for
quantification of minimal residual disease in childhood and adult T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Brüggemann M(1), van der Velden VH, Raff T, Droese J, Ritgen M, Pott C, Wijkhuijs
AJ, Gökbuget N, Hoelzer D, van Wering ER, van Dongen JJ, Kneba M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Clinic II, University of Kiel, Germany. m.brueggemann@med2.uni-kiel.de

Current MRD studies in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) mainly use
T-cell receptor gamma, delta and SIL-TAL1 gene rearrangements as MRD-PCR targets.
However, low frequency or limited diversity of these markers restricts the number
of evaluable patients, particularly because two markers are recommended for MRD
monitoring. Hence, we developed a new strategy implementing the TCR beta (TCRB)
locus for MRD quantification. The frequency and characteristics of complete and
incomplete TCRB rearrangements were investigated in 53 childhood and 100 adult
T-ALL patients using the BIOMED-2 multiplex PCR assay. Clonal rearrangements were
identified in 92% both childhood and adult T-ALL (Vbeta-Dbeta-Jbeta
rearrangements in 80%, Dbeta-Jbeta rearrangements in 53%). Comparative sequence
analysis of 203 TCRB recombinations revealed preferential usage of the
'end-stage' segment Jbeta2.7 in childhood T-ALL (27%), whereas Jbeta2.3 was most 
frequently involved in adult T-ALL (24%). In complete rearrangements, three
downstream Vbeta segments (19-1/20-1/21-1) were preferentially used.
Subsequently, a TCRB real-time quantitative PCR assay to quantify MRD with 13
germline Jbeta primer/probe combinations and allele-specific oligonucleotides was
developed and applied to 60 clonal TCRB rearrangements. The assay allowed the
detection of one leukemic cell within at least 10(4) polyclonal cells in 93% of
cases and will be of high value for future MRD studies.

PMID: 14961040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(4):1439-52.

SCL assembles a multifactorial complex that determines glycophorin A expression.

Lahlil R(1), Lécuyer E, Herblot S, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec H2W 1R7, Canada.

SCL/TAL1 is a hematopoietic-specific transcription factor of the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family that is essential for erythropoiesis. Here we
identify the erythroid cell-specific glycophorin A gene (GPA) as a target of SCL 
in primary hematopoietic cells and show that SCL occupies the GPA locus in vivo. 
GPA promoter activation is dependent on the assembly of a multifactorial complex 
containing SCL as well as ubiquitous (E47, Sp1, and Ldb1) and tissue-specific
(LMO2 and GATA-1) transcription factors. In addition, our observations suggest
functional specialization within this complex, as SCL provides its HLH protein
interaction motif, GATA-1 exerts a DNA-tethering function through its binding to 
a critical GATA element in the GPA promoter, and E47 requires its N-terminal
moiety (most likely entailing a transactivation function). Finally, endogenous
GPA expression is disrupted in hematopoietic cells through the
dominant-inhibitory effect of a truncated form of E47 (E47-bHLH) on E-protein
activity or of FOG (Friend of GATA) on GATA activity or when LMO2 or Ldb-1
protein levels are decreased. Together, these observations reveal the functional 
complementarities of transcription factors within the SCL complex and the
essential role of SCL as a nucleation factor within a higher-order complex
required to activate gene GPA expression.

PMCID: PMC344179
PMID: 14749362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Aug;25(8):1305-13. Epub 2004 Jan 23.

Recombination at chromosomal sequences involved in leukaemogenic rearrangements
is differentially regulated by p53.

Boehden GS(1), Restle A, Marschalek R, Stocking C, Wiesmüller L.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsfrauenklinik, Prittwitzstrasse 43, D-89075 Ulm, Johann Wolfgang
Goethe Universität, Biozentrum, N230, R303, Marie-Curie-Strasse 9, D-60439
Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Chromosomal translocations and retroviral integration events at breakpoint
cluster regions (bcrs) have been associated with leukaemias. To directly compare 
the effect of different cis-regulatory sequences on recombination, we adapted our
SV40 based model system to the analysis of correspondingly selected bcrs from the
TAL1, LMO2, retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARalpha) and MLL genes. We show that a
399 bp fragment from the MLL bcr is sufficient to cause a 3-4-fold stimulation of
spontaneously occurring DNA exchange and to respond to etoposide by up to 10-fold
further elevated frequencies, i.e. to mimic the fragility of the 8.3 kb bcr
during chemotherapy. To analyse the regulatory role of p53 in recombination
involving leukaemia-related sequences, we stably expressed wtp53 and a
transactivation negative mutant. Consistent with the proposed role of p53 as a
suppressor of error-prone recombination, both p53 proteins down-regulated
recombination with most of the sequences tested, even with the MLL bcr after
etoposide treatment. Surprisingly, however, p53 stimulated recombination, in
constructs carrying the RARalpha bcr fragment. This is the first study, which
provides evidence for a stimulatory role of p53 in homologous recombination. Our 
data further indicate that inhibition of topoisomerase I can mimic the effects of
p53 on stimulating recombination on the RARalpha bcr. Thus, these data also
firstly describe a biological role of the biochemical interactions between p53
and topoisomerase I that may have implications for a gain-of-function phenotype
of certain p53 mutants in genetic destabilization.

PMID: 14742315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Development. 2004 Feb;131(3):693-702.

SCL interacts with VEGF to suppress apoptosis at the onset of hematopoiesis.

Martin R(1), Lahlil R, Damert A, Miquerol L, Nagy A, Keller G, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hematopoiesis and Leukemia, Clinical Research Institute of
Montreal, Montreal, Canada.

During development, hematopoiesis initiates in the yolk sac through a process
that depends on VEGF/Flk1 signaling and on the function of the SCL/Tal1
transcription factor. Here we show that VEGF modifies the developmental potential
of primitive erythroid progenitors and prolongs their life span. Furthermore, the
survival of yolk sac erythrocytes in vivo depends on the dose of VEGF.
Interestingly, in Vegf(lo/lo) embryos carrying a hypomorph allele, Flk1-positive 
cells reach the yolk sac at E8.5, but are severely compromised in their ability
to generate primitive erythroid precursors. These observations indicate that
during embryonic development, different thresholds of VEGF are required for the
migration and clonal expansion of hematopoietic precursors. The near absence of
primitive erythroid precursors in Vegf(lo/lo) embryos correlates with low levels 
of Scl in the yolk sac. Strikingly, gain-of-function of SCL partially complements
the hematopoietic defect caused by the hypomorph Vegf(lo) allele, and
re-establishes the survival of erythroid cells and the expression of erythroid
genes (Gata1 and betaH1). This indicates that SCL functions downstream of VEGF to
ensure an expansion of the hematopoietic compartment.

PMID: 14729577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Blood. 2004 May 1;103(9):3336-41. Epub 2004 Jan 15.

Stem cell leukemia protein directs hematopoietic stem cell fate.

Kunisato A(1), Chiba S, Saito T, Kumano K, Nakagami-Yamaguchi E, Yamaguchi T,
Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Blood. 2005 Feb 1;105(3):1365; author reply 1365-6.

Stem cell leukemia (SCL) protein has been shown to be an essential transcription 
factor during hematopoietic development in the embryo. In adult hematopoiesis,
however, the role for SCL has remained largely unknown, whereas it is expressed
in bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). In this study, we performed HSC
transplantation and an in vitro HSC differentiation assay using retrovirally
transduced HSCs with wild-type (WT) and dominant-negative (DN) SCL. The
transplantation experiments showed that SCL does not affect the long-term
repopulating capacity of HSCs but that WT SCL and DN SCL increase the short-term 
contribution of the transduced HSCs in myeloid and lymphoid lineages,
respectively. An in vitro single-cell assay using a fetal thymus organ culture
system further demonstrated that WT SCL facilitates HSCs to differentiate into
the myeloid lineage but that DN SCL facilitates HSCs to differentiate into the
lymphoid lineage. We conclude that the up-regulation or down-regulation of SCL
directs HSCs toward myeloid or lymphoid lineage, respectively, although SCL does 
not affect their long-term repopulating capacity.

PMID: 14726394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Blood. 2004 May 1;103(9):3342-8. Epub 2004 Jan 15.

SCL is required for normal function of short-term repopulating hematopoietic stem
cells.

Curtis DJ(1), Hall MA, Van Stekelenburg LJ, Robb L, Jane SM, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Rotary Bone Marrow Research Laboratory, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne,
Victoria 3050, Australia. dcurtis@wehi.edu.au

The stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene is essential for the development of
hematopoietic stem cells in the embryo. Here, we used a conditional gene
targeting approach to examine the function of SCL in adult hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs). Flow cytometry of bone marrow from SCL-deleted mice demonstrated a 
4-fold increase in number of Lin(neg) c-kit(+) Sca-1(+) cells. Despite this
increase in the number of phenotypic HSCs, competitive repopulation assays
demonstrated a severe multilineage defect in repopulation capacity by SCL-deleted
bone marrow cells. SCL-heterozygous cells also showed a mild repopulation defect,
thus suggesting haploinsufficiency of SCL. The transplantation defect of
SCL-deleted cells was observed within 4 weeks of transplantation, indicating a
defect in a multipotent progenitor or short-term repopulating HSCs. Although the 
defect persisted in secondary transplants, it remained relatively stable,
suggesting that SCL was not required for self-renewal of the HSCs. Generation of 
SCL-deleted cells within SCL-wild-type mice rescued the early repopulating
defect. Together, our results suggest that SCL is required for the normal
function of short-term repopulating HSCs.

PMID: 14726374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Exp Hematol. 2004 Jan;32(1):11-24.

SCL: from the origin of hematopoiesis to stem cells and leukemia.

Lécuyer E(1), Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Immunovirologie et Cancérologie (IRIC), Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

In the hematopoietic system, lineage commitment and differentiation is controlled
by the combinatorial action of transcription factors from diverse families. SCL
is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that is an essential regulator
at several levels in the hematopoietic hierarchy and whose inappropriate
regulation frequently contributes to the development of pediatric T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. This review discusses advances that have shed important
light on the functions played by SCL during normal hematopoiesis and
leukemogenesis and have revealed an unexpected robustness of hematopoietic stem
cell function. Molecular studies have unraveled a mechanism through which gene
expression is tightly controlled, as SCL functions within multifactorial
complexes that exhibit an all-or-none switch-like behavior in transcription
activation, arguing for a quantal process that depends on the concurrent
occupation of target loci by all members of the complex. Finally, variations in
composition of SCL-containing complexes may ensure flexibility and specificity in
the regulation of lineage-specific programs of gene expression, thus providing
the molecular basis through which SCL exerts its essential functions at several
branch points of the hematopoietic hierarchy.

PMID: 14725896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Blood. 2004 May 1;103(9):3326-35. Epub 2004 Jan 8.

Characterization of DNA-binding-dependent and -independent functions of SCL/TAL1 
during human erythropoiesis.

Ravet E(1), Reynaud D, Titeux M, Izac B, Fichelson S, Roméo PH,
Dubart-Kupperschmitt A, Pflumio F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Institut Cochin, U567 INSERM, Paris, France.

The transcription factor TAL1 has major functions during embryonic hematopoiesis 
and in adult erythropoiesis and megakaryocytopoiesis. These functions rely on
different TAL1 structural domains that are responsible for dimerization,
transactivation, and DNA binding. Previous work, most often done in mice, has
shown that some TAL1 functions do not require DNA binding. To study the role of
TAL1 and the relevance of the TAL1 DNA-binding domain in human erythropoiesis, we
developed an approach that allows an efficient enforced wild-type or mutant TAL1 
protein expression in human hematopoietic CD34(+) cells using a lentiviral
vector. Differentiation capacities of the transduced cells were studied in a
culture system that distinguishes early and late erythroid development. Results
indicate that enforced TAL1 expression enhances long-term culture initiating cell
(LTC-IC) potential and erythroid differentiation of human CD34(+) cells as shown 
by increased beta globin and porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD) gene expressions
and erythroid colony-forming units (CFU-Es), erythroid burst-forming units
(BFU-Es), and glycophorin A-positive (GPA(+)) cell productions. Enforced
expression of a TAL1 protein deleted of its DNA-binding domain (named Delta
bTAL1) mimicked most TAL1 effects except for the LTC-IC enhancement, the
down-regulation of the CD34 surface marker, and the GPA(+) cell production. These
results provide the first functional indications of DNA-binding-dependent and
-independent roles of TAL1 in human erythropoiesis.

PMID: 14715640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Seikagaku. 2003 Nov;75(11):1461-4.

[Role of SCL/Tall on endothelial and hematopoietic development].

[Article in Japanese]

Ema M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
University of Tsukuba, Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

PMID: 14699849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Methods Enzymol. 2003;365:186-202.

Gene targeting strategies for the isolation of hematopoietic and endothelial
precursors from differentiated ES cells.

Zhang WJ(1), Chung YS, Eades B, Choi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, Box 8118, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

PMID: 14696346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Dec 26;312(4):1073-81.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor TAL1/SCL inhibits the expression 
of the p16INK4A and pTalpha genes.

Hansson A(1), Manetopoulos C, Jönsson JI, Axelson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine, Lund
University, University Hospital MAS, SE-205 02, Malmö, Sweden.

The Tal1 gene (also called Scl or TCL5) encodes a basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor required for hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis. Additionally,
aberrant transcriptional activation of the Tal1 gene is a frequent event in human
T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). T cell specific expression of TAL1
in mice induces aggressive T cell malignancies, demonstrating the oncogenic
potential of TAL1. Yet, the underlying mechanisms of TAL1 induced tumorigenesis
are poorly understood. By inhibiting E protein mediated transcription of the
pTalpha gene, TAL1 can interfere with the T cell differentiation program. In
addition, several studies suggest that TAL1 expression might also enhance
proliferation rate. We report here that TAL1 can bind the E boxes in both the p16
and the pTalpha promoters, and functionally suppress the activity of both
promoters. These results indicate that TAL1 can affect both T cell proliferation 
and differentiation. Moreover, we show that overexpression of TAL1 in
hematopoietic progenitor cells promotes cell cycle division.

PMID: 14651981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Neuroscience. 2003;122(2):421-36.

Expression pattern of the stem cell leukaemia gene in the CNS of the embryonic
and adult mouse.

van Eekelen JA(1), Bradley CK, Göthert JR, Robb L, Elefanty AG, Begley CG, Harvey
AR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Child Health Research and WAIMR, University of Western Australia,
at the Telethon Institute for Child Health Research, PO Box 855, West Perth WA
6872, Australia. ankev@ichr.uwa.edu.au

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor stem cell leukaemia (SCL) 
is a 'master regulator' of haematopoiesis, where SCL is pivotal in cell fate
determination and differentiation. SCL has also been detected in CNS, where other
members of the bHLH-family have been shown to be indispensable for neuronal
development; however, no detailed expression pattern of SCL has so far been
described. We have generated a map of SCL expression in the embryonic and adult
mouse brain based on histochemical analysis of LacZ reporter gene expression in
sequential sections of brain tissue derived from SCL-LacZ knockin mice. The
expression of LacZ was confirmed to reflect SCL expression by in situ
hybridisation. LacZ expression was found in a range of different diencephalic,
mesencephalic and metencephalic brain nuclei in adult CNS. Co-localisation of
LacZ with the neuronal marker NeuN indicated expression in post-mitotic neurons
in adulthood. LacZ expression by neurons was confirmed in tissue culture
analysis. The nature of the pretectal, midbrain and hindbrain regions expressing 
LacZ suggest that SCL in adult CNS is potentially involved in processing of
visual, auditory and pain related information. During embryogenesis, LacZ
expression was similarly confined to thalamus, midbrain and hindbrain. LacZ
staining was also evident in parts of the intermediate and marginal zone of the
aqueduct and ventricular zone of the fourth ventricle at E12.5 and E14. These
cells may represent progenitor stages of differentiating neural cells. Given the 
presence of SCL in both the developing brain and in post-mitotic neurons, it
seems likely that the function of SCL in neuronal differentiation may differ from
its function in maintaining the differentiated state of the mature neuron.

PMID: 14614907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Blood. 2004 Mar 1;103(5):1909-11. Epub 2003 Nov 6.

Biallelic transcriptional activation of oncogenic transcription factors in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Ferrando AA(1), Herblot S, Palomero T, Hansen M, Hoang T, Fox EA, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Aberrant expression of transcription factor oncogenes such as HOX11, HOX11L2,
TAL1/SCL, LYL1, LMO1, and LMO2 can be detected in lymphoblasts from up to 80% of 
patients with acute T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Transcriptional
activation of these oncogenes in leukemic cells typically results from
chromosomal rearrangements that place them next to highly active cis-acting
transcriptional regulatory elements. However, biallelic activation of TAL1 in
some T-ALL cases has been previously proposed. We have used allele-specific mRNA 
analysis to show that trans-acting mechanisms leading to biallelic overexpression
of TAL1 are involved in 10 (42%) of 24 TAL1+ informative T-ALL cases, 2 (17%) of 
12 HOX11+ informative cases, and 7 (64%) of 11 LMO2+ informative cases. We
propose that aberrant expression of oncogenic transcription factors in a
significant fraction of T-ALLs may result from loss of the upstream
transcriptional mechanisms that normally down-regulate the expression of these
oncogenes during T-cell development.

PMID: 14604958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Development. 2003 Dec;130(25):6187-99. Epub 2003 Nov 5.

Lmo2 and Scl/Tal1 convert non-axial mesoderm into haemangioblasts which
differentiate into endothelial cells in the absence of Gata1.

Gering M(1), Yamada Y, Rabbitts TH, Patient RK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

The LIM domain protein Lmo2 and the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
Scl/Tal1 are expressed in early haematopoietic and endothelial progenitors and
interact with each other in haematopoietic cells. While loss-of-function studies 
have shown that Lmo2 and Scl/Tal1 are essential for haematopoiesis and angiogenic
remodelling of the vasculature, gain-of-function studies have suggested an
earlier role for Scl/Tal1 in the specification of haemangioblasts, putative
bipotential precursors of blood and endothelium. In zebrafish embryos, Scl/Tal1
can induce these progenitors from early mesoderm mainly at the expense of the
somitic paraxial mesoderm. We show that this restriction to the somitic paraxial 
mesoderm correlates well with the ability of Scl/Tal1 to induce ectopic
expression of its interaction partner Lmo2. Co-injection of lmo2 mRNA with
scl/tal1 dramatically extends its effect to head, heart, pronephros and
pronephric duct mesoderm inducing early blood and endothelial genes all along the
anteroposterior axis. Erythroid development, however, is expanded only into
pronephric mesoderm, remaining excluded from head, heart and somitic paraxial
mesoderm territories. This restriction correlates well with activation of gata1
transcription and co-injection of gata1 mRNA along with scl/tal1 and lmo2 induces
erythropoiesis more broadly without ventralising or posteriorising the embryo.
While no ectopic myeloid development from the Scl/Tal1-Lmo2-induced
haemangioblasts was observed, a dramatic increase in the number of endothelial
cells was found. These results suggest that, in the absence of inducers of
erythroid or myeloid haematopoiesis, Scl/Tal1-Lmo2-induced haemangioblasts
differentiate into endothelial cells.

PMID: 14602685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Semin Hematol. 2003 Oct;40(4):274-80.

Gene expression profiling in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Ferrando AA(1), Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) presents a difficult medical problem.
T-ALL's clinical features and the biological properties of the leukemia cells are
not predictive of prognosis, and thus have not been useful for risk-specific
adjustments in therapeutic intensity. Microarray gene expression analyses of
T-cell leukemic lymphoblasts have not only improved our understanding of the
biological heterogeneity of this disease but have revealed clinically relevant
molecular subtypes. Five different multistep molecular pathways have been
identified that lead to T-ALL, involving activation of different T-ALL oncogenes:
(1) HOX11, (2) HOX11L2, (3) TAL1 plus LMO1/2, (4) LYL1 plus LMO2, and (5)
MLL-ENL. Gene expression studies indicate activation of a subset of these
genes-HOX11, TAL1, LYL1, LMO1, and LMO2-in a much larger fraction of T-ALL cases 
than those harboring activating chromosomal translocations. In many such cases,
the abnormal expression of one or more of these oncogenes is biallelic,
implicating upstream regulatory mechanisms. Among these molecular subtypes,
overexpression of the HOX11 orphan homeobox gene occurs in approximately 5% to
10% of childhood and 30% of adult T-ALL cases. Patients with HOX11-positive
lymphoblasts have an excellent prognosis when treated with modern combination
chemotherapy, while cases at high risk of early failure are included largely in
the TAL1- and LYL1-positive groups. Supervised learning approaches applied to
microarray data have identified a group of genes whose expression is able to
distinguish high-risk cases. Further analyses of gene expression signatures of
T-ALL lymphoblasts are especially needed for patients treated on modern
combination chemotherapy trials to clearly distinguish the 10% to 15% of patients
who fail induction or relapse in the first year of treatment. These high-risk
patients would be ideal candidates for more intensive therapies in first
remission, such as myeloablative regimens with stem cell rescue. Based on the
rapid pace of research in T-ALL, made possible in large part through microarray
technology, deep analysis of molecular pathways should lead to new and much more 
specific targeted therapies.

PMID: 14582078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Leukemia. 2003 Nov;17(11):2149-56.

Comparative analysis of T-cell receptor gene rearrangements at diagnosis and
relapse of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) shows high stability of
clonal markers for monitoring of minimal residual disease and reveals the
occurrence of second T-ALL.

Szczepanski T(1), van der Velden VH, Raff T, Jacobs DC, van Wering ER, Brüggemann
M, Kneba M, van Dongen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

A total of 28 children and nine adults with relapsed T-ALL were analyzed for the 
configuration of their T-cell receptor (TCR) and TAL1 genes at diagnosis and
relapse to evaluate their stability throughout the disease course. A total of 150
clonal TCR and TAL1 gene rearrangements were identified in the 37 patients at
diagnosis. In 65% of cases all rearrangements and in 27% of cases most
rearrangements found at diagnosis were preserved at relapse. Two children with
unusually late T-ALL recurrences displayed completely different TCR gene
rearrangement sequences between diagnosis and relapse. This indicates that a
proportion of very late T-ALL recurrences might represent second T-ALL.
Specifically, 88% of clonal rearrangements identified at diagnosis in truly
relapsed T-ALL were preserved at relapse. This is significantly higher as
compared to previously studied precursor-B-ALL ( approximately 70%). Thus, from
biological point of view, immunogenotype of T-ALL is more stable as compared with
precursor-B-ALL. The overall stability of TCR gene rearrangements was higher in
adult T-ALL (97%) than in childhood T-ALL (86%). Based on the stability of TCR
gene rearrangements, we propose a strategy for PCR target selection (TCRD+TAL1
--> TCRB --> TCRG), which probably allows reliable minimal residual disease
detection in all T-ALL patients.

PMID: 14576730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(21):7585-99.

Identification of a TAL1 target gene reveals a positive role for the LIM
domain-binding protein Ldb1 in erythroid gene expression and differentiation.

Xu Z(1), Huang S, Chang LS, Agulnick AD, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232,
USA.

The TAL1 (or SCL) gene, originally identified from its involvement by a recurrent
chromosomal translocation, encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor 
essential for erythropoiesis. Although presumed to regulate transcription, its
target genes are largely unknown. We show here that a nuclear complex containing 
TAL1, its DNA-binding partner E47, zinc finger transcription factor GATA-1, LIM
domain protein LMO2, and LIM domain-binding protein Ldb1 transactivates the
protein 4.2 (P4.2) gene through two E box GATA elements in its proximal promoter.
Binding of this complex to DNA was dependent on the integrity of both E box and
GATA sites and was demonstrated to occur on the P4.2 promoter in cells. Maximal
transcription in transiently transfected cells required both E box GATA elements 
and expression of all five components of the complex. This complex was shown, in 
addition, to be capable of linking in solution double-stranded oligonucleotides
corresponding to the two P4.2 E box GATA elements. This DNA-linking activity
required Ldb1 and increased with dimethyl sulfoxide-induced differentiation of
murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. In contrast, enforced expression in MEL cells
of dimerization-defective mutant Ldb1, as well as wild-type Ldb1, significantly
decreased E box GATA DNA-binding activities, P4.2 promoter activity, and
accumulation of P4.2 and beta-globin mRNAs. These studies define a physiologic
target for a TAL1- and GATA-1-containing ternary complex and reveal a positive
role for Ldb1 in erythroid gene expression and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC207591
PMID: 14560005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Leukemia. 2003 Oct;17(10):1998-2006.

Altered transcription of the stem cell leukemia gene in myelofibrosis with
myeloid metaplasia.

Steunou V(1), Le Bousse-Kerdilès MC, Colin-Micouin A, Clay D, Chevillard S,
Martyré MC; French INSERM Research Network on Myelofibrosis Myeloid Metaplasia.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U365, Institut Curie, Paris Cedex, France.

An increased number of circulating CD34+ hematopoietic progenitors with a
prominent proliferation of the megakaryocytic (MK) population are the hallmarks
of the myeloproliferation in myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia (MMM).
Analyzing the potential contribution of the stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene in MMM 
myeloproliferation was doubly interesting for SCL is expressed both in
primitive-uncommitted progenitor cells and erythroid/MK cells, its transcription 
differentially initiating from promoter 1b and 1a, respectively. Our results show
that: (i) the expression of SCL transcript is increased in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients; (ii) SCL gene transcription is altered
in MMM CD34+ progenitor cells sorted into CD34+CD41+ and CD34+CD41-
subpopulations. Actually, in patients, SCL transcription initiated at promoter 1b
is restricted to primitive CD34+CD41- progenitor cells, while it is detectable in
both cell subsets from healthy subjects; (iii) the full-length isoform of SCL
protein is present in patients' CD34+ cells and in PBMC; in the latter the
SCL-expressing cells mainly belong to the MK lineage in which its sublocalization
is both nuclear and cytoplasmic, which contrasts with the sole nuclear staining
observed in normal MK cells. Our demonstration of altered expression and
transcription of SCL in patients' hematopoietic cells emphasizes the possible
contribution of this regulatory nuclear factor to the hematopoietic
dysregulation, which is a feature of myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia.

PMID: 14513050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Development. 2003 Nov;130(22):5437-44. Epub 2003 Sep 24.

Mouse placenta is a major hematopoietic organ.

Alvarez-Silva M(1), Belo-Diabangouaya P, Salaün J, Dieterlen-Lièvre F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Embryologie cellulaire et moléculaire du CNRS et du Collège de
France, 49 bis, avenue de la Belle Gabrielle, 94736 Nogent s/Marne cedex, France.

Placenta and yolk sac from 8- to 17-day-old (E8-E17) mouse embryos/fetuses were
investigated for the presence of in vitro clonogenic progenitors. At E8-E9, the
embryonic body from the umbilicus caudalwards was also analysed. Fetal liver was 
analysed beginning on E10. At E8, between five and nine somite pairs (sp),
placenta, yolk sac and embryonic body yielded no progenitors. The first
progenitors appeared at E8.5 at the stage of 15 sp in the yolk sac, 18 sp in the 
embryonic body, 20 sp in the placenta and only at E12 in the fetal liver (absent 
at E10, at E11 not determined). Progenitors with a high proliferation potential
that could be replated for two months, as well as the whole range of myeloid
progenitors, were found at all stages in all organs. However, the earliest of
these progenitors (these yielding large, multilineage colonies) were 2-4 times
more frequent in the placenta than in the yolk sac or fetal liver. In the fetal
liver, late progenitors were more frequent and the cellularity increased steeply 
with developmental age. Thus, the fetal liver, which is a recognized site for
amplification and commitment, has a very different hematopoietic developmental
profile from placenta or yolk sac. Placentas were obtained from GFP transgenic
embryos in which only the embryonic contribution expressed the transgene. 80% of 
the colonies derived from these placental cells were GFP+, and so originated from
the fetal component of the placenta. These data point to the placenta as a major 
hematopoietic organ that is active during most of pregnancy.

PMID: 14507780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Sep 2;100(18):10299-303. Epub 2003 Aug 21.

Unsuspected role of the brain morphogenetic gene Otx1 in hematopoiesis.

Levantini E(1), Giorgetti A, Cerisoli F, Traggiai E, Guidi A, Martin R, Acampora 
D, Aplan PD, Keller G, Simeone A, Iscove NN, Hoang T, Magli MC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Technologies, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche,
56124 Pisa, Italy.

Otx1 belongs to the paired class of homeobox genes and plays a pivotal role in
brain development. Here, we show that Otx1 is expressed in hematopoietic
pluripotent and erythroid progenitor cells. Moreover, bone marrow cells from mice
lacking Otx1 exhibit a cell-autonomous impairment of the erythroid compartment.
In agreement with these results, molecular analysis revealed decreased levels of 
erythroid genes that include the SCL and GATA-1 transcription factors.
Accordingly, a gain of function of SCL rescues the erythroid deficiency in
Otx1-/- mice. Taken together, our findings indicate a function for Otx1 in the
regulation of blood cell production.

PMCID: PMC193555
PMID: 12934017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2003 Aug;13(6):254-9.

Cell fate decisions in early blood vessel formation.

Ema M(1), Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute and the Department of Molecular and
Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X5.

The close spatial relationship between endothelial and hematopoietic cells at
different stages of development has led to the concept of a common progenitor,
the hemangioblast. The vascular endothelial growth factor receptor, Flk1 or KDR, 
is a common marker of all cells--whether embryonic or adult--that have putative
hemangioblast properties. In this article, a model is proposed in which Flk1
marks a common mesodermal precursor that segregates successive subsets of
Flk1-expressing or Flk1-nonexpressing cells whose fate is determined by
coexpression of lineage-specific transcription factors. Cells that retain Flk1
activity have endothelial potential, cells that also activate downstream
transcription factors such as Tal1 and Runx1 gain primitive or definitive
hematopoietic activity, and cells that lose Flk1 expression but gain expression
of other transcription factors become smooth muscle or other cell types.

PMID: 12922023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Aug 8;307(4):891-9.

The LIM-only protein LMO4 modulates the transcriptional activity of HEN1.

Manetopoulos C(1), Hansson A, Karlsson J, Jönsson JI, Axelson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine, Lund
University, University Hospital MAS, Malmö S-205 02, Sweden.

The basic helix-loop-helix protein HEN1 and the LIM-only proteins LMO2 and LMO4
are expressed in neuronal cells. HEN1 was cloned by virtue of its homology to
TAL1, a bHLH protein important for early hematopoiesis. Since it has been shown
that TAL1 forms complex with LMO proteins in erythroid and leukemic cells we
investigated the capacity of HEN1 to form complex with LMO2 and LMO4. By
mammalian two-hybrid analysis, we show that HEN1 interacts with both LMO2 and
LMO4. To characterize the transcriptional capacity of HEN1 alone or together with
LMO2 and LMO4, we performed reporter gene assays. In comparison with the
ubiquitously expressed bHLH protein E47, HEN1 is a very modest transcriptional
activator and titration experiments indicate that HEN1, like TAL1, represses E47 
mediated transcriptional activation. Furthermore, LMO4 but not LMO2 was able to
augment this effect. Overexpression of HEN1 in hippocampal precursor cells
resulted in neurite extension, which could be prevented by LMO4. Taken together, 
these results indicate that LMO proteins can modulate the transcriptional
activity of HEN1.

PMID: 12878195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cell Death Differ. 2003 Aug;10(8):905-13.

Control of erythroid cell production via caspase-mediated cleavage of
transcription factor SCL/Tal-1.

Zeuner A(1), Eramo A, Testa U, Felli N, Pelosi E, Mariani G, Srinivasula SM,
Alnemri ES, Condorelli G, Peschle C, De Maria R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome
00161, Italy.

SCL/Tal-1 is a helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factor required for blood
cell development, whose abnormal expression is responsible for induction of
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. We show here that SCL/Tal-1 is a key target 
of caspases in developing erythroblasts. SCL/Tal-1 degradation occurred rapidly
after caspase activation and preceded the cleavage of the major erythroid
transcription factor GATA-1. Expression of a caspase-resistant SCL/Tal-1 in
erythroid progenitors was able to prevent amplification of caspase activation,
GATA-1 degradation and impaired erythropoiesis induced by growth factor
deprivation or death receptor triggering. The potent proerythropoietic activity
of uncleavable SCL/Tal-1 was clearly evident in the absence of erythropoietin, a 
condition that did not allow survival of normal erythroid cells or expansion of
erythroblasts expressing caspase-resistant GATA-1. In the absence of
erythropoietin, cells expressing caspase-resistant SCL/Tal-1 maintain high levels
of Bcl-X(L), which inhibits amplification of the caspase cascade and mediates
protection from apoptosis. Thus, SCL/TAL-1 is a survival factor for erythroid
cells, whereas caspase-mediated cleavage of SCL/Tal-1 results in amplification of
caspase activation, GATA-1 degradation and impaired erythropoiesis.

PMID: 12867998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2003 May;24(5):256-8.

[Detection of 29 types of fusion gene in leukemia by multiplex RT-PCR].

[Article in Chinese]

Li ZG(1), Wu MY, Zhao W, Li B, Yang J, Zhu P, Hu YM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematological Center, Beijing Children's Hospital, Beijing 100045, China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the fusion genes derived from 29 types of chromosome
structural aberrations in children with leukemia.
METHODS: Bone marrow samples from 191 children with leukemia were analyzed with a
novel multiplex nested RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Of the 191 leukemic samples, 86 (45.0%) carried 14 types of fusion genes
including SIL/TAL1, MLL/AF1q, E2A/PBX1, MLL/AF6, AML1/ETO, MLL/AF9, TEL/ABL,
BCR/ABL, MLL/AF10, dupMLL, MLL/ENL, TEL/AML1, PML/RARalpha and CBFbeta/MYH11. The
activation of oncogene HOX11 was detected in 31 cases, with or without other
chromosome aberrations in 15 (7.8%) and 16 cases (8.4%), respectively.
CONCLUSION: This multiplex nested RT-PCR reaction could screen 29 types of
chromosome structural aberrations at the same time. It may be helpful for the
detection of minimal residual diseases after chemotherapy and bone marrow
transplantation.

PMID: 12859878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Dev Comp Immunol. 2003 Oct;27(9):793-800.

Characterization of a Tal/SCL-like transcription factor in the pacific oyster
Crassostrea gigas.

Barreau-Roumiguière C(1), Montagnani C, Escoubas JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Défense et Résistance chez les Invertébrés Marins (DRIM),
UMR5098 (IFREMER, CNRS, UMII) Université de Montpellier II, place Eugène
Bataillon, CC80, 34095, Montpellier, France.

We have cloned and characterized a cDNA encoding Cg-tal in the Pacific oyster
Crassostrea gigas. The isolated cDNA encodes a 219 amino acids protein that
contains the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain homologous to that of
vertebrate and invertebrate Tal1/SCL. Phylogenetic analyses sustained that Cg-Tal
belongs to this family of bHLH transcription factors. Northern blot analysis of
Cg-tal mRNA expression in adult oyster tissues indicated that Cg-ta1 was
specifically expressed in hemocytes, in a constitutive manner. In vertebrates,
activation of Tal1/SCL expression is essential for the initiation of
hematopoiesis and the formation of hematopoietic stem cells. Considering Tal1/SCL
function in vertebrates, Cg-Tal is likely to constitute a promising tool for
studying hematopoiesis in oyster.

PMID: 12818636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Blood. 2003 Oct 1;102(7):2593-6. Epub 2003 Jun 19.

NF-kappaB activation in premalignant mouse tal-1/scl thymocytes and tumors.

O'Neil J(1), Ventura JJ, Cusson N, Kelliher M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, USA.

TAL-1/SCL activation is a common genetic event in pediatric T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Expression of tal-1/scl or a DNA binding mutant
of tal-1/scl induces arrest of thymocyte development, resulting in decreases in
double-positive and single-positive CD4 thymocytes. Moreover, nuclear p65/p50
heterodimers are detected in premalignant tal-1/scl and mut tal-1/scl thymocytes,
suggesting that E2A depletion may induce developmental arrest and stimulate
NF-kappaB activation. Increased NF-kappaB activity is also observed in tal-1/scl 
tumors and bcl-2 is overexpressed. To examine the contribution of NF-kappaB to
tal-1/scl tumor growth in vivo, we expressed a mutant form of IkappaBalpha in
tal-1/scl tumor cells. Although expression of mutant IkappaBalpha inhibited the
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha)-induced NF-kappaB response, it had no
effect on tumor growth in mice. These data suggest that NF-kappaB activation is
an early event in tal-1/scl-induced leukemogenesis, associated with arrest of
thymocyte development, and does not appear to contribute to tal-1/scl-induced
tumor growth.

PMID: 12816868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Genes Dev. 2003 Apr 15;17(8):959-64.

Translational control of SCL-isoform expression in hematopoietic lineage choice.

Calkhoven CF(1), Muller C, Martin R, Krosl G, Pietsch H, Hoang T, Leutz A.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2003 Jun 15;17(12):1554.

We investigated the translational regulation of SCL protein expression and its
role in hematopoietic lineage choice. We show that the expression of different
SCL protein isoforms is regulated by signal transduction pathways that modulate
translation initiation factor (eIF) function. A conserved small upstream open
reading frame (uORF) in SCL transcripts acts as a cis-regulatory element for
isoform expression. At the onset of erythroid differentiation, truncated SCL
protein isoforms arise by alternative translation initiation and favor the
erythroid lineage. In comparison, full-length SCL proteins are more efficient at 
enhancing the megakaryocyte lineage. Together, our studies unravel translational 
control as a novel mechanism regulating hematopoietic outcome.

PMCID: PMC196037
PMID: 12704079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. FEMS Yeast Res. 2002 Aug;2(3):277-82.

The non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway controls the fermentation rate of
xylulose but not of xylose in Saccharomyces cerevisiae TMB3001.

Johansson B(1), Hahn-Hägerdal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Microbiology, Lund University, P.O. Box 124, Sweden.
bjorn_johansson@bio.uminho.pt

Saccharomyces cerevisiae is able to ferment xylose, when engineered with the
enzymes xylose reductase (XYL1) and xylitol dehydrogenase (XYL2). However, xylose
fermentation is one to two orders of magnitude slower than glucose fermentation. 
S. cerevisiae has been proposed to have an insufficient capacity of the
non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) for rapid xylose fermentation.
Strains overproducing the non-oxidative PPP enzymes ribulose 5-phosphate
epimerase (EC 5.1.3.1), ribose 5-phosphate ketol isomerase (EC 5.3.1.6),
transaldolase (EC 2.2.1.2) and transketolase (EC 2.2.1.1), as well as all four
enzymes simultaneously, were compared with respect to xylose and xylulose
fermentation with their xylose-fermenting predecessor S. cerevisiae TMB3001,
expressing XYL1, XYL2 and only overexpressing XKS1 (xylulokinase). The level of
overproduction in S. cerevisiae TMB3026, overproducing all four non-oxidative PPP
enzymes, ranged between 4 and 23 times the level in TMB3001. Overproduction of
the non-oxidative PPP enzymes did not influence the xylose fermentation rate in
either batch cultures of 50 g l(-1) xylose or chemostat cultures of 20 g l(-1)
glucose and 20 g l(-1) xylose. The low specific growth rate on xylose was also
unaffected. The results suggest that neither of the non-oxidative PPP enzymes has
any significant control of the xylose fermentation rate in S. cerevisiae TMB3001.
However, the specific growth rate on xylulose increased from 0.02-0.03 for
TMB3001 to 0.12 for the strain overproducing only transaldolase (TAL1) and to
0.23 for TMB3026, suggesting that overproducing all four enzymes has a
synergistic effect. TMB3026 consumed xylulose about two times faster than
TMB30001 in batch culture of 50 g l(-1) xylulose. The results indicate that
growth on xylulose and the xylulose fermentation rate are partly controlled by
the non-oxidative PPP, whereas control of the xylose fermentation rate is
situated upstream of xylulokinase, in xylose transport, in xylose reductase,
and/or in the xylitol dehydrogenase.

PMID: 12702276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Leuk Res. 2003 Jul;27(7):575-82.

Measurement of SIL-TAL1 fusion gene transcripts associated with human T-cell
lymphocytic leukemia by real-time reverse transcriptase-PCR.

Curry JD(1), Smith MT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
University of California at Berkley, 439 Life Sciences Addition, Berkeley, CA
94720-3200, USA.

TAL1 disruption at 1p32 [del(1p)] is a common rearrangement in the development of
T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia (T-ALL). The del(1p) are usually interstitial
90kb deletions placing TAL1 under control of the SCL interrupting locus (SIL)
gene forming the SIL-TAL1 fusion product. A reverse transcriptase real-time PCR
assay to quantify SIL-TAL1 fusion genes is described. A SIL-TAL1 fusion gene RNA 
transcript was built that permitted absolute standard curves to be generated.
Sensitivity of the RT-PCR assay was determined to be 10 cells (CEM cell line) in 
10(6) human lymphocytes. Peripheral blood lymphocytes from 10 healthy adults and 
10 neonates were assayed. None of the samples showed any SIL-TAL1 expression.
However, when lymphocytes from three adults were cultured in vitro the SIL-TAL1
transcript was detectable in the RNA isolates. No RAG2 expression was detected in
these expanded samples, suggesting that the clones bearing the SIL-TAL1 fusion
gene may have existed at low levels prior to the ex vivo expansion.

PMID: 12681356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Haematologica. 2003 Mar;88(3):275-9.

A multiplex reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction strategy for the
diagnostic molecular screening of chimeric genes: a clinical evaluation on 170
patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Elia L(1), Mancini M, Moleti L, Meloni G, Buffolino S, Krampera M, De Rossi G,
Foà R, Cimino G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Cellulari ed Ematologia, Sezione di Ematologia, 
University La Sapienza, via Benevento 6, 00161 Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: In the last few years molecular methods have allowed
the identification of leukemia-associated genetic lesions, which may represent
the most accurate predictors of clinical outcome. These considerations strengthen
the need for rapid identification of the abnormalities. Our aim was to
demonstrate whether a modified multiplex reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) system might be successfully used to screen a large number of
patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
DESIGN AND METHODS: In this study we adapted the multiplex RT-PCR assay,
previously described by Pallisgaard et al., to detect all the most frequent
genetic lesions with their characteristic splicing variants occurring in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, such as the MLL/AF4, MLL/ENL, BCR/ABL p190 (e1a2) and
p210 (b2a2,b3a2) isoforms, E2A/PBX1, TEL/AML1, SIL/TAL1 and the novel
NUP98/RAP1GDS1 transcript, recently described in a T-ALL leukemic subtype.
RESULTS: We used the multiplex RT-PCR assay to screen 170 ALL patients (70
children and 100 adults). PCR positivity was detected in 67 (39%) of the 170 ALL 
patients studied. The comparison between cytogenetic and molecular analyses
showed complete correspondence between the two assays in all patients with an
evaluable karyotype. Finally, the observed incidence of genetic lesions in our
ALL patients was similar to the frequency usually reported both in children and
in adults with ALL.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: These results show that, compared to single
RT-PCR reactions, our multiplex RT-PCR system allows rapid, specific,
simultaneous as well as a less expensive, laborious and time-consuming detection 
of the most frequent fusion transcripts in ALL patients. Therefore, it might be
recommended for rapid diagnostic molecular screening of large numbers of
patients, such as those enrolled in multicenter, co-operative studies.
Furthermore, we have shown that multiplex RT-PCR is an open system that can
easily be adapted to detect new leukemic genes.

PMID: 12651265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Blood. 2003 Jun 15;101(12):4757-64. Epub 2003 Feb 27.

A PAR domain transcription factor is involved in the expression from a
hematopoietic-specific promoter for the human LMO2 gene.

Crable SC(1), Anderson KP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, OH, USA.

The transcription factor LMO2 is believed to exert its effect through the
formation of protein-protein interactions with other DNA-binding factors such as 
GATA-1 and TAL1. Although LMO2 has been shown to be critical for the formation of
the erythroid cell lineage, the gene is also expressed in a number of
nonerythroid tissues. In this report, we demonstrate that the more distal of the 
2 promoters for the LMO2 gene is highly restricted in its pattern of expression, 
directing the hematopoietic-specific expression of this gene. Deletion and
mutation analyses have identified a critical cis element in the first
untranslated exon of the gene. This element is a consensus-binding site for a
small family of basic leucine zipper proteins containing a proline and acidic
amino acid-rich (PAR) domain. Although all 3 members of this family are produced 
in erythroid cells, only 2 of these proteins, thyrotroph embryonic factor and
hepatic leukemia factor, can activate transcription from this LMO2 promoter
element. These findings represent a novel mechanism in erythroid gene regulation 
because PAR proteins have not previously been implicated in this process.

PMID: 12609830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Mar;23(5):1817-31.

A mutant receptor tyrosine phosphatase, CD148, causes defects in vascular
development.

Takahashi T(1), Takahashi K, St John PL, Fleming PA, Tomemori T, Watanabe T,
Abrahamson DR, Drake CJ, Shirasawa T, Daniel TO.

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Division and Center for Vascular Biology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.
takamune.takahashi@mcmail.vanderbilt.edu

Vascularization defects in genetic recombinant mice have defined critical roles
for a number of specific receptor tyrosine kinases. Here we evaluated whether an 
endothelium-expressed receptor tyrosine phosphatase, CD148 (DEP-1/PTPeta),
participates in developmental vascularization. A mutant allele,
CD148(DeltaCyGFP), was constructed to eliminate CD148 phosphatase activity by
in-frame replacement of cytoplasmic sequences with enhanced green fluorescent
protein sequences. Homozygous mutant mice died at midgestation, before embryonic 
day 11.5 (E11.5), with vascularization failure marked by growth retardation and
disorganized vascular structures. Structural abnormalities were observed as early
as E8.25 in the yolk sac, prior to the appearance of intraembryonic defects.
Homozygous mutant mice displayed enlarged vessels comprised of endothelial cells 
expressing markers of early differentiation, including VEGFR2 (Flk1), Tal1/SCL,
CD31, ephrin-B2, and Tie2, with notable lack of endoglin expression. Increased
endothelial cell numbers and mitotic activity indices were demonstrated. At E9.5,
homozygous mutant embryos showed homogeneously enlarged primitive vessels
defective in vascular remodeling and branching, with impaired pericyte investment
adjacent to endothelial structures, in similarity to endoglin-deficient embryos. 
Developing cardiac tissues showed expanded endocardial projections accompanied by
defective endocardial cushion formation. These findings implicate a member of the
receptor tyrosine phosphatase family, CD148, in developmental vascular
organization and provide evidence that it regulates endothelial proliferation and
endothelium-pericyte interactions.

PMCID: PMC151692
PMID: 12588999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Br J Haematol. 2003 Feb;120(3):482-3.

Absence of SCL mutations in myeloid malignancies.

Delabesse E(1), Li J, Schnittger S, Hiddemann W, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Cambridge, UK.

Transcription factors play a central role in the pathogenesis of acute leukaemia.
Genes encoding transcription factors are frequently perturbed by chromosome
rearrangements. More recently acquired point mutations have been described in a
number of important genes for normal haematopoiesis. The stem cell leukaemia
(SCL) gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor and is
upregulated by chromosome rearrangements in T-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. SCL 
function is essential for the development of both primitive and definitive
haematopoiesis. We searched for SCL mutations in myeloid leukaemias and chronic
myeloproliferative disorders. Our data demonstrated that SCL point mutations were
rare in acute myeloid leukaemia and myeloproliferative disorders.

PMID: 12580964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2003 Feb;69(2):740-6.

Molecular analysis of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutant with improved ability to 
utilize xylose shows enhanced expression of proteins involved in transport,
initial xylose metabolism, and the pentose phosphate pathway.

Wahlbom CF(1), Cordero Otero RR, van Zyl WH, Hahn-Hägerdal B, Jönsson LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Microbiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Differences between the recombinant xylose-utilizing Saccharomyces cerevisiae
strain TMB 3399 and the mutant strain TMB 3400, derived from TMB 3399 and
displaying improved ability to utilize xylose, were investigated by using
genome-wide expression analysis, physiological characterization, and biochemical 
assays. Samples for analysis were withdrawn from chemostat cultures. The
characteristics of S. cerevisiae TMB 3399 and TMB 3400 grown on glucose and on a 
mixture of glucose and xylose, as well as of S. cerevisiae TMB 3400 grown on only
xylose, were investigated. The strains were cultivated under chemostat conditions
at a dilution rate of 0.1 h(-1), with feeds consisting of a defined mineral
medium supplemented with 10 g of glucose liter(-1), 10 g of glucose plus 10 g of 
xylose liter(-1) or, for S. cerevisiae TMB 3400, 20 g of xylose liter(-1). S.
cerevisiae TMB 3400 consumed 31% more xylose of a feed containing both glucose
and xylose than S. cerevisiae TMB 3399. The biomass yields for S. cerevisiae TMB 
3400 were 0.46 g of biomass g of consumed carbohydrate(-1) on glucose and 0.43 g 
of biomass g of consumed carbohydrate(-1) on xylose. A K(s) value of 33 mM for
xylose was obtained for S. cerevisiae TMB 3400. In general, the percentage error 
was <20% between duplicate microarray experiments originating from independent
fermentation experiments. Microarray analysis showed higher expression in S.
cerevisiae TMB 3400 than in S. cerevisiae TMB 3399 for (i) HXT5, encoding a
hexose transporter; (ii) XKS1, encoding xylulokinase, an enzyme involved in one
of the initial steps of xylose utilization; and (iii) SOL3, GND1, TAL1, and TKL1,
encoding enzymes in the pentose phosphate pathway. In addition, the
transcriptional regulators encoded by YCR020C, YBR083W, and YPR199C were
expressed differently in the two strains. Xylose utilization was, however, not
affected in strains in which YCR020C was overexpressed or deleted. The higher
expression of XKS1 in S. cerevisiae TMB 3400 than in TMB 3399 correlated with
higher specific xylulokinase activity in the cell extracts. The specific activity
of xylose reductase and xylitol dehydrogenase was also higher for S. cerevisiae
TMB 3400 than for TMB 3399, both on glucose and on the mixture of glucose and
xylose.

PMCID: PMC143595
PMID: 12570990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genes Dev. 2003 Feb 1;17(3):380-93.

Combinatorial effects of Flk1 and Tal1 on vascular and hematopoietic development 
in the mouse.

Ema M(1), Faloon P, Zhang WJ, Hirashima M, Reid T, Stanford WL, Orkin S, Choi K, 
Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada M5G
1X5.

Mouse embryos mutant for the VEGF receptor, VEGFR2, Flk-1, or Kdr, fail to form
both endothelial and hematopoietic cells, suggesting a possible role in a common 
progenitor to both lineages. The transcription factor Tal1 (Scl), is not
expressed in Flk1(-/-) embryos, consistent with a downstream role in the Flk1
pathway. We tested whether expression of Tal1 under the Flk1 promoter was
sufficient to rescue the loss of endothelial and hematopoietic cells in Flk1
mutants. Only partial rescue of hematopoiesis and endothelial development was
observed in vivo. However, Flk1(-/Tal1) embryonic stem (ES) cells were capable of
blast colony formation in vitro at levels equivalent to Flk1(+/-) heterozygotes. 
Ectopic expression of Tal1 under the Flk1 promoter in Flk1(+/-) mouse embryos or 
ES cells caused no obvious pathology but increased the number of blast colony
forming cells (BL-CFCs) and enhanced their hematopoietic potential. These
single-cell-derived BL-CFCs also produced smooth muscle cells in vitro. Increased
Tal1 expression inhibited smooth muscle differentiation in this assay, whereas
loss of Tal1 promoted smooth muscle formation. We propose a model in which the
combinatorial effects of Flk1 and Tal1 act to regulate cell fate choice in early 
development into hematopoietic, endothelial, and smooth muscle lineages.

PMCID: PMC195986
PMID: 12569129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 11;278(15):12680-7. Epub 2003 Feb 3.

Regulation of pT alpha gene expression by a dosage of E2A, HEB, and SCL.

Tremblay M(1), Herblot S, Lecuyer E, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Montréal, Montréal, Québec H2W 1R7, Canada.

The expression of the pT alpha gene is required for effective selection,
proliferation, and survival of beta T-cell receptor (beta TCR)-expressing
immature thymocytes. Here, we have identified two phylogenetically conserved
E-boxes within the pT alpha enhancer sequence that are required for optimal
enhancer activity and for its stage-specific activity in immature T cells. We
have shown that the transcription factors E2A and HEB associate with high
affinity to these E-boxes. Moreover, we have identified pT alpha as a direct
target of E2A-HEB heterodimers in immature thymocytes because they specifically
occupy the enhancer in vivo. In these cells, pT alpha mRNA levels are determined 
by the presence of one or two functional E2A or HEB alleles. Furthermore, E2A/HEB
transcriptional activity is repressed by heterodimerization with SCL, a
transcription factor that is turned off in differentiating thymocytes exactly at 
a stage when pT alpha is up-regulated. Taken together, our observations suggest
that the dosage of E2A, HEB, and SCL determines pT alpha gene expression in
immature T cells.

PMID: 12566462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Feb 4;100(3):992-7. Epub 2003 Jan 27.

The critical regulator of embryonic hematopoiesis, SCL, is vital in the adult for
megakaryopoiesis, erythropoiesis, and lineage choice in CFU-S12.

Hall MA(1), Curtis DJ, Metcalf D, Elefanty AG, Sourris K, Robb L, Gothert JR,
Jane SM, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Rotary Bone Marrow Research Laboratory, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne,
Victoria 3050, Australia. hall@wehi.edu.au

Gene targeting studies have shown that the transcription factor SCL is critically
important for embryonic hematopoiesis, but the early lethality of SCL null mice
has precluded the genetic analysis of its function in the adult. We have now
generated a conditional knockout of SCL by using CreLox technology and an
IFN-inducible Cre transgenic mouse. Deletion of SCL in adult mice perturbed
megakaryopoiesis and erythropoiesis with the loss of early progenitor cells in
both lineages. This led to a blunted response to the hematopoietic stress induced
by polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid, with a persistently low platelet count and
hematocrit compared with controls. In contrast, progenitors of granulocyte and
macrophage lineages were not affected, even in the setting of stress. Immature
progenitor cells (day 12 colony-forming unit spleen) with multilineage capacity
were still present in the SCL null bone marrow, but these progenitors had lost
the capacity to generate erythroid and megakaryocyte cells, and colonies were
composed of only myeloid cells. These results suggest that SCL is critical for
megakaryopoiesis and erythropoiesis, but is dispensable for production of myeloid
cells during adult hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC298714
PMID: 12552125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nature. 2003 Jan 30;421(6922):547-51. Epub 2003 Jan 19.

Haematopoietic stem cells retain long-term repopulating activity and multipotency
in the absence of stem-cell leukaemia SCL/tal-1 gene.

Mikkola HK(1), Klintman J, Yang H, Hock H, Schlaeger TM, Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Children's Hospital and the Dana Farber
Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The production of blood cells is sustained throughout the lifetime of an
individual by haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Specification of HSCs from
mesoderm during embryonic development requires the stem cell leukaemia SCL/tal-1 
gene product. Forced expression of SCL/tal-1 strongly induces blood formation in 
embryos, indicating that this gene has a dominant role in commitment to
haematopoiesis. In the adult haematopoietic system, expression of SCL/tal-1 is
enriched in HSCs and multipotent progenitors, and in erythroid and megakaryocytic
lineages, consistent with roles for this factor in adult haematopoiesis. Here we 
assess by conditional gene targeting whether SCL/tal-1 is required continuously
for the identity and function of HSCs. We find that SCL/tal-1 is dispensable for 
HSC engraftment, self-renewal and differentiation into myeloid and lymphoid
lineages; however, the proper differentiation of erythroid and megakaryocytic
precursors is dependent on SCL/tal-1. Thus, SCL/tal-1 is essential for the
genesis of HSCs, but its continued expression is not essential for HSC functions.
These findings contrast with lineage choice mechanisms, in which the identity of 
haematopoietic lineages requires continuous transcription factor expression.

PMID: 12540851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Jan 27;1625(2):207-13.

Cloning and characterization of the SIL promoter.

Colaizzo-Anas T(1), Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Buffalo State-SUNY, 210 Caudell Hall, Buffalo, NY 14222, USA.
tcolaizzo@aol.com

The SIL gene undergoes a site-specific rearrangement with the SCL gene in 25% of 
patients with T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The functional result of
this rearrangement is that the SIL regulatory elements aberrantly drive
expression of the SCL gene. We have cloned and sequenced the human SIL promoter, 
cloned a murine homolog, found the sequence to be highly conserved, and defined a
minimal promoter region. Both the cloned murine and human sequences were found to
be highly active in either human or murine cells. SCL mRNA, driven by a cloned
SIL promoter, could be downregulated by DMSO in stably transfected F4-6 murine
erythroleukemia cells. The SIL promoter was found to be partially unmethylated in
proliferating tissues, in which it is highly expressed, and more highly
methylated in post-mitotic tissues, in which SIL is not expressed. The isolation 
of the SIL promoter provides an important tool for the study of both the SIL gene
expression as well as the role of the SIL promoter in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 12531481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Leukemia. 2003 Jan;17(1):272-4.

Zinc modulates c-Myc/Mad1 balance in human leukemia cells.

Sirinian MI, Pisegna S, Paroli M, Militi S, Testa U, Peschle C.

PMID: 12529695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Oct;10(5):404-8.

[Effects of SCL antisense ooligonucleotides on K562 and CEM cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Zheng ZJ(1), Hu JD, Huang SH, Wang SY, Lu LH.

Author information: 
(1)Union Hospital of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou 350001, China.

The stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene is a new oncogene related with leukemogenesis. 
To explore the effects of antisense oligonucleotides of SCL on leukemic cells,
SCL antisense phosphorothioate oligodeoxynucleotides (AS-PS-ODN) were used to
treat K562 and CEM leukemic cell lines to observe the effects on proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis and SCL mRNA expression in the cells. The results
showed that incubation of K562 or CEM cells with AS-PS-ODN at different
concentrations led to inhibition of cell proliferation, and the inhibitory
effects varied with the incubation time. The positive rate of benzidine staining 
in K562 cells increased significantly after the inhibition with AS-PS-ODN,
compared with S-PS-ODN treatment. The characteristics of apoptosis were observed 
in K562 cells treated with AS-PS-ODN, but not in CEM cells. Expression of SCL
mRNA in K562 and CEM cells and SIL-SCL mRNA in CEM cells decreased after
incubation of AS-PS-ODN. It is concluded that SCL AS-PS-ODN inhibits specifically
the proliferation of K562 and CEM cells, also decreases the level of SCL and
SIL-SCL mRNA expression. AS-PS-ODN enhances erythroid differentiation and induces
premature apoptosis in K562 cells.

PMID: 12513737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. EMBO J. 2002 Dec 16;21(24):6700-8.

SCL/tal-1-dependent process determines a competence to select the definitive
hematopoietic lineage prior to endothelial differentiation.

Endoh M(1), Ogawa M, Orkin S, Nishikawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, 606-8057, Japan. mendoh@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Hematopoiesis in most vertebrate species occurs in two distinct phases, primitive
and definitive, which diverge from FLK1(+)VE-cadherin(-) mesoderm and
FLK1(+)VE-cadherin(+) endothelial cells (EC), respectively. This study aimed at
determining the stage at which hematopoietic lineage fate is determined by
manipulating the SCL/tal-1 expression that is known to be essential for the early
development of the primitive and definitive hematopoietic systems. We established
SCL-null ES cell lines in which SCL expression is rescued by tamoxifen-inducible 
Cre recombinase-loxP site-mediated recombination. While no hematopoietic cells
(HPC) were detected in SCL-null ES cell differentiation cultures, SCL gene
reactivation from day 2 to day 4 after initiation of differentiation could rescue
both primitive and definitive hematopoiesis. SCL reactivation at later phases was
ineffective. Moreover, generation of VE-cadherin(+) EC that can give rise to
definitive HPC required SCL reactivation prior to VE-cadherin expression. These
results indicated that the competence to become HPC is acquired at the mesodermal
stage by a SCL-dependent process that takes place independently of determination 
of endothelial fate.

PMCID: PMC139094
PMID: 12485991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Nov 12;99(23):14925-30. Epub 2002 Nov 4.

Expression profiling of CD34+ hematopoietic stem/ progenitor cells reveals
distinct subtypes of therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia.

Qian Z(1), Fernald AA, Godley LA, Larson RA, Le Beau MM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology and the Cancer Research Center, University of
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. zqian@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu

One of the most serious consequences of cytotoxic cancer therapy is the
development of therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (t-AML), a neoplastic
disorder arising from a multipotential hematopoietic stem cell. To gain insights 
into the molecular basis of this disease, we performed gene expression profiling 
of CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells from t-AML patients. Our analysis
revealed that there are distinct subtypes of t-AML that have a characteristic
gene expression pattern. Common to each of the subgroups are gene expression
patterns typical of arrested differentiation in early progenitor cells. Leukemias
with a -5/del(5q) have a higher expression of genes involved in cell cycle
control (CCNA2, CCNE2, CDC2), checkpoints (BUB1), or growth (MYC), and loss of
expression of the gene encoding IFN consensus sequence-binding protein (ICSBP). A
second subgroup of t-AML is characterized by down-regulation of transcription
factors involved in early hematopoiesis (TAL1, GATA1, and EKLF) and
overexpression of proteins involved in signaling pathways in myeloid cells (FLT3)
and cell survival (BCL2). Establishing the molecular pathways involved in t-AML
may facilitate the identification of selectively expressed genes that can be
exploited for the development of urgently needed targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC137521
PMID: 12417757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Development. 2002 Dec;129(23):5511-20.

Lineage analysis of the hemangioblast as defined by FLK1 and SCL expression.

Chung YS(1), Zhang WJ, Arentson E, Kingsley PD, Palis J, Choi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Accumulating studies support the idea that a common progenitor, termed the
hemangioblast, generates both hematopoietic and endothelial cell lineages. To
better define the relationship between these cell lineages, we have generated
knock-in embryonic stem (ES) cells carrying a non-functional human CD4 at the Scl
locus. By using in vitro differentiated Scl(+/CD4) ES cells, we demonstrate that 
FLK1 and SCL are molecular determinants of the hemangioblast. Furthermore, our
studies demonstrate that hematopoietic and endothelial cells develop via
distinct, sequential generation of FLK1 and SCL-expressing cells. FLK1(+)CD4(-)
cells first arise in developing embryoid bodies. The Scl gene is turned on within
FLK1(+)CD4(-) cells to give rise to FLK1(+)CD4(+) cells. Alternatively, a
subpopulation of the initial FLK1(+)CD4(-) cells remains as SCL negative. Within 
the FLK1(+)CD4(+) cells, FLK1 is down regulated to generate FILK1(-)CD4(+) cells.
Replating studies demonstrate that hematopoietic progenitors are enriched within 
FLK1(+)CD4(+) and FLK1(-)CD4(+) cells, while endothelial cells develop from
FLK1(+)CD4(+) and FLK1(+)CD4(-) cell populations.

PMID: 12403720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Blood. 2003 Jan 15;101(2):508-16. Epub 2002 Sep 19.

Expression of CD41 marks the initiation of definitive hematopoiesis in the mouse 
embryo.

Mikkola HK(1), Fujiwara Y, Schlaeger TM, Traver D, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Murine hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) originate from mesoderm in a process that 
requires the transcription factor SCL/Tal1. To define steps in the commitment to 
blood cell fate, we compared wild-type and SCL(-/-) embryonic stem cell
differentiation in vitro and identified CD41 (GpIIb) as the earliest surface
marker missing from SCL(-/-) embryoid bodies (EBs). Culture of
fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) purified cells from EBs showed that
definitive hematopoietic progenitors were highly enriched in the CD41(+)
fraction, whereas endothelial cells developed from CD41(-) cells. In the mouse
embryo, expression of CD41 was detected in yolk sac blood islands and in fetal
liver. In yolk sac and EBs, the panhematopoietic marker CD45 appeared in a
subpopulation of CD41(+) cells. However, multilineage hematopoietic colonies
developed not only from CD45(+)CD41(+) cells but also from CD45(-)CD41(+) cells, 
suggesting that CD41 rather than CD45 marks the definitive culture colony-forming
unit (CFU-C) at the embryonic stage. In contrast, fetal liver CFU-C was CD45(+), 
and only a subfraction expressed CD41, demonstrating down-regulation of CD41 by
the fetal liver stage. In yolk sac and EBs, CD41 was coexpressed with embryonic
HSC markers c-kit and CD34. Sorting for CD41 and c-kit expression resulted in
enrichment of definitive hematopoietic progenitors. Furthermore, the CD41(+)
c-kit(+) population was missing from runx1/AML1(-/-) EBs that lack definitive
hematopoiesis. These results suggest that the expression of CD41, a candidate
target gene of SCL/Tal1, and c-kit define the divergence of definitive
hematopoiesis from endothelial cells during development. Although CD41 is
commonly referred to as megakaryocyte-platelet integrin in adult hematopoiesis,
these results implicate a wider role for CD41 during murine ontogeny.

PMID: 12393529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Blood. 2002 Oct 1;100(7):2430-40.

The SCL complex regulates c-kit expression in hematopoietic cells through
functional interaction with Sp1.

Lécuyer E(1), Herblot S, Saint-Denis M, Martin R, Begley CG, Porcher C, Orkin SH,
Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Montreal and from the Departments of
Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Molecular Biology, Université de Montréal,
Quebec, Canada.

The combinatorial interaction among transcription factors is believed to
determine hematopoietic cell fate. Stem cell leukemia (SCL, also known as TAL1
[T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia 1]) is a tissue-specific basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factor that plays a central function in hematopoietic
development; however, its target genes and molecular mode of action remain to be 
elucidated. Here we show that SCL and the c-Kit receptor are coexpressed in
hematopoietic progenitors at the single-cell level and that SCL induces c-kit in 
chromatin, as ectopic SCL expression in transgenic mice sustains c-kit
transcription in developing B lymphocytes, in which both genes are normally
down-regulated. Through transient transfection assays and coimmunoprecipitation
of endogenous proteins, we define the role of SCL as a nucleation factor for a
multifactorial complex (SCL complex) that specifically enhances c-kit promoter
activity without affecting the activity of myelomonocytic promoters. This
complex, containing hematopoietic-specific (SCL, Lim-only 2 (LMO2),
GATA-1/GATA-2) and ubiquitous (E2A, LIM- domain binding protein 1 [Ldb-1])
factors, is tethered to DNA via a specificity protein 1 (Sp1) motif, through
direct interactions between elements of the SCL complex and the Sp1 zinc finger
protein. Furthermore, we demonstrate by chromatin immunoprecipitation that SCL,
E2A, and Sp1 specifically co-occupy the c-kit promoter in vivo. We therefore
conclude that c-kit is a direct target of the SCL complex. Proper activation of
the c-kit promoter depends on the combinatorial interaction of all members of the
complex. Since SCL is down-regulated in maturing cells while its partners remain 
expressed, our observations suggest that loss of SCL inactivates the SCL complex,
which may be an important event in the differentiation of pluripotent
hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 12239153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Br J Haematol. 2002 Sep;118(4):1011-8.

Molecular characterization of a new recombination of the SIL/TAL-1 locus in a
child with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Carlotti E(1), Pettenella F, Amaru R, Slater S, Lister TA, Barbui T, Basso G,
Cazzaniga G, Rambaldi A, Biondi A.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Ematologia, Ospedali Riuniti Bergamo, Clinica paediatrica,
Università di Milano-Bicocca, Ospedale S. Gerardo, Monza, Italy.

Deletions involving the SIL-TAL-1 locus are seen in 15% of T-acute lymphoblastic 
leukaemias (T-ALL). To date, seven deletions have been described, spreading over 
90 kb of chromosome 1, fusing SIL to the TAL-1 gene and resulting in over
expression of TAL-1. During the diagnostic screening of the TAL-1 deletion in 176
T-ALL patients, we identified one case showing a new SIL rearrangement. A novel
fusion transcript was identified between the SIL exon 1a and an unknown sequence 
(633-cDNA). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) screening of a human cDNA library
confirmed the existence of this transcript. Using long-distance PCR on patient
DNA, we obtained a genomic fragment containing SIL exon 1b, a portion of intron
1b, an unknown sequence and the 633 sequence. Using DNA from healthy donors, a
partial genomic map of 633-DNA was found to be identical to the restriction map
of the PCR fragment amplified from patient DNA. To define the chromosomal origin 
of 633-DNA, a YAC human genomic library was screened. Two clones containing
633-DNA were found, mapping to chromosomal region 1p32 and both contained SIL and
TAL-1 sequences. By searching GenBank, we identified PAC RP1-18D14 which contains
SIL, TAL-1 and 633-DNA, confirming this novel rearrangement as a new deletion of 
the SIL/TAL-1 locus.

PMID: 12199779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Leukemia. 2002 Aug;16(8):1432-6.

Minimal residual disease levels in bone marrow and peripheral blood are
comparable in children with T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), but not in
precursor-B-ALL.

van der Velden VH(1), Jacobs DC, Wijkhuijs AJ, Comans-Bitter WM, Willemse MJ,
Hählen K, Kamps WA, van Wering ER, van Dongen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Sensitive and quantitative detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) in bone
marrow (BM) samples of children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is
essential for evaluation of early treatment response. In this study, we evaluated
whether the traumatic BM samplings can be replaced by peripheral blood (PB)
samplings. MRD levels were analyzed in follow-up samples of 62 children with
precursor-B-ALL (532 paired BM-PB samples) and 22 children with T-ALL (149 paired
BM-PB samples) using real-time quantitative PCR (RQ-PCR) analysis of
immunoglobulin and T cell receptor gene rearrangements with sensitivities of
10(-3) to 10(-5) (one ALL cell in 10(3) to 10(5) normal cells). In 14 of the 22
T-ALL patients, detectable MRD levels were found in 67 paired BM-PB samples: in
47 pairs MRD was detected both in BM and PB, whereas in the remaining pairs very 
low MRD levels were detected in BM (n = 11) or PB (n = 9) only. The MRD levels in
the paired BM-PB samples were very comparable and strongly correlated (r(s) =
0.849). Comparable results were obtained earlier by immunophenotyping in 26 T-ALL
patients (321 paired BM-PB samples), which also showed a strong correlation
between MRD levels in paired BM and PB samples (r(s) = 0.822). In 39 of the 62
precursor-B-ALL patients, MRD was detected in 107 BM-PB pairs: in 48 pairs MRD
was detected in both BM and PB, in 47 pairs MRD was solely detected in BM (at
variable levels), and in 12 pairs only the PB sample was MRD-positive at very low
levels (</=10(-4)). Furthermore, in the 48 double-positive pairs, MRD levels in
BM and PB varied enormously with MRD levels in BM being up to 1000 times higher
than in the corresponding PB samples. Consequently, BM samples cannot easily be
replaced by PB sampling for MRD analysis in childhood precursor-B-ALL, in line
with their BM origin. In T-ALL, which are of thymic origin, BM sampling might be 
replaced by PB sampling, because the dissemination of T-ALL cells to BM and PB
appears to be comparable.

PMID: 12145681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Blood. 2002 Aug 1;100(3):991-7.

HOX11L2 expression defines a clinical subtype of pediatric T-ALL associated with 
poor prognosis.

Ballerini P(1), Blaise A, Busson-Le Coniat M, Su XY, Zucman-Rossi J, Adam M, van 
den Akker J, Perot C, Pellegrino B, Landman-Parker J, Douay L, Berger R, Bernard 
OA.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hématologie Biologique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France.
paola.ballerini@trs.ap-hop-paris.fr

The most frequent oncogenic activation events characterized in childhood T acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) result in the transcriptional activation of genes 
coding for transcription factors. The main genes are TAL1/SCL, a member of the
basic region helix-loop-helix gene family, and HOX11L2, a member of the
homeobox-containing protein family. To gain insight into the pathogenesis of this
type of hematologic malignancy, we analyzed 28 T-ALL samples. SIL-TAL1/SCL fusion
was detected in 6 patients; expression of HOX11L2 was observed in 6 patients and 
of HOX11 in 3 patients. With one exception, these activations did not occur
simultaneously in the same patients, and they allowed the subclassification of
50% of the patients. SIL-TAL1 fusion was detected in association with HOX11
expression in one patient and with a t(8;14) (q24;q11) in another. High
expression of LYL1, LMO2, or TAL1 was observed mainly in samples negative for
HOX11L2 expression. HOX11L1 and HOX11 expression were observed in one instance
each, in the absence of detectable chromosomal abnormality of their respective
loci, on chromosomes 2 and 10, respectively. HOX11L2 expression was associated
with a chromosome 5q abnormality, the location of the HOX11L2 locus in each case 
tested. Finally, our data show that HOX11L2 expression was a suitable marker for 
minimal residual disease follow-up and was significantly associated with relapse 
(P =.02).

PMID: 12130513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Dyn. 2002 Jun;224(2):231-7.

Coexpression of SCL and GATA3 in the V2 interneurons of the developing mouse
spinal cord.

Smith E(1), Hargrave M, Yamada T, Begley CG, Little MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, incorporating the Special Research Centre 
for Functional and Applied Genomics, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Australia.

The differentiation of neural progenitors into the many classes of neurons that
exist in the mature spinal cord is a process that relies heavily on the
activation of precise combinations of transcription factors. Defining these
transcription factor combinations is an important aspect of research in
developmental neurobiology that promises to provide incredible insights into the 
structure, function, and pathology of the central nervous system. The present
study aimed to investigate a possible role for the Stem Cell Leukemia (SCL) gene,
a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor gene, in the specification
of a population of neural cells in the ventral neural tube. Section RNA in situ
hybridisation revealed that SCL is transiently expressed within the V2
postmitotic domain of the developing mouse spinal cord between 10.5 and 13.5 days
post coitum. Double-immunofluorescence experiments were subsequently carried out 
to directly compare the expression of SCL with other V2-specific markers at the
cellular level. These experiments revealed that SCL is expressed in a medially
restricted subpopulation of GATA-3 producing cells, suggesting a possible role
for this factor in the differentiation of the GATA population of V2 interneurons.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12112475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Blood. 2002 Jul 15;100(2):491-500.

Ectopic expression of TAL-1 protein in Ly-6E.1-htal-1 transgenic mice induces
defects in B- and T-lymphoid differentiation.

Goardon N(1), Schuh A, Hajar I, Ma X, Jouault H, Dzierzak E, Roméo PH,
Maouche-Chrétien L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Département d'Hématologie, INSERM, CNRS, Paris, France.

The tal-1 gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
required for primitive and definitive hematopoiesis. Additionally, ectopic
activation of the tal-1 gene during T lymphopoiesis occurs in numerous cases of
human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. With the use of transgenic mice, we
show that, in adult hematopoiesis, constitutive expression of TAL-1 protein
causes disorders in the hematopoietic lineages that normally switch off tal-1
gene expression during their differentiation process. Myelopoiesis was
characterized by a moderate increase of myeloid precursors and by Sca-1 antigen
persistence. Although no lymphoid leukemia was observed, T lymphopoiesis and B
lymphopoiesis were severely impaired. Transgenic mice showed reduced thymic
cellularity together with a decrease in double-positive cells and a concurrent
increase in the single-positive population. B cells exhibited a differentiation
defect characterized by a reduction of the B-cell compartment most likely because
of a differentiation block upstream of the intermediate pro-B progenitor. B cells
escaping this defect developed normally, but transgenic splenocytes presented a
defect in immunoglobulin class switch recombination. Altogether, these results
enlighten the fine-tuning of TAL-1 expression during adult hematopoiesis and
indicate why TAL-1 expression has to be switched off in the lymphoid lineages.

PMID: 12091340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Cancer Cell. 2002 Feb;1(1):75-87.

Gene expression signatures define novel oncogenic pathways in T cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Ferrando AA(1), Neuberg DS, Staunton J, Loh ML, Huard C, Raimondi SC, Behm FG,
Pui CH, Downing JR, Gilliland DG, Lander ES, Golub TR, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02142, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2002 Mar;1(2):109-10.

Human T cell leukemias can arise from oncogenes activated by specific chromosomal
translocations involving the T cell receptor genes. Here we show that five
different T cell oncogenes (HOX11, TAL1, LYL1, LMO1, and LMO2) are often
aberrantly expressed in the absence of chromosomal abnormalities. Using
oligonucleotide microarrays, we identified several gene expression signatures
that were indicative of leukemic arrest at specific stages of normal thymocyte
development: LYL1+ signature (pro-T), HOX11+ (early cortical thymocyte), and
TAL1+ (late cortical thymocyte). Hierarchical clustering analysis of gene
expression signatures grouped samples according to their shared oncogenic
pathways and identified HOX11L2 activation as a novel event in T cell
leukemogenesis. These findings have clinical importance, since HOX11 activation
is significantly associated with a favorable prognosis, while expression of TAL1,
LYL1, or, surprisingly, HOX11L2 confers a much worse response to treatment. Our
results illustrate the power of gene expression profiles to elucidate
transformation pathways relevant to human leukemia.

PMID: 12086890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. EMBO J. 2002 Jun 17;21(12):3039-50.

Establishing the transcriptional programme for blood: the SCL stem cell enhancer 
is regulated by a multiprotein complex containing Ets and GATA factors.

Göttgens B(1), Nastos A, Kinston S, Piltz S, Delabesse EC, Stanley M, Sanchez MJ,
Ciau-Uitz A, Patient R, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK. bg200@cam.ac.uk

Stem cells are a central feature of metazoan biology. Haematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs) represent the best-characterized example of this phenomenon, but the
molecular mechanisms responsible for their formation remain obscure. The stem
cell leukaemia (SCL) gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor with an essential role in specifying HSCs. Here we have addressed the
transcriptional hierarchy responsible for HSC formation by characterizing an SCL 
3' enhancer that targets expression to HSCs and endothelium and their bipotential
precursors, the haemangioblast. We have identified three critical motifs, which
are essential for enhancer function and bind GATA-2, Fli-1 and Elf-1 in vivo. Our
results suggest that these transcription factors are key components of an
enhanceosome responsible for activating SCL transcription and establishing the
transcriptional programme required for HSC formation.

PMCID: PMC126046
PMID: 12065417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Blood. 2002 Jun 1;99(11):3931-8.

Rescue of the lethal scl(-/-) phenotype by the human SCL locus.

Sinclair AM(1), Bench AJ, Bloor AJ, Li J, Göttgens B, Stanley ML, Miller J, Piltz
S, Hunter S, Nacheva EP, Sanchez MJ, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 2XY, United Kingdom.

The stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription 
factor with a critical role in the development of both blood and endothelium.
Loss-of-function studies have shown that SCL is essential for the formation of
hematopoietic stem cells, for subsequent erythroid development and for yolk sac
angiogenesis. SCL exhibits a highly conserved pattern of expression from mammals 
to teleost fish. Several murine SCL enhancers have been identified, each of which
directs reporter gene expression in vivo to a subdomain of the normal SCL
expression pattern. However, regulatory elements necessary for SCL expression in 
erythroid cells remain to be identified and the size of the chromosomal domain
needed to support appropriate SCL transcription is unknown. Here we demonstrate
that a 130-kilobase (kb) yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) containing the human
SCL locus completely rescued the embryonic lethal phenotype of scl(-/-) mice.
Rescued YAC(+) scl(-/-) mice were born in appropriate Mendelian ratios, were
healthy and fertile, and exhibited no detectable abnormality of yolk sac, fetal
liver, or adult hematopoiesis. The human SCL protein can therefore substitute for
its murine homologue. In addition, our results demonstrate that the human SCL YAC
contains the chromosomal domain necessary to direct expression to the erythroid
lineage and to all other tissues in which SCL performs a nonredundant essential
function.

PMID: 12010791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Genome Res. 2002 May;12(5):749-59.

Transcriptional regulation of the stem cell leukemia gene (SCL)--comparative
analysis of five vertebrate SCL loci.

Göttgens B(1), Barton LM, Chapman MA, Sinclair AM, Knudsen B, Grafham D, Gilbert 
JG, Rogers J, Bentley DR, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge University, Cambridge, CB2
2XY, United Kingdom. bg200@cam.ac.uk

The stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene encodes a bHLH transcription factor with a
pivotal role in hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis and a pattern of expression that
is highly conserved between mammals and zebrafish. Here we report the isolation
and characterization of the zebrafish SCL locus together with the identification 
of three neighboring genes, IER5, MAP17, and MUPP1. This region spans 68 kb and
comprises the longest zebrafish genomic sequence currently available for
comparison with mammalian, chicken, and pufferfish sequences. Our data show
conserved synteny between zebrafish and mammalian SCL and MAP17 loci, thus
suggesting the likely genomic domain necessary for the conserved pattern of SCL
expression. Long-range comparative sequence analysis/phylogenetic footprinting
was used to identify noncoding conserved sequences representing candidate
transcriptional regulatory elements. The SCL promoter/enhancer, exon 1, and the
poly(A) region were highly conserved, but no homology to other known mouse SCL
enhancers was detected in the zebrafish sequence. A combined homology/structure
analysis of the poly(A) region predicted consistent structural features,
suggesting a conserved functional role in mRNA regulation. Analysis of the SCL
promoter/enhancer revealed five motifs, which were conserved from zebrafish to
mammals, and each of which is essential for the appropriate pattern or level of
SCL transcription.

PMCID: PMC186570
PMID: 11997341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Hematother Stem Cell Res. 2002 Apr;11(2):195-206.

The role of the stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene in hematopoietic and endothelial
lineage specification.

Bloor AJ(1), Sánchez MJ, Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge University Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 2XY, UK.

Anatomical observations made at the beginning of the twentieth century revealed
an intimate association between the ontogeny of blood and endothelium and led to 
the hypothesis of a common cell of origin termed the hemangioblast. However, the 
precise nature of the cellular intermediates involved in the development of both 
lineages from uncommitted precursors to mature cell types is still the subject of
ongoing studies, as are the molecular mechanisms driving this process. There is
clear evidence that lineage-restricted transcription factors play a central role 
in the genesis of mature lineage committed cells from multipotent progenitors.
Amongst these, the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family is of key importance for 
cell fate determination in the development of the hematopoietic system and
beyond. This article will review the current evidence for the common origin of
blood and endothelium, focusing on the function of the bHLH protein encoded by
the stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene, and its role as a pivotal regulator of
hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis.

PMID: 11983093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Blood. 2002 May 1;99(9):3293-301.

Human immune associated nucleotide 1: a member of a new guanosine triphosphatase 
family expressed in resting T and B cells.

Cambot M(1), Aresta S, Kahn-Perlès B, de Gunzburg J, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U474, ICGM,
Maternité Port-Royal, Paris, France.

TAL-1 is a basic helix-loop-helix oncoprotein that is expressed in up to 30% of
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias but not in the T lineage. We have cloned a
complementary DNA, called Human Immune Associated Nucleotide 1 (hIAN1), whose
messenger RNA (mRNA) level expression is inversely correlated to the TAL-1 mRNA
level in human leukemic T-cell lines. The hIAN1 encodes a 38-kd protein that
belongs to a novel family of proteins conserved from plants to humans and
characterized by motifs related to, but highly divergent from, the consensus
motifs found in guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins. Despite these
divergent amino acids at positions involved in GTP/guanosine diphosphate (GDP)
binding and guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) activities, we found that hIAN1
specifically binds GDP (K(d) = 0.47 microM) and GTP (K(d) = 6 microM) and
exhibits intrinsic GTPase activity. Among mature hematopoietic cells, hIAN1 is
specifically expressed in resting T and B lymphocytes, and its expression level
tremendously decreased at the protein but not the mRNA level during B- or
T-lymphocyte activation, suggesting a specific role for this new type of GTPase
during the immune response.

PMID: 11964296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Leukemia. 2002 Apr;16(4):755-61.

A single split-signal FISH probe set allows detection of TAL1 translocations as
well as SIL-TAL1 fusion genes in a single test.

van der Burg M(1), Smit B, Brinkhof B, Barendregt BH, Verschuren MC, Dib M,
Beverloo HB, van Dongen JJ, Langerak AW.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Immunology, Erasmus University Rotterdam/University Hospital
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

About 30% of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALL) carry TAL1 gene
aberrations. In the majority of cases (approximately 25%), this concerns a
submicroscopic deletion of approximately 90 kb in chromosome region 1p32, which
deletes the coding regions of the SIL gene and the untranslated region of the
TAL1 gene, thereby placing the TAL1 gene under control of the SIL promoter
region. Translocation (1;14)(p32;q11) involving the TAL1 gene occurs at a much
lower frequency (3%), whereas some other rare variant translocations have been
described as well. In this study we developed a set of TAL1 FISH probes based on 
the split-signal FISH principle that enables detection of both types of TAL1 gene
aberrations in single test. For this purpose, one probe was designed downstream
of the TAL1 gene (TAL1-D) and the second probe in the region upstream of the TAL1
gene, partly covering the SIL gene (SIL-U). We show that this split-signal FISH
probe set allows reliable detection of the unaffected SIL-TAL1 gene region with a
fusion signal, SIL-TAL1 fusion genes with loss of the SIL-U signal, and TAL1 gene
translocations with a split-signal, independent of the involved partner gene.

PMID: 11960364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Leukoc Biol. 2002 Apr;71(4):545-56.

CBP and p300: versatile coregulators with important roles in hematopoietic gene
expression.

Blobel GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia 19104, USA. blobel@email.chop.edu

PMID: 11927640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 24;277(21):18365-72. Epub 2002 Mar 19.

Phosphorylation by mitogen-activated protein kinase mediates the hypoxia-induced 
turnover of the TAL1/SCL transcription factor in endothelial cells.

Tang T(1), Arbiser JL, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor TAL1 (or SCL), originally
identified from its involvement by a chromosomal rearrangement in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, is required for hematopoietic development. TAL1 also has 
a critical role in embryonic vascular remodeling and is expressed in endothelial 
cells postnatally, although little is known about its function or regulation in
this cell type. We report here that the important proangiogenic stimulus hypoxia 
stimulates phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and proteasomal breakdown of TAL1 in 
endothelial cells. Tryptic phosphopeptide mapping and chemical inhibitor studies 
showed that hypoxia induced the mitogen-activated protein kinase-mediated
phosphorylation of a single serine residue, Ser(122), in the protein, and
site-directed mutagenesis demonstrated that Ser(122) phosphorylation was
necessary for hypoxic acceleration of TAL1 turnover in an immortalized murine
endothelial cell line. Finally, whereas TAL1 expression was detected in
endothelial cells from both large and small vessels, hypoxia-induced TAL1
turnover was observed only in microvascular endothelial cells. Besides their
implications for TAL1 function in angiogenic processes, these results demonstrate
that a protein kinase(s) important for mitogenic signaling is also utilized in
hypoxic endothelial cells to target a transcription factor for destruction.

PMID: 11904294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Curr Opin Hematol. 2002 Mar;9(2):93-100.

New insights into erythropoiesis.

Koury MJ(1), Sawyer ST, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, and Nashville Veterans
Administration Medical Centers, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-6305, USA.
mark.khoury@mcmail.vanderbilt.edu

Commitment of hematopoietic cells to the erythroid lineage involves the actions
of several transcription factors, including TAL1, LMO2, and GATA-2. The
differentiation of committed erythroid progenitor cells involves other
transcription factors, including NF-E2 and EKLF. Upon binding erythropoietin, the
principal regulator of erythropoiesis, cell surface erythropoietin receptors
dimerize and activate specific intracellular kinases, including Janus family
tyrosine protein kinase 2, phosphoinositol-3 kinase, and mitogen-activated
protein kinase. Important substrates of these kinases are tyrosines in the
erythropoietin receptors themselves and the signal transducer and transcription
activator proteins. Erythropoietin prevents erythroid cell apoptosis. Some of the
apoptotic tendency of erythroid cells can be attributed to proapoptotic molecules
produced by hematopoietic cells, macrophages, and stromal cells. Cell divisions
accompanying terminal erythroid differentiation are finely controlled by cell
cycle regulators, and disruption of these terminal divisions causes erythroid
cell apoptosis. In reticulocyte maturation, regulated degradation of internal
organelles involves a lipoxygenase, whereas survival requires the antiapoptotic
protein Bcl-x.

PMID: 11844990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Leuk Res. 2002 Apr;26(4):335-43.

PCR-heteroduplex analysis of TCR gamma, delta and TAL-1 deletions in T-acute
lymphoblastic leukemias: implications in the detection of minimal residual
disease.

Nirmala K(1), Rajalekshmy KR, Raman SG, Shanta V, Rajkumar T.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute (WIA), Sardar Patel Road, Guindy, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
caninst@md2.vsnl.net.in

Detection of MRD remains one of the major goals in the treatment of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). We have used the polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)-heteroduplex (HD) analysis to assess and confirm the clonal expansion of T 
cell receptor (TCR) gamma and delta gene rearrangements in 24 T-ALL patients at
diagnosis. 52.4% revealed Vdelta1-Jdelta1; 48% Vdelta2-Ddelta3; 62.5%
Vgamma1-Jgamma1 and 46% both Vdelta1-Jdelta1 and Vgamma1-Jgamma1 clonal
rearrangements. 6/24 patients had TAL-1 deletion. These clonal markers were used 
to monitor MRD in remission/relapse bone marrow samples for periods ranging from 
6 to 75 months after diagnosis. Patients who relapsed and died revealed a
continuous PCR-HD positivity in their clinical remission bone marrow samples. HD 
analysis established identical diagnostic clone at relapse. Patients who are in
long-term clinical and morphological remission achieved PCR-HD negativity in
their 8-12 months bone marrow remission samples and continue to be PCR-HD
negative. MRD monitored in six patients with two diagnostic PCR--HD positive
clonal markers reveal an identical pattern ensuring circumvention of false
positive and negative results. Thus, we conclude that PCR followed by HD analysis
is a useful technique to monitor MRD in remission/relapse samples in ALL
patients.

PMID: 11839375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Development. 2002 Feb;129(3):649-59.

Non-cell autonomous requirement for the bloodless gene in primitive hematopoiesis
of zebrafish.

Liao EC(1), Trede NS, Ransom D, Zapata A, Kieran M, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics
and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

Vertebrate hematopoiesis occurs in two distinct phases, primitive (embryonic) and
definitive (adult). Genes that are required specifically for the definitive
program, or for both phases of hematopoiesis, have been described. However, a
specific regulator of primitive hematopoiesis has yet to be reported. The
zebrafish bloodless (bls) mutation causes absence of embryonic erythrocytes in a 
dominant but incompletely penetrant manner. Primitive macrophages appear to
develop normally in bls mutants. Although the thymic epithelium forms normally in
bls mutants, lymphoid precursors are absent. Nonetheless, the bloodless mutants
can progress through embryogenesis, where red cells begin to accumulate after 5
days post-fertilization (dpf). Lymphocytes also begin to populate the thymic
organs by 7.5 dpf. Expression analysis of hematopoietic genes suggests that
formation of primitive hematopoietic precursors is deficient in bls mutants and
those few blood precursors that are specified fail to differentiate and undergo
apoptosis. Overexpression of scl, but not bmp4 or gata1, can lead to partial
rescue of embryonic blood cells in bls. Cell transplantation experiments show
that cells derived from bls mutant donors can differentiate into blood cells in a
wild-type host, but wild-type donor cells fail to form blood in the mutant host. 
These observations demonstrate that the bls gene product is uniquely required in 
a non-cell autonomous manner for primitive hematopoiesis, potentially acting via 
regulation of scl.

PMID: 11830566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Immunity. 2002 Jan;16(1):9-21.

Helix-loop-helix proteins regulate pre-TCR and TCR signaling through modulation
of Rel/NF-kappaB activities.

Kim D(1), Xu M, Nie L, Peng XC, Jimi E, Voll RE, Nguyen T, Ghosh S, Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 825 NE
13th Street, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

E2A and HEB are basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors essential for T cell
development. Complete inhibition of their activities through transgenic
overexpression of their inhibitors Id1 and Tal1 leads to a dramatic loss of
thymocytes. Here, we suggest that bHLH proteins play important roles in
establishing thresholds for pre-TCR and TCR signaling. Inhibition of their
function allows double-negative cells to differentiate without a functional
pre-TCR, while anti-CD3 stimulation downregulates bHLH activities. We also find
that the transcription factor NF-kappaB becomes activated in transgenic
thymocytes. Further activation of NF-kappaB exacerbates the loss of thymocytes,
whereas inhibition of NF-kappaB leads to the rescue of double-positive
thymocytes. Therefore, we propose that E2A and HEB negatively regulate pre-TCR
and TCR signaling and their removal causes hyperactivation and apoptosis of
thymocytes.

PMID: 11825562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Yeast. 2002 Feb;19(3):225-31.

Overproduction of pentose phosphate pathway enzymes using a new CRE-loxP
expression vector for repeated genomic integration in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Johansson B(1), Hahn-Hägerdal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Microbiology, Lund University, PO Box 124, 21 00 Lund,
Sweden.

Two new vectors are described, the expression vector pB3 PGK and the CRE
recombinase vector pCRE3. The pB3 PGK has a zeocin-selectable marker flanked by
loxP sequences and an expression cassette consisting of the strong PGK1 promoter 
and the GCY1 terminator. The S. cerevisiae genes RKI1, RPE1, TAL1 and TKL1 were
cloned in pB3 PGK and integrated in the locus of the respective gene, resulting
in overexpression of the genes. S. cerevisiae TMB 3026, simultaneously
overexpressing the RKI1, RPE1, TAL1 and TKL1 genes, was created by successive
integrations and removal of the loxP-zeocin-loxP cassette using pCRE3. The
2mu-based pCRE3 carries the aureobasidin A, zeocin and URA3 markers. pCRE3 proved
to be easily cured without active counter-selection. The zeocin marker is present
on both the pB3 PGK and on pCRE3, so that screening for zeocin sensitivity
indicates both chromosomal marker loss and loss of the pCRE3 vector. This feature
saves time, since only one screening step is needed between successive
chromosomal integrations. Marker recycling did not lead to increased zeocin
resistance, indicating that the zeocin marker could be used for more than four
rounds of transformation. The use of the CRE/loxP system proved to be a practical
strategy to overexpress multiple genes without exhausting available markers.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 11816030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Development. 2002 Jan;129(2):361-72.

Hedgehog is required for murine yolk sac angiogenesis.

Byrd N(1), Becker S, Maye P, Narasimhaiah R, St-Jacques B, Zhang X, McMahon J,
McMahon A, Grabel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Wesleyan University, CT 06459, USA.

Blood islands, the precursors of yolk sac blood vessels, contain primitive
erythrocytes surrounded by a layer of endothelial cells. These structures
differentiate from extra-embryonic mesodermal cells that underlie the visceral
endoderm. Our previous studies have shown that Indian hedgehog (Ihh) is expressed
in the visceral endoderm both in the visceral yolk sac in vivo and in embryonic
stem (ES) cell-derived embryoid bodies. Differentiating embryoid bodies form
blood islands, providing an in vitro model for studying vasculogenesis and
hematopoiesis. A role for Ihh in yolk sac function is suggested by the
observation that roughly 50% of Ihh(-/-) mice die at mid-gestation, potentially
owing to vascular defects in the yolk sac. To address the nature of the possible 
vascular defects, we have examined the ability of ES cells deficient for Ihh or
smoothened (Smo), which encodes a receptor component essential for all hedgehog
signaling, to form blood islands in vitro. Embryoid bodies derived from these
cell lines are unable to form blood islands, and express reduced levels of both
PECAM1, an endothelial cell marker, and alpha-SMA, a vascular smooth muscle
marker. RT-PCR analysis in the Ihh(-/-) lines shows a substantial decrease in the
expression of Flk1 and Tal1, markers for the hemangioblast, the precursor of both
blood and endothelial cells, as well as Flt1, an angiogenesis marker. To extend
these observations, we have examined the phenotypes of embryo yolk sacs deficient
for Ihh or SMO: Whereas Ihh(-/-) yolk sacs can form blood vessels, the vessels
are fewer in number and smaller, perhaps owing to their inability to undergo
vascular remodeling. Smo(-/-) yolk sacs arrest at an earlier stage: the
endothelial tubes are packed with hematopoietic cells, and fail to undergo even
the limited vascular remodeling observed in the Ihh(-/-) yolk sacs. Our study
supports a role for hedgehog signaling in yolk sac angiogenesis.

PMID: 11807029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Feb;22(3):886-900.

Gradient of E2A activity in B-cell development.

Herblot S(1), Aplan PD, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)The Clinical Research Institute of Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

The E2A locus is a frequent target of chromosomal translocations in B-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL). E2A encodes two products, E12 and E47, that are
part of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription factors and are
central in B lineage differentiation. E2A haplo-insufficiency hinders progression
through three major checkpoints in B-cell development: commitment into the B
lineage, at the pro-B to pre-B transition, and in the induction of immunoglobulin
M (IgM) expression required for a functional BCR. These observations underscore
the importance of E2A gene dosage in B-cell development. Here we show that a
higher proportion of pro-B cells in E2A(+/-) mice is in the cell cycle compared
to that in wild-type littermates. This increase correlates with lower
p21(waf/cip1) levels, indicating that E2A has an antiproliferative function in
B-cell progenitors. Ectopic expression in the B lineage of SCL/Tal1, a
tissue-specific bHLH factor that inhibits E2A function, blocks commitment into
the B lineage without affecting progression through later stages of
differentiation. Furthermore, ectopic SCL expression exacerbates E2A
haplo-insufficiency in B-cell differentiation, indicating that SCL genetically
interacts with E2A. Taken together, these observations provide evidence for a
gradient of E2A activity that increases from the pre-pro-B to the pre-B stage and
suggest a model in which low levels of E2A (as in pro-B cells) are sufficient to 
control cell growth, while high levels (in pre-B cells) are required for cell
differentiation. The antiproliferative function of E2A further suggests that in
B-ALL associated with t(1;19) and t(17;19), the disruption of one E2A allele
contributes to leukemogenesis, in addition to other anomalies induced by E2A
fusion proteins.

PMCID: PMC133542
PMID: 11784864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Exp Med. 2002 Jan 7;195(1):85-98.

V(D)J-mediated translocations in lymphoid neoplasms: a functional assessment of
genomic instability by cryptic sites.

Marculescu R(1), Le T, Simon P, Jaeger U, Nadel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology, University of
Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

Most lymphoid malignancies are initiated by specific chromosomal translocations
between immunoglobulin (Ig)/T cell receptor (TCR) gene segments and cellular
proto-oncogenes. In many cases, illegitimate V(D)J recombination has been
proposed to be involved in the translocation process, but this has never been
functionally established. Using extra-chromosomal recombination assays, we
determined the ability of several proto-oncogenes to target V(D)J recombination, 
and assessed the impact of their recombinogenic potential on translocation rates 
in vivo. Our data support the involvement of 2 distinct mechanisms:
translocations involving LMO2, TAL2, and TAL1 in T cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL), are compatible with illegitimate V(D)J recombination between a 
TCR locus and a proto-oncogene locus bearing a fortuitous but functional
recombination site (type 1); in contrast, translocations involving BCL1 and BCL2 
in B cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (B-NHL), are compatible with a process in which
only the IgH locus breaks are mediated by V(D)J recombination (type 2). Most
importantly, we show that the t(11;14)(p13;q32) translocation involving LMO2 is
present at strikingly high frequency in normal human thymus, and that the
recombinogenic potential conferred by the LMO2 cryptic site is directly
predictive of the in vivo level of translocation at that locus. These findings
provide new insights into the regulation forces acting upon genomic instability
in B and T cell tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3212722
PMID: 11781368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Development. 2001 Dec;128(23):4815-27.

Selective rescue of early haematopoietic progenitors in Scl(-/-) mice by
expressing Scl under the control of a stem cell enhancer.

Sánchez MJ(1), Bockamp EO, Miller J, Gambardella L, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, CIMR Centre, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK. mss24@cus.cam.ac.uk

The stem cell leukaemia gene (Scl) encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor with a pivotal role in both haematopoiesis and endothelial development.
During mouse development, Scl is first expressed in extra-embryonic mesoderm, and
is required for the generation of all haematopoietic lineages and normal yolk sac
angiogenesis. Ectopic expression of Scl during zebrafish development specifies
haemangioblast formation from early mesoderm. These results suggest that SCL is
essential for establishing the transcriptional programme responsible for the
formation of haematopoietic stem cells and have focused attention on the
transcriptional regulation of Scl itself. Previous studies have identified a
panel of Scl enhancers each of which directed expression to a subdomain of the
normal Scl expression pattern. Among them, a 3' enhancer directed expression
during development to vascular endothelium and haematopoietic progenitors but not
to Ter119(+) erythroid cells. The expression in haematopoietic stem cells,
however, remained undetermined. We demonstrate that this 3' enhancer directs lacZ
expression in transgenic mice to most foetal and adult long-term repopulating
haematopoietic stem cells, and therefore functions as a stem cell enhancer.
Consistent with these results, expression in Scl(-/-) embryos of exogenous Scl
driven by the stem cell enhancer rescued the formation of early haematopoietic
progenitors and also resulted in normal yolk sac angiogenesis. By contrast,
erythropoiesis remained markedly deficient in rescued embryos. This observation
is consistent with the inactivity of the stem cell enhancer in erythroid cells
and reveals an essential role for SCL during erythroid differentiation in vivo.

PMID: 11731461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2001 Dec;13(6):673-8.

A complex linkage in the developmental pathway of endothelial and hematopoietic
cells.

Nishikawa SI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University and Riken Center for Developmental Biology, Shogoin-Kawaharacho 53,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan. snishika@virus.Kyoto-u.ac.jp

During normal vertebrate development, hematopoietic and endothelial cells form
closely situated and interacting populations. Although the close proximity of
cells to each other does not necessarily mean that they are relatives,
accumulating evidence indicates that hematopoietic and endothelial cells are
indeed close kin; they share common progenitors and each is able to become the
other under certain circumstances. This article summarizes recent advances in the
developmental relationship between hematopoietic and endothelial cells.

PMID: 11698182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Curr Biol. 2001 Sep 4;11(17):1353-7.

Critical role of biklf in erythroid cell differentiation in zebrafish.

Kawahara A(1), Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Hematopoietic cells arise from ventral mesoderm in different vertebrates, but the
mechanisms through which various factors contribute to the hematopoietic
processes, including erythrogenesis, remain incompletely understood. The
Krüppel-like transcription factor Biklf is preferentially expressed in blood
islands throughout zebrafish embryogenesis, marking the region of future
erythropoiesis [1]. In this paper, we show that expression of biklf is
significantly suppressed in the blood-less mutants vampire and m683 in which
primitive hematopoiesis is impaired. Knockdown of biklf using morpholino-based
antisense oligonucleotides (biklf-MO) led to a potent reduction in the number of 
circulating blood cells and deficiency in hemoglobin production. Consistently, we
found that the expression of beta(e3)globin is strongly suppressed in
biklf-MO-injected embryos, while gata1 expression is partly inhibited at the
10-somite stage. In addition, analysis of reporter constructs driven by the GATA1
and beta-globin promoters showed that Biklf can positively regulate both genes.
These results indicate that Biklf is required for erythroid cell differentiation 
in zebrafish.

PMID: 11553329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Sep 11;98(19):10716-21. Epub 2001 Sep 4.

Hematopoietic colony-forming cells derived from human embryonic stem cells.

Kaufman DS(1), Hanson ET, Lewis RL, Auerbach R, Thomson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Wisconsin Hospital and Clinics, 600 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53792, USA.

Human embryonic stem (ES) cells are undifferentiated, pluripotent cells that can 
be maintained indefinitely in culture. Here we demonstrate that human ES cells
differentiate to hematopoietic precursor cells when cocultured with the murine
bone marrow cell line S17 or the yolk sac endothelial cell line C166. This
hematopoietic differentiation requires fetal bovine serum, but no other exogenous
cytokines. ES cell-derived hematopoietic precursor cells express the cell surface
antigen CD34 and the hematopoietic transcription factors TAL-1, LMO-2, and
GATA-2. When cultured on semisolid media with hematopoietic growth factors, these
hematopoietic precursor cells form characteristic myeloid, erythroid, and
megakaryocyte colonies. Selection for CD34(+) cells derived from human ES cells
enriches for hematopoietic colony-forming cells, similar to CD34 selection of
primary hematopoietic tissue (bone marrow, umbilical cord blood). More terminally
differentiated hematopoietic cells derived from human ES cells under these
conditions also express normal surface antigens: glycophorin A on erythroid
cells, CD15 on myeloid cells, and CD41 on megakaryocytes. The in vitro
differentiation of human ES cells provides an opportunity to better understand
human hematopoiesis and could lead to a novel source of cells for transfusion and
transplantation therapies.

PMCID: PMC58532
PMID: 11535826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cancer Res. 2001 Sep 1;61(17):6382-7.

scid Thymocytes with TCRbeta gene rearrangements are targets for the oncogenic
effect of SCL and LMO1 transgenes.

Chervinsky DS(1), Lam DH, Melman MP, Gross KW, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Department, Medicine Branch, Division of Clinical Sciences, National 
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

SCL and LMO1 were both discovered by virtue of their activation by
chromosomaltranslocation in patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL). Overexpression of SCL and LMO1 in the thymus of transgenic mice leads to
T-ALL at a young age. scid (severe combined immunodeficient) mice are unable to
efficiently recombine antigen receptor genes and consequently display a
developmental block at the CD4-CD8- to CD4+CD8+ transition. To test the
hypothesis that this developmental block would protect SCL/LMO1 transgenic mice
from developing T-ALL, we crossed the SCL and LMO1 transgenes onto a scid
background. The age of onset for T-ALL in the SCL/LMO1/scid mice was
significantly delayed (P < 0.001) compared with SCL/LMO1/wild-type mice.
Intriguingly, all of the SCL/LMO1/scid malignancies displayed clonal, in-frame
TCRbeta gene rearrangements. Taken together, these findings suggest that the
"leaky" scid thymocyte that undergoes a productive TCRbeta gene rearrangement is 
susceptible to the oncogenic action of SCL and LMO1 and additionally suggests
that TCRbeta gene rearrangements may be required for the oncogenic action of SCL 
and LMO1.

PMID: 11522630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Development. 2001 Jun;128(12):2301-8.

Primitive erythropoiesis in the Xenopus embryo: the synergistic role of LMO-2,
SCL and GATA-binding proteins.

Mead PE(1), Deconinck AE, Huber TL, Orkin SH, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Hematopoietic stem cells are derived from ventral mesoderm during vertebrate
development. Gene targeting experiments in the mouse have demonstrated key roles 
for the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor SCL and the GATA-binding
protein GATA-1 in hematopoiesis. When overexpressed in Xenopus animal cap
explants, SCL and GATA-1 are each capable of specifying mesoderm to become blood.
Forced expression of either factor in whole embryos, however, does not lead to
ectopic blood formation. This apparent paradox between animal cap assays and
whole embryo phenotype has led to the hypothesis that additional factors are
involved in specifying hematopoietic mesoderm. SCL and GATA-1 interact in a
transcriptional complex with the LIM domain protein LMO-2. We have cloned the
Xenopus homolog of LMO-2 and show that it is expressed in a similar pattern to
SCL during development. LMO-2 can specify hematopoietic mesoderm in animal cap
assays. SCL and LMO-2 act synergistically to expand the blood island when
overexpressed in whole embryos. Furthermore, co-expression of GATA-1 with SCL and
LMO-2 leads to embryos that are ventralized and have blood throughout the
dorsal-ventral axis. The synergistic effect of SCL, LMO-2 and GATA-1, taken
together with the findings that these factors can form a complex in vitro,
suggests that this complex specifies mesoderm to become blood during
embryogenesis.

PMID: 11493549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2001 Jun;938:96-107; discussion 108.

Regulation of hemangioblast development.

Lacaud G(1), Robertson S, Palis J, Kennedy M, Keller G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Gene Therapy and Molecular Medicine, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, Box 1496, 1425 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10029-6514, USA.

The in vitro differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells provides a powerful
approach for studying the earliest events involved in the commitment of the
hematopoietic and endothelial lineages. Using this model system, we have
identified a precursor with the potential to generate both primitive and
definitive hematopoietic cells as well as cells with endothelial characteristics.
The developmental potential of this precursor suggests that it represents the in 
vitro equivalent of the hemangioblast, a common stem cell for both lineages. ES
cells deficient for the transcription factor scl/tal-1 are unable to generate
hemangioblasts, while those deficient for Runx1 generate reduced numbers of these
precursors. These findings indicate that both genes play pivotal roles at the
earliest stages of hematopoietic and endothelial development. In addition, they
highlight the strength of this model system in studying the function of genes in 
embryonic development.

PMID: 11458531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Oncogene. 2001 Jun 28;20(29):3897-905.

The DNA binding activity of TAL-1 is not required to induce leukemia/lymphoma in 
mice.

O'Neil J(1), Billa M, Oikemus S, Kelliher M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Department of Molecular Genetics
and Microbiology and the Cancer Center, 373 Plantation Street, Worcester,
Massachusetts, MA 01605, USA.

Activation of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) gene TAL-1 (or SCL) is the most
frequent gain-of-function mutation in pediatric T cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL). Similarly, mis-expression of tal-1 in the thymus of transgenic 
mice results in the development of clonal T cell lymphoblastic leukemia. To
determine the mechanism(s) of tal-1-induced leukemogenesis, we created transgenic
mice expressing a DNA binding mutant of tal-1. Surprisingly, these mice develop
disease, demonstrating that the DNA binding properties of tal-1 are not required 
to induce leukemia/lymphoma in mice. However, wild type tal-1 and the DNA binding
mutant both form stable complexes with E2A proteins. In addition, tal-1
stimulates differentiation of CD8-single positive thymocytes but inhibits the
development of CD4-single positive cells: effects also observed in E2A-deficient 
mice. Our study suggests that the bHLH protein tal-1 contributes to leukemia by
interfering with E2A protein function(s).

PMID: 11439353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jun 5;98(12):6540-2.

Mapping of complex regulatory elements by pufferfish/zebrafish transgenesis.

Rothenberg EV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, 156-29, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 
91125, USA. evroth@its.caltech.edu

PMCID: PMC34387
PMID: 11390989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 3;276(31):29126-33. Epub 2001 Jun 4.

Analysis of the V(D)J recombination efficiency at lymphoid chromosomal
translocation breakpoints.

Raghavan SC(1), Kirsch IR, Lieber MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90089-9176, 
USA.

Chromosomal translocations and deletions are among the major events that initiate
neoplasia. For lymphoid chromosomal translocations, misrecognition by the RAG
(recombination activating gene) complex of V(D)J recombination is one
contributing factor that has long been proposed. The chromosomal translocations
involving LMO2 (t(11;14)(p13;q11)), Ttg-1 (t(11;14)(p15;q11)), and Hox11
(t(10;14)(q24;q11)) are among the clearest examples in which it appears that a D 
or J segment has synapsed with an adventitious heptamer/nonamer at a gene outside
of one of the antigen receptor loci. The interstitial deletion at 1p32 involving 
SIL (SCL-interrupting locus)/SCL (stem cell leukemia) is a case involving two
non-V(D)J sites that have been suggested to be V(D)J recombination mistakes. Here
we have used our human extrachromosomal substrate assay to formally test the
hypothesis that these regions are V(D)J recombination misrecognition sites and,
more importantly, to quantify their efficiency as V(D)J recombination targets
within the cell. We find that the LMO2 fragile site functions as a 12-signal at
an efficiency that is only 27-fold lower than that of a consensus 12-signal. The 
Ttg-1 site functions as a 23-signal at an efficiency 530-fold lower than that of 
a consensus 23-signal. Hox11 failed to undergo recombination as a 12- or
23-signal and was at least 20,000-fold less efficient than consensus signals. SIL
has been predicted to function as a 12-signal and SCL as a 23-signal. However, we
find that SIL actually functions as a 23-signal. These results provide a formal
demonstration that certain chromosomal fragile sites can serve as RAG complex
targets, and they determine whether these sites function as 12- versus
23-signals. These results quantify one of the three major factors that determine 
the frequency of these translocations in T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia.

PMID: 11390401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jun 5;98(12):6747-52. Epub 2001 May 29.

Regulation of the stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene: a tale of two fishes.

Barton LM(1), Gottgens B, Gering M, Gilbert JG, Grafham D, Rogers J, Bentley D,
Patient R, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University
of Cambridge, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge CB2 2XY, United Kingdom.

The stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene encodes a tissue-specific basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein with a pivotal role in hemopoiesis and
vasculogenesis. Several enhancers have been identified within the murine SCL
locus that direct reporter gene expression to subdomains of the normal SCL
expression pattern, and long-range sequence comparisons of the human and murine
SCL loci have identified additional candidate enhancers. To facilitate the
characterization of regulatory elements, we have sequenced and analyzed 33 kb of 
the SCL genomic locus from the pufferfish Fugu rubripes, a species with a highly 
compact genome. Although the pattern of SCL expression is highly conserved from
mammals to teleost fish, the genes flanking pufferfish SCL were unrelated to
those known to flank both avian and mammalian SCL genes. These data suggest that 
SCL regulatory elements are confined to the region between the upstream and
downstream flanking genes, a region of 65 kb in human and 8.5 kb in pufferfish.
Consistent with this hypothesis, the entire 33-kb pufferfish SCL locus directed
appropriate expression to hemopoietic and neural tissue in transgenic zebrafish
embryos, as did a 10.4-kb fragment containing the SCL gene and extending to the
5' and 3' flanking genes. These results demonstrate the power of combining the
compact genome of the pufferfish with the advantages that zebrafish provide for
studies of gene regulation during development. Furthermore, the pufferfish SCL
locus provides a powerful tool for the manipulation of hemopoiesis and
vasculogenesis in vivo.

PMCID: PMC34424
PMID: 11381108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Br J Haematol. 2001 Apr;113(1):52-7.

Decreased expression of transcription factor GATA-2 in haematopoietic stem cells 
in patients with aplastic anaemia.

Fujimaki S(1), Harigae H, Sugawara T, Takasawa N, Sasaki T, Kaku M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Tohoku University School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan.

Aplastic anaemia is characterized by reduced haematopoiesis resulting in
pancytopenia. It has been speculated that there is an injury in haematopoietic
stem cells in the bone marrow; however, the precise nature of the injury has not 
been elucidated. In this study, the levels of expression of mRNAs for three
transcription factors, GATA-2, SCL and AML1, which function in the early stages
of haematopoiesis, were examined by quantitative polymerase chain reaction in
patients with aplastic anaemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and
normal subjects. Among these factors, expression of GATA-2 mRNA in purified
CD34-positive cells was markedly decreased in aplastic anaemia compared with that
in ITP and in normal subjects. The expression levels of SCL and AML1 mRNA in
CD34-positive cells in aplastic anaemia were not different from those in normal
subjects. When the expression of GATA-2 protein in CD34-positive cells was
examined by immunocytochemical analysis, the percentage of GATA-2-positive cells 
in aplastic anaemia was lower than that in normal subjects. These findings
strongly suggest that there is an aberrant expression of transcription factors in
stem cells in aplastic anaemia, which may be responsible for the development of
the disease.

PMID: 11328281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;33(4):391-407.

The Ets family contains transcriptional activators and repressors involved in
angiogenesis.

Lelièvre E(1), Lionneton F, Soncin F, Vandenbunder B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de Lille, 1, rue du Professeur Calmette, BP 447, 59021,
Lille Cedex, France.

The Ets family contains a growing number of transcriptional activators and
inhibitors, which activity is regulated by phosphorylation and protein-protein
interactions. Among these factors, Ets1, Erg1 and Fli1 are expressed in
endothelial cells during angiogenesis in normal and pathological development. The
expression of these transcription factors is regulated by angiogenic factors in
cultured endothelial cells, as well as by various stresses occurring during
angiogenesis. Transfection experiments and transgenic mice analysis revealed that
Ets family members are involved in the transcriptional regulation of endothelial 
specific genes such as those encoding Tie1 and -2, VEGFR1 and -2 and VE-Cadherin.
In vitro studies plead for a role of Ets family members in endothelial cell
adhesion, spreading and motility. Gene inactivation experiments show that Ets1 is
dispensable for embryonic development. The phenotype of knocked-out embryos
indicates that Tel is required for maintenance of the developing vascular network
in the yolk sac. Altogether, we suggest that Ets family members act both
positively and negatively during the different steps of the angiogenic process.
The regulation of the initiation of gene transcription arises from the combined
activity of different transcriptional regulators. Therefore very few
transcription factors are specific for a physiological process, or a given cell
type. The transcriptional network that regulates blood vessel formation involves 
transcription factors which are expressed in a variety of situations. The Lung
Kruppel Like Factor (LKLF) which is required for blood vessel stabilisation
during murine development is also expressed in the primitive vertebrae and in the
lung of the adult (C.T. Kuo, M.L. Veselits, K.P. Barton, M.M. Lu, C. Clendenin,
J.M. Leiden, The LKLF transcription factor is required for normal tunica media
formation and blood vessel stabilisation during murine embryogenesis, Genes Dev. 
11 (22) (1997) 2996-3006). Scl/Tal1 which is essential for angiogenic remodelling
of the yolk sac capillary network (J.E. Visvader, Y. Fujiwara, S.H. Orkin,
Unsuspected role for the T-cell leukemia protein SCL/tal-1 in vascular
development, Genes Dev. 12 (4) (1998) 473-479), is involved in blood cell
development and is also expressed in the developing brain. The EPAS transcription
factor which was thought to be endothelial cell specific in the mouse embryo (H. 
Tian, S.L. McKnight, D.W. Russell, Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1), a
transcription factor selectively expressed in endothelial cells, Genes Dev. 11
(1) (1997) 72-82) is also expressed in the liver, kidney and cells of the
sympathetic nervous system of the chick embryo (J. Favier, H. Kempf, P. Corvol,
J.M. Gasc, Cloning and expression pattern of EPAS1 in the chicken embryo.
Colocalization with tyrosine hydroxylase, FEBS Lett. 462 (1-2) (1999) 19-24).
Ets1, which expression was originally detected in lymphoid cells of adult
tissues, has been the first transcription factor to be identified in endothelial 
cells during angiogenesis in the embryo (B. Vandenbunder, L. Pardanaud, T.
Jaffredo, M.A. Mirabel, D. Stehelin, Complementary patterns of expression of
c-etsl, c-myb and c-myc in the blood-forming system of the chick embryo,
Development 107 (1989) 265-274 [5]) and in tumours (N. Wernert, M.B. Raes, P.
Lassalle, M.P. Dehouck, B. Gosselin, B. Vandenbunder, D. Stehelin, The c-ets 1
proto-oncogene is a transcription factor expressed in endothelial cells during
tumor vascularisation and other forms of angiogenesis in man, Am. J. Path. 140
(1992) 119-127 [6]). Since then, the Ets family has extended and this review will
emphasise the relationships between these factors and angiogenesis.

PMID: 11312108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Nat Immunol. 2000 Aug;1(2):138-44.

SCL and LMO1 alter thymocyte differentiation: inhibition of E2A-HEB function and 
pre-T alpha chain expression.

Herblot S(1), Steff AM, Hugo P, Aplan PD, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W1R7.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2000 Aug;1(2):97-8.

Cooperation between the stem cell leukemia (SCL) transcription factor and its
nuclear partners LMO1 or LMO2 induces aggressive T cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia when inappropriately expressed in T cells. This study examined the
cellular and molecular targets of the SCL-LMO complex at the preleukemic stage.
We show that SCL and its partners are coexpressed in the most primitive
thymocytes. Maturation to the pre-T cell stage is associated with a
down-regulation of SCL and LMO1 and LMO2, and a concomitant up-regulation of E2A 
and HEB expression. Moreover, enforced expression of SCL-LMO1 inhibits T cell
differentiation and recapitulates a loss of HEB function, causing a deregulation 
of the transition checkpoint from the CD4-CD8- to CD4+CD8+ stages. Finally, we
identify the gene encoding pT alpha as a downstream target of HEB that is
specifically repressed by the SCL-LMO complex.

PMID: 11248806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nat Immunol. 2000 Aug;1(2):97-8.

Intertwining proteins in thymocyte development and cancer.

Murre C.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2000 Aug;1(2):138-44.

PMID: 11248796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Leukemia. 2001 Jan;15(1):166-70.

Quantification of minimal residual disease in T-lineage acute lymphoblastic
leukemia with the TAL-1 deletion using a standardized real-time PCR assay.

Chen X(1), Pan Q, Stow P, Behm FG, Goorha R, Pui CH, Neale GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Hematologic relapse remains the greatest obstacle to the cure of children with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Recent studies have shown that patients with 
increased risk of relapse can be identified by measuring residual leukemic cells,
called minimal residual disease (MRD), during clinical remission. Current PCR
methods, however, for measuring MRD are cumbersome and time-consuming. To improve
and simplify MRD assessment, we developed a real-time quantitative PCR (RQ-PCR)
assay for detection of leukemic cells that harbor the TAL-1 deletion. We studied 
serial dilutions of leukemic DNA and found the assay had a sensitivity of
detection of one leukemic cell among 100,000 normal cells. We then investigated
23 samples from eight children with ALL in clinical remission. We quantified
residual leukemic cells by using the TAL-1 RQ-PCR assay and by using limiting
dilution analysis. In 17 samples, both methods detected MRD levels > or =0.001%. 
The percentages of leukemic cells measured by the two methods correlated well (r2
= 0.926). In the remaining six samples, both methods detected fewer than 0.001%
leukemic cells. We conclude the TAL-1 RQ-PCR assay can be used for rapid,
sensitive and accurate assessment of MRD in T-lineage ALL with the TAL-1
deletion.

PMID: 11243385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Leukemia. 2001 Jan;15(1):141-7.

Development and characterization of T cell leukemia cell lines established from
SCL/LMO1 double transgenic mice.

Chervinsky DS(1), Lam DH, Zhao XF, Melman MP, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, USA.

We have established a panel of nine immortal cell lines from T cell malignancies 
which arose in mice transgenic for the SCL and LMO1 genes. Cells from the primary
malignancies initially grew very slowly in vitro, loosely attached to a stromal
layer, before gaining the ability to proliferate independently. Upon gaining the 
ability to proliferate in the absence of a stromal layer, these cell lines grew
rapidly, doubling every 14-23 h, to a very high density, approaching 10(7)
cells/ml. Whereas the tumors which arise in SCL/LMO1 double transgenic mice are
typically diploid or pseudodiploid, the cell lines were all grossly aneuploid,
suggesting the possibility that additional genetic events were selected for in
vitro. Given that SCL and LMO1 gene activation are both commonly seen in human
patients with T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, these cell lines may be a
useful in vitro model for the human disease.

PMID: 11243382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Stem Cells. 2001;19(1):59-70.

Steel factor sustains SCL expression and the survival of purified CD34+ bone
marrow cells in the absence of detectable cell differentiation.

Caceres-Cortes JR(1), Krosl G, Tessier N, Hugo P, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hemopoiesis and Leukemia and Clinical Research Institute of
Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. cortesj@servidor.unam.mx

CD34+ cells express the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor SCL, which is
essential for blood cell formation in vivo. In addition, their survival is
critically dependent on hemopoietic growth factors. We therefore compared the
effects of Steel factor (SF) and GM-CSF on the survival, proliferation, and
differentiation of primary human CD34+ cells, as well as the role of SCL during
these processes. GM-CSF suppresses apoptosis in CD34+ cells, which proliferate
and differentiate into mature granulocytic and monocytic cells (CD34-CD13+) and
loose SCL expression. In contrast, SF suppresses apoptosis without a significant 
increase in cell numbers, and the cells remain CD34+ and SCL+ with a blast-like
morphology. Examination of apoptosis by the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling (TUNEL) reaction and of the cell cycle
status indicated that SF is both a survival factor and a mitogenic factor for
CD34+ cells. There was, however, constant cell death in a fraction of the
population, which could be rescued by GM-CSF. Co-addition of SF and GM-CSF
prevents the downregulation of SCL observed in the presence of GM-CSF by itself, 
allows for prolonged survival and expansion of CD34+ cells in culture, inhibits
monocytic differentiation and impairs granulocytic differentiation. Finally,
exposure to an antisense SCL but not a control oligonucleotide decreases SCL
protein levels and prevents the suppression of apoptosis by SF without affecting 
GM-CSF-dependent cell survival. These observations suggest that the hemopoietic
transcription factor SCL regulates the survival of CD34+ cells in response to SF.

PMID: 11209091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Genome Res. 2001 Jan;11(1):87-97.

Long-range comparison of human and mouse SCL loci: localized regions of
sensitivity to restriction endonucleases correspond precisely with peaks of
conserved noncoding sequences.

Göttgens B(1), Gilbert JG, Barton LM, Grafham D, Rogers J, Bentley DR, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Mechanisms in Disease, Cambridge
Institute for Medical Research, Addenbrooke's Hospital Site, Cambridge CB2 2XY,
UK. bg200@cam.ac.uk

Long-range comparative sequence analysis provides a powerful strategy for
identifying conserved regulatory elements. The stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene
encodes a bHLH transcription factor with a pivotal role in hemopoiesis and
vasculogenesis, and it displays a highly conserved expression pattern. We present
here a detailed sequence comparison of 193 kb of the human SCL locus to 234 kb of
the mouse SCL locus. Four new genes have been identified together with an ancient
mitochondrial insertion in the human locus. The SCL gene is flanked upstream by
the SIL gene and downstream by the MAP17 gene in both species, but the gene order
is not collinear downstream from MAP17. To facilitate rapid identification of
candidate regulatory elements, we have developed a new sequence analysis tool
(SynPlot) that automates the graphical display of large-scale sequence
alignments. Unlike existing programs, SynPlot can display the locus features of
more than one sequence, thereby indicating the position of homology peaks
relative to the structure of all sequences in the alignment. In addition,
high-resolution analysis of the chromatin structure of the mouse SCL gene
permitted the accurate positioning of localized zones accessible to restriction
endonucleases. Zones known to be associated with functional regulatory regions
were found to correspond precisely with peaks of human/mouse homology, thus
demonstrating that long-range human/mouse sequence comparisons allow accurate
prediction of the extent of accessible DNA associated with active regulatory
regions.

PMCID: PMC311011
PMID: 11156618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. EMBO J. 2000 Dec 15;19(24):6792-803.

P/CAF-mediated acetylation regulates the function of the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor TAL1/SCL.

Huang S(1), Qiu Y, Shi Y, Xu Z, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
37232, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor TAL1 (or SCL) is a critical
regulator of hematopoietic and vascular development and is misexpressed in the
majority of patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. We found
previously that TAL1 could interact with transcriptional co-activator and
co-repressor complexes possessing histone acetyltransferase and deacetylase
activities, respectively. Here, we report that TAL1 is subject to acetylation in 
vivo and can be acetylated by p300 and the p300/CBP-associated factor P/CAF in
vitro. P/CAF-mediated acetylation, which mapped to a lysine-rich motif in the
loop region, increased TAL1 binding to DNA while selectively inhibiting its
interaction with the transcriptional co-repressor mSin3A. Furthermore, P/CAF
protein, TAL1-P/CAF interaction and TAL1 acetylation increased significantly in
murine erythroleukemia cells induced to differentiate in culture, while enforced 
expression of an acetylation-defective P/CAF mutant inhibited endogenous TAL1
acetylation, TAL1 DNA-binding activity, TAL1-directed transcription and terminal 
differentiation of these cells. These results reveal a novel mechanism by which
TAL1 activity is regulated and implicate acetylation of this transcription factor
in promotion of erythroid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC305888
PMID: 11118214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Blood. 2000 Dec 15;96(13):4178-84.

Zebrafish homolog of the leukemia gene CBFB: its expression during embryogenesis 
and its relationship to scl and gata-1 in hematopoiesis.

Blake T(1), Adya N, Kim CH, Oates AC, Zon L, Chitnis A, Weinstein BM, Liu PP.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Mammalian CBFB encodes a transcription factor (CBF beta) that in combination with
CBF alpha 2 binds to specific DNA sequences and regulates expression of a number 
of hematopoietic genes. CBFB is associated with human leukemias through a
chromosome 16 inversion and is essential for definitive hematopoiesis during
mouse embryo development. We have isolated a zebrafish cbfb complementary DNA
(cDNA) clone from a zebrafish kidney cDNA library. This cbfb is highly homologous
to human and mouse CBFB/Cbfb genes at both the DNA and protein level. In
biochemical analyses, cbfbeta binds to human CBF alpha 2 and enhances its DNA
binding. During zebrafish development, cbfb is expressed in the lateral plate
mesoderm at tail bud stage and in the intermediate cell mass (ICM, the location
of embryonic hematopoiesis) between the 21- to 26-somite stages. The cbfb is also
expressed in Rohon-Beard cells, cranial nerve ganglia, hindbrain, retina,
branchial arches, jaw, and fin buds. Expression of cbfb is decreased or absent in
the ICM and Rohon-Beard cells in some hematopoietic mutants and is unaffected in 
others. We have also analyzed the expression of scl and gata-1 in the same
hematopoietic mutants to ascertain the relative order of these transcription
factors to cbfb in zebrafish hematopoiesis. Our results indicate that cbfb is
expressed in early hematopoietic progenitors and that its expression pattern in
the hematopoietic mutants is similar to that of scl. (Blood. 2000;96:4178-4184)

PMID: 11110689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Blood. 2000 Nov 1;96(9):3078-85.

Role of SCL/Tal-1, GATA, and ets transcription factor binding sites for the
regulation of flk-1 expression during murine vascular development.

Kappel A(1), Schlaeger TM, Flamme I, Orkin SH, Risau W, Breier G.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Physiological and Clinical Research, Bad Nauheim,
Germany.

The receptor tyrosine kinase Flk-1 is essential for embryonic blood vessel
development and for tumor angiogenesis. To identify upstream transcriptional
regulators of Flk-1, the gene regulatory elements that mediate
endothelium-specific expression in mouse embryos were characterized. By
mutational analysis, binding sites for SCL/Tal-1, GATA, and Ets transcription
factors located in the Flk-1 enhancer were identified as critical elements for
the endothelium-specific Flk-1 gene expression in transgenic mice. c-Ets1, a
transcription factor that is coexpressed with Flk-1 during embryonic development 
and tumor angiogenesis, activated the Flk-1 promoter via 2 binding sites. One of 
these sites was required for Flk-1 promoter function in the embryonic
vasculature. These results provide the first evidence that SCL/Tal-1, GATA, and
Ets transcription factors act upstream of Flk-1 in a combinatorial fashion to
determine embryonic blood vessel formation and are key regulators not only of the
hematopoietic program, but also of vascular development.

PMID: 11049987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Development. 2000 Oct;127(20):4303-13.

Hhex and scl function in parallel to regulate early endothelial and blood
differentiation in zebrafish.

Liao W(1), Ho CY, Yan YL, Postlethwait J, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0448, USA.

During embryogenesis, endothelial and blood precursors are hypothesized to arise 
from a common progenitor, the hemangioblast. Several genes that affect the
differentiation of, or are expressed early in, both the endothelial and blood
lineages may in fact function at the level of the hemangioblast. For example, the
zebrafish cloche mutation disrupts the differentiation of both endothelial and
blood cells. The transcription factor gene scl is expressed in both endothelial
and blood lineages from an early stage and can regulate their differentiation.
Here we report that in zebrafish the homeobox gene hhex (previously called hex)
is also expressed in endothelial and blood lineages from an early stage. We find 
that hhex expression in these lineages is significantly reduced in cloche mutant 
embryos, indicating that hhex functions downstream of cloche to regulate
endothelial and blood differentiation. Ectopic expression of hhex through
injection of a DNA construct leads to the premature and ectopic expression of
early endothelial and blood differentiation genes such as fli1, flk1 and gata1,
indicating that Hhex can positively regulate endothelial and blood
differentiation. However, analysis of a hhex deficiency allele shows that hhex is
not essential for early endothelial and blood differentiation, suggesting that
another gene, perhaps scl, compensates for the absence of Hhex function.
Furthermore, we find that hhex and scl can induce each other's expression,
suggesting that these two genes cross-regulate each other during early
endothelial and blood differentiation. Together, these data provide the initial
framework of a pathway that can be used to further integrate the molecular events
regulating hemangioblast differentiation.

PMID: 11003831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Leuk Lymphoma. 2000 Aug;38(5-6):505-12.

Internal deletions within the BCL6 gene in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Nakamura Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Dokkyo University School of Medicine, Tochigi,
Japan. yu-nakam@dokkyomed.ac.jp

The BCL6 gene, encoding a POZ/Zinc finger protein which acts as a transcriptional
repressor, is frequently altered at its 5' non-coding region by 3q27 chromosomal 
translocations in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). BCL6 rearrangement is one 
of the most common genetic abnormalities in NHL. As a result of translocations,
the regulatory region of the BCL6 gene is replaced by an heterologous reciprocal 
partner such as the immunoglobulin (IG) genes. Promotor substitution leads to
deregulation of the BCL6 expression, which may be associated with
lymphomagenesis. Recent studies have shown that the 5' non-coding region of the
BCL6 gene is also subject to somatic hypermutation physiologically operating in
germinal center (GC) B-cells in a similar pattern to that of the IG genes. There 
is little evidence to show that structural alterations of the BCL6 gene may be
caused by mechanisms other than chromosomal translocations. To date, five cases
with NHL exhibiting gross BCL6 deletions of the 1.5-2.4 kb have been reported.
These deletions occurred in the same region as translocational breakpoints and
the somatic hypermutations cluster, but independently of chromosomal
rearrangements. The deletions overlapped at the 270 bp region and this region
contains a putative protein-binding sequence which may play a role in the
regulation of the BCL6 expression. Small separated deletions of 22-101 bp, which 
may also contain protein-binding sequences, were evident in another NHL case. In 
contrast to the TAL1 deletion in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), the
BCL6 deletion is considered to be mediated by a mechanism other than aberrant
activity of the IG recombinase. Internal deletion within the BCL6 gene is a
recurrent molecular abnormality in B-cell NHL, which is sometimes
indistinguishable from rearrangements by chromosomal translocations. At present, 
the mechanism of DNA recombination and its role in lymphomagenesis remain
unknown.

PMID: 10953971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Exp Hematol. 2000 Jul;28(7):833-40.

Sequential requirements for SCL/tal-1, GATA-2, macrophage colony-stimulating
factor, and osteoclast differentiation factor/osteoprotegerin ligand in
osteoclast development.

Yamane T(1), Kunisada T, Yamazaki H, Nakano T, Orkin SH, Hayashi SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Life Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori
University, Yonago, Japan. yamanet@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Osteoclasts are of hematopoietic origin. The mechanism by which
hematopoietic stem cells are specified to the osteoclast lineage is unclear. To
understand the process of generation and differentiation of this lineage of
cells, we performed in vitro studies on the differentiation of embryonic stem
cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined the potential of mutant embryonic stem cell
lines harboring targeted deletions of the GATA-1, FOG, SCL/tal-1, or GATA-2 genes
to differentiate into osteoclasts and determined when these molecules function in
osteoclast development.
RESULTS: The lack of GATA-1 or FOG did not affect osteoclastogenesis. In
contrast, SCL/tal-1-null embryonic stem cells generated no osteoclasts. In the
case of the loss of GATA-2, a small number of osteoclasts were generated.
GATA-2-null osteoclasts were morphologically normal and the terminal maturation
was not disturbed, but a defect was observed in the generation of osteoclast
progenitors. Experiments using specific inhibitors that block the signaling
through macrophage colony-stimulating factor and osteoclast differentiation
factor/osteoprotegerin ligand suggested that GATA-2 seems to act earlier in
osteoclastogenesis than these cytokines. Interestingly, macrophage colony-forming
units were not severely reduced by the loss of GATA-2 compared to osteoclast
progenitors.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that osteocalsts need SCL/tal-1 at an early
point in development, and that GATA-2 is required for generation of osteoclast
progenitors but not for the later stages when macrophage colony-stimulating
factor and osteoclast differentiation factor/ osteoprotegerin ligand are needed. 
We also demonstrated that osteoclast progenitors behave as a different population
than macrophage colony-forming units.

PMID: 10907645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2000 Jun;45(9 Suppl):1565-72.

[Regulation of hematopoiesis by transcription factors].

[Article in Japanese]

Kurokawa M(1), Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology & Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Japan. kurokawa-tky@umin.ac.jp

PMID: 10879135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(14):5330-42.

A pentamer transcriptional complex including tal-1 and retinoblastoma protein
downmodulates c-kit expression in normal erythroblasts.

Vitelli L(1), Condorelli G, Lulli V, Hoang T, Luchetti L, Croce CM, Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161 Rome,
Italy.

Human proerythroblasts and early erythroblasts, generated in vitro by normal
adult progenitors, contain a pentamer protein complex comprising the tal-1
transcription factor heterodimerized with the ubiquitous E2A protein and linked
to Lmo2, Ldb1, and retinoblastoma protein (pRb). The pentamer can assemble on a
consensus tal-1 binding site. In the pRb(-) SAOS-2 cell line transiently
transfected with a reporter plasmid containing six tal-1 binding site, pRb
enhances the transcriptional activity of tal-1-E12-Lmo2 and tal-1-E12-Lmo2-Ldb1
complexes but not that of a tal-1-E12 heterodimer. We explored the functional
significance of the pentamer in erythropoiesis, specifically, its transcriptional
effect on the c-kit receptor, a tal-1 target gene stimulating early hematopoietic
proliferation downmodulated in erythroblasts. In TF1 cells, the pentamer
decreased the activity of the reporter plasmid containing the c-kit proximal
promoter with two inverted E box-2 type motifs. In SAOS-2 cells the pentamer
negatively regulates (i) the activity of the reporter plasmid containing the
proximal human c-kit promoter and (ii) endogenous c-kit expression. In both cases
pRb significantly potentiates the inhibitory effect of the tal-1-E12-Lmo2-Ldb1
tetramer. These data indicate that this pentameric complex assembled in maturing 
erythroblasts plays an important regulatory role in c-kit downmodulation;
hypothetically, the complex may regulate the expression of other critical
erythroid genes.

PMCID: PMC85982
PMID: 10866689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Leukemia. 2000 Jun;14(6):1143-52.

Rapid, multifluorescent TCRG Vgamma and Jgamma typing: application to T cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia and to the detection of minor clonal populations.

Delabesse E(1), Burtin ML, Millien C, Madonik A, Arnulf B, Beldjord K, Valensi F,
Macintyre EA.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Hematology, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades and Université Paris V, 
France.

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2001 Aug;15(8):1301-3.

Detection of clonal T cell receptor gamma (TCRG) gene rearrangements by PCR is
widely used in both the diagnostic assessment of lymphoproliferative disorders
and the follow-up of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), when residual
positivity in excess of 10(-3) at morphological complete remission is
increasingly recognised to be an independent marker of poor prognosis. This is
largely based on specific detection of V-J rearrangements from childhood cases.
We describe rapid, multifluorescent Vgamma and Jgamma PCR typing of multiplex
amplified diagnostic samples, as applied to 46 T-ALL. These strategies allow
selected analysis of appropriate cases, immediate identification of Vgamma and
Jgamma segments in over 95% of alleles, improved resolution and precision sizing 
and a sensitivity of detection at the 10(-2)-10(-3) level. We demonstrate
preferential V-J combinations but no difference in V-J usage between children and
adults, nor between SIL-TAL1-negative and -positive cases. A combination of
fluorescent multiplex and Vgamma-Jgamma-specific monoplex follow-up, as described
here, will allow detection of both significant clonal evolution and of the
diagnostic clone at a level of prognostic significance, by techniques which can
readily be applied to large-scale prospective studies for which real-time
analysis is required.

PMID: 10865981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 30;275(26):19676-84.

Suppression of erythroid but not megakaryocytic differentiation of human K562
erythroleukemic cells by notch-1.

Lam LT(1), Ronchini C, Norton J, Capobianco AJ, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Department of Pharmacology, Molecular 
and Cellular Pharmacology Program, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The Notch signal transduction pathway is a highly conserved regulatory system
that controls multiple developmental processes. We have established an
erythroleukemia cell model to study how Notch regulates cell fate and
erythroleukemic cell differentiation. K562 and HEL cells expressed the Notch-1
receptor and the Notch ligand Jagged-1. The stable expression of the
constitutively active intracellular domain of Notch-1 (NIC-1) in K562 cells
inhibited erythroid without affecting megakaryocytic maturation. Expression of
antisense Notch-1 induced spontaneous erythroid maturation. Suppression of
erythroid maturation by NIC-1 did not result from down-regulation of GATA-1 and
TAL-1, transcription factors necessary for erythroid differentiation. Microarray 
gene expression analysis identified genes activated during erythroid maturation, 
and NIC-1 disrupted the maturation-dependent changes in the expression of these
genes. These results show that NIC-1 alters the pattern of gene expression in
K562 cells leading to a block in erythroid maturation and therefore suggest that 
Notch signaling may control the developmental potential of normal and malignant
erythroid progenitor cells.

PMID: 10783395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Development. 2000 May;127(9):1931-41.

Basic fibroblast growth factor positively regulates hematopoietic development.

Faloon P(1), Arentson E, Kazarov A, Deng CX, Porcher C, Orkin S, Choi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Recently identified BLast Colony Forming Cells (BL-CFCs) from in vitro
differentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells represent the common progenitor of
hematopoietic and endothelial cells, the hemangioblast. Access to this initial
cell population committed to the hematopoietic lineage provides a unique
opportunity to characterize hematopoietic commitment events. Here, we show that
BL-CFC expresses the receptor tyrosine kinase, Flk1, and thus we took advantage
of the BL-CFC assay, as well as fluorescent activated cell sorter (FACS) analysis
for Flk1(+) cells to determine quantitatively if mesoderm-inducing factors
promote hematopoietic lineage development. Moreover, we have analyzed ES lines
carrying targeted mutations for fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (fgfr1), a
receptor for basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), as well as scl, a
transcription factor, for their potential to generate BL-CFCs and Flk1(+) cells, 
to further define events leading to hemangioblast development. Our data suggest
that bFGF-mediated signaling is critical for the proliferation of the
hemangioblast and that cells expressing both Flk1 and SCL may represent the
hemangioblast.

PMID: 10751181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Mar 28;97(7):3497-502.

The t(14;21)(q11.2;q22) chromosomal translocation associated with T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia activates the BHLHB1 gene.

Wang J(1), Jani-Sait SN, Escalon EA, Carroll AJ, de Jong PJ, Kirsch IR, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY
14263, USA.

We have cloned the genomic breakpoints for a balanced t(14;21)(q11. 2;q22)
chromosomal translocation associated with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Sequence analysis of the genomic breakpoints indicated that the translocation had
been mediated by an illegitimate V(D)J recombination event that disrupted the
T-cell receptor (TCR) alpha locus and placed the TCR alpha locus enhancer on the 
derivative 21 chromosome. We identified a previously unreported transcript,
designated BHLHB1 (for basic domain, helix-loop-helix protein, class B, 1) that
had been activated by the translocation. BHLHB1 mapped to the region of
chromosome 21 that has been proposed to be responsible, at least in part, for the
learning deficits seen in children with Down's syndrome. Although BHLHB1
expression normally is restricted to neural tissues, T-cell lymphoblasts with the
t(14;21)(q11.2;q22) also expressed high levels of BHLHB1 mRNA. Expression of
BHLHB1 dramatically inhibited E2A-mediated transcription activation in NIH 3T3
fibroblasts and Jurkat T cells. This observation suggests that BHLHB1, similar to
SCL/TAL1, may exert a leukemogenic effect through a functional inactivation of
E2A or related proteins.

PMCID: PMC16268
PMID: 10737801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2000 Feb;41(2):152-8.

[Chromosome 1 abnormalities at band 1p32 in two atomic bomb survivors with
myelodysplastic syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakamura H(1), Hata T, Tagawa M, Atogami S, Tomonaga M, Sadamori N, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki Municipal Medical Center.

We reported on 2 atomic bomb survivors(a 60-year-old man and 63-year-old
woman)suffering myelodysplastic syndrome(MDS) associated with 1p32 chromosomal
abnormalities. They were exposed to atomic bomb radiation at distances of 1.2 and
1.1 km, respectively, and were given a diagnosis of MDS 44 and 46 years after the
bombing, respectively. The male patient had refractory anemia(RA) and a bone
marrow cell karyotype of 46, XY, del(1)(p22p32), t(8;11)(p11;p15). The female
patient had RA with excess of blasts (RAEB) and a karyotype of 45, X, -X,
t(1;11)(p32;q23), +del(1)(p32), inv(3) (p21q27), del(5)(q15), -6, -9, -19, +mar
1, +mar 2. Multi-separated nuclear megakaryocytes were observed in both patients.
These findings suggested that they had been exposed to radiation near the atomic 
explosion despite the fact that their symptoms of MDS developed more than 40
years after the bombing. 1p32 is known to be the locus of the TAL1 gene. However,
Southern blot analysis did not reveal rearrangement of the TAL1 gene in the male 
patient.

PMID: 10723246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Blood. 2000 Mar 1;95(5):1671-9.

Vasculogenesis in the day 6.5 to 9.5 mouse embryo.

Drake CJ(1), Fleming PA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical University of South Carolina, Department of Cell Biology and the
Cardiovascular Developmental Biology Center, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.
drakec@musc.edu

The process of vasculogenesis was characterized in the 6.5- to 9.5-day mouse
embryo and in allantoic culture by analysis of spatial and temporal expression
patterns of the endothelial or hematopoietic lineage-associated proteins, TAL1,
Flk1, platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM), CD34, VE-cadherin, and
Tie2. The study establishes that: (1) TAL1 and Flk1 are coexpressed in isolated
mesodermal cells that give rise to endothelial cells and thus can be defined as
angioblasts; (2) hematopoietic cells of blood islands express TAL1, but not Flk1;
(3) vasculogenesis in the embryo proper is initiated by mesoderm fated to give
rise to the endocardium; (4) the maturation/morphogenesis of blood vessels can be
defined in terms of a sequential pattern of expression in which TAL1 and Flk1 are
expressed first followed by PECAM, CD34, VE-cadherin, and later Tie2; and (5)
TAL1 expression is down-regulated in endothelial cells of mature vessels. (Blood.
2000;95:1671-1679)

PMID: 10688823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Mar;20(6):2248-59.

mSin3A regulates murine erythroleukemia cell differentiation through association 
with the TAL1 (or SCL) transcription factor.

Huang S(1), Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.

Activation of the TAL1 (or SCL) gene is the most frequent gain-of-function
mutation in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). TAL1 belongs to the
basic helix-loop-helix (HLH) family of transcription factors that bind as
heterodimers with the E2A and HEB/HTF4 gene products to a nucleotide sequence
motif termed the E-box. Reported to act both as an activator and as a repressor
of transcription, the mechanisms underlying TAL1-regulated gene expression are
poorly understood. We report here that the corepressor mSin3A is associated with 
TAL1 in murine erythroleukemia (MEL) and human T-ALL cells. Interaction mapping
showed that the basic-HLH domain of TAL1 was both necessary and sufficient for
TAL1-mSin3A interaction. TAL1 was found, in addition, to interact with the
histone deacetylase HDAC1 in vitro and in vivo, and a specific histone
deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), relieved TAL1-mediated repression of
an E-box-containing promoter and a GAL4 reporter linked to a thymidine kinase
minimal promoter. Further, TAL1 association with mSin3A and HDAC1 declined during
dimethyl sulfoxide-induced differentiation of MEL cells in parallel with a
decrease in mSin3A abundance. Finally, TSA had a synergistic effect with enforced
TAL1 expression in stimulating MEL cells to differentiate, while constitutive
expression of mSin3A inhibited MEL cell differentiation. These results
demonstrate that a corepressor complex containing mSin3A and HDAC1 interacts with
TAL1 and restricts its function in erythroid differentiation. This also has
implications for this transcription factor's actions in leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC110841
PMID: 10688671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Nat Biotechnol. 2000 Feb;18(2):181-6.

Analysis of vertebrate SCL loci identifies conserved enhancers.

Göttgens B(1), Barton LM, Gilbert JG, Bench AJ, Sanchez MJ, Bahn S, Mistry S,
Grafham D, McMurray A, Vaudin M, Amaya E, Bentley DR, Green AR, Sinclair AM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, MRC Centre, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Biotechnol 2000 Oct;18(10):1021.

Comment in
    Nat Biotechnol. 2000 Feb;18(2):148-9.

The SCL gene encodes a highly conserved bHLH transcription factor with a pivotal 
role in hemopoiesis and vasculogenesis. We have sequenced and analyzed 320 kb of 
genomic DNA composing the SCL loci from human, mouse, and chicken. Long-range
sequence comparisons demonstrated multiple peaks of human/mouse homology, a
subset of which corresponded precisely with known SCL enhancers. Comparisons
between mammalian and chicken sequences identified some, but not all, SCL
enhancers. Moreover, one peak of human/mouse homology (+23 region), which did not
correspond to a known enhancer, showed significant homology to an analogous
region of the chicken SCL locus. A transgenic Xenopus reporter assay was
established and demonstrated that the +23 region contained a new neural enhancer.
This combination of long-range comparative sequence analysis with a
high-throughput transgenic bioassay provides a powerful strategy for identifying 
and characterizing developmentally important enhancers.

PMID: 10657125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Nat Biotechnol. 2000 Feb;18(2):148-9.

So many genomes, so little time.

Miller W.

Comment on
    Nat Biotechnol. 2000 Feb;18(2):181-6.

PMID: 10657116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Dev Dyn. 1999 Dec;216(4-5):450-8.

Derivation of melanocytes from embryonic stem cells in culture.

Yamane T(1), Hayashi S, Mizoguchi M, Yamazaki H, Kunisada T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Life Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori
University, Yonago, Japan.

We report that embryonic stem (ES) cells were efficiently induced to
differentiate to melanocytes in vitro. When undifferentiated ES cells were
cocultured with a bone marrow-derived stromal cell line, a very small but
significant number of melanocytes were reproducibly generated. This process was
greatly enhanced by addition of dexamethasone to the culture and strictly
depended on steel factor, the ligand for the c-Kit receptor tyrosine kinase.
Expression of c-Kit on the precursor cells was confirmed by using SCL/tal-1-/- ES
cells, which are defective for producing hematopoietic cells, which were thus
ruled out as possible sources of nonmelanogenic c-Kit-expressing cells. The
morphology, reactivity to growth factors, and expression of melanogenic markers
of the cells generated all indicated unequivocally that these cells were
melanocytes. This culture system may provide a potent tool for the study of
development and function of melanocytes.

PMID: 10633864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 14;275(2):949-58.

Erythroid-specific inhibition of the tal-1 intragenic promoter is due to binding 
of a repressor to a novel silencer.

Courtes C(1), Lecointe N, Le Cam L, Baudoin F, Sardet C, Mathieu-Mahul D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire, UMR 5535, IFR 24, 1919 Route de Mende, F
34293, Montpellier, France.

The basic helix-loop-helix tal-1 gene plays a key role in hematopoiesis, and its 
expression is tightly controlled through alternative promoters and complex
interactions of cis-acting regulatory elements. tal-1 is not expressed in normal 
T cells, but its transcription is constitutive in a large proportion of human T
cell leukemias. We have previously described a downstream initiation of tal-1
transcription specifically associated with a subset of T cell leukemias that
leads to the production of NH(2)-truncated TAL-1 proteins. In this study, we
characterize the human promoter (promoter IV), embedded within a GC-rich region
in exon IV, responsible for this transcriptional activity. The restriction of
promoter IV usage is assured by a novel silencer element in the 3'-untranslated
region of the human gene that represses its activity in erythroid but not in T
cells. The silencer activity is mediated through binding of a tissue-specific
nuclear factor to a novel protein recognition motif (designated tal-RE) in the
silencer. Mutation of a single residue within the tal-RE abolishes both specific 
protein binding and silencing activity. Altogether, our results demonstrate that 
the tal-1 promoter IV is actively repressed in cells of the
erythro-megakaryocytic lineage and that this repression is released in leukemic T
cells, resulting in the expression of the tal-1 truncated transcript.

PMID: 10625632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jan;20(2):713-23.

A GATA box in the GATA-1 gene hematopoietic enhancer is a critical element in the
network of GATA factors and sites that regulate this gene.

Nishimura S(1), Takahashi S, Kuroha T, Suwabe N, Nagasawa T, Trainor C, Yamamoto 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 
305-8577, Japan.

A region located at kbp -3.9 to -2.6 5' to the first hematopoietic exon of the
GATA-1 gene is necessary to recapitulate gene expression in both the primitive
and definitive erythroid lineages. In transfection analyses, this region
activated reporter gene expression from an artificial promoter in a position- and
orientation-independent manner, indicating that the region functions as the
GATA-1 gene hematopoietic enhancer (G1HE). However, when analyzed in transgenic
embryos in vivo, G1HE activity was orientation dependent and also required the
presence of the endogenous GATA-1 gene hematopoietic promoter. To define the
boundaries of G1HE, a series of deletion constructs were prepared and tested in
transfection and transgenic mice analyses. We show that G1HE contains a 149-bp
core region which is critical for GATA-1 gene expression in both primitive and
definitive erythroid cells but that expression in megakaryocytes requires the
core plus additional sequences from G1HE. This core region contains one GATA, one
GAT, and two E boxes. Mutational analyses revealed that only the GATA box is
critical for gene-regulatory activity. Importantly, G1HE was active in SCL(-/-)
embryos. These results thus demonstrate the presence of a critical network of
GATA factors and GATA binding sites that controls the expression of this gene.

PMCID: PMC85182
PMID: 10611250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Leukemia. 1999 Dec;13(12):1901-28.

Standardized RT-PCR analysis of fusion gene transcripts from chromosome
aberrations in acute leukemia for detection of minimal residual disease. Report
of the BIOMED-1 Concerted Action: investigation of minimal residual disease in
acute leukemia.

van Dongen JJ(1), Macintyre EA, Gabert JA, Delabesse E, Rossi V, Saglio G,
Gottardi E, Rambaldi A, Dotti G, Griesinger F, Parreira A, Gameiro P, Diáz MG,
Malec M, Langerak AW, San Miguel JF, Biondi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Rotterdam/Erasmus University
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Prospective studies on the detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) in acute
leukemia patients have shown that large-scale MRD studies are feasible and that
clinically relevant MRD-based risk group classification can be achieved and can
now be used for designing new treatment protocols. However, multicenter
international treatment protocols with MRD-based stratification of treatment need
careful standardization and quality control of the MRD techniques. This was the
aim of the European BIOMED-1 Concerted Action 'Investigation of minimal residual 
disease in acute leukemia: international standardization and clinical evaluation'
with participants of 14 laboratories in eight European countries (ES, NL, PT, IT,
DE, FR, SE and AT). Standardization and quality control was performed for the
three main types of MRD techniques, ie flow cytometric immunophenotyping, PCR
analysis of antigen receptor genes, and RT-PCR analysis of well-defined
chromosomal aberrations. This study focussed on the latter MRD technique. A total
of nine well-defined chromosome aberrations with fusion gene transcripts were
selected: t(1;19) with E2A-PBX1, t(4;11) with MLL-AF4, t(8;21) with AML1-ETO,
t(9;22) with BCR-ABL p190 and BCR-ABL p210, t(12;21) with TEL-AML1, t(15;17) with
PML-RARA, inv (16) with CBFB-MYH11, and microdeletion 1p32 with SIL-TAL1. PCR
primers were designed according to predefined criteria for single PCR (external
primers A <--> B) and nested PCR (internal primers C <--> D) as well as for
'shifted' PCR with a primer upstream (E5' primer) or downstream (E3' primer) of
the external A <--> B primers. The 'shifted' E primers were designed for
performing an independent PCR together with one of the internal primers for
confirmation (or exclusion) of positive results. Various local RT and PCR
protocols were compared and subsequently a common protocol was designed, tested
and adapted, resulting in a standardized RT-PCR protocol. After initial testing
(with adaptations whenever necessary) and approval by two or three laboratories, 
the primers were tested by all participating laboratories, using 17 cell lines
and patient samples as positive controls. This testing included comparison with
local protocols and primers as well as sensitivity testing via dilution
experiments. The collaborative efforts resulted in standardized primer sets with 
a minimal target sensitivity of 10-2 for virtually all single PCR analyses,
whereas the nested PCR analyses generally reached the minimal target sensitivity 
of 10-4. The standardized RT-PCR protocol and primer sets can now be used for
molecular classification of acute leukemia at diagnosis and for MRD detection
during follow-up to evaluate treatment effectiveness.

PMID: 10602411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1999 Oct;31(10):1193-207.

The stem cell leukaemia (SCL) gene: a critical regulator of haemopoietic and
vascular development.

Barton LM(1), Göttgens B, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, MRC Centre, UK.

PMID: 10582347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Blood. 1999 Dec 1;94(11):3754-63.

SCL expression in the mouse embryo detected with a targeted lacZ reporter gene
demonstrates its localization to hematopoietic, vascular, and neural tissues.

Elefanty AG(1), Begley CG, Hartley L, Papaevangeliou B, Robb L.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, the Cooperative
Research Centre for Cellular Growth Factors and the Rotary Bone Marrow Research
Laboratories, Victoria, Australia. elefanty@wehi.edu.au

The helix-loop-helix transcription factor SCL (TAL1) is indispensable for blood
cell formation in the mouse embryo. We have explored the localization and
developmental potential of cells fated to express SCL during murine development
using SCL-lacZ mutant mice in which the Escherichia coli lacZ reporter gene was
'knocked in' to the SCL locus. In addition to the hematopoietic defect associated
with SCL deficiency, the yolk sac blood vessels in SCL(lacZ/lacZ) embryos formed 
an abnormal primary vascular plexus, which failed to undergo subsequent
remodeling and formation of large branching vessels. Intraembryonic
vasculogenesis in precirculation SCL(lacZ/lacZ) embryos appeared normal but, in
embryos older than embryonic day (E) 8.5 to E9, absolute anemia leading to severe
hypoxia precluded an accurate assessment of further vascular development. In
heterozygous SCL(lacZ/w) embryos, lacZ was expressed in the central nervous
system, vascular endothelia, and primitive and definitive hematopoietic cells in 
the blood, aortic wall, and fetal liver. Culture of fetal liver cells sorted for 
high and low levels of beta galactosidase activity from SCL(lacZ/w) heterozygous 
embryos indicated that there was a correlation between the level of SCL
expression and the frequency of hematopoietic progenitor cells.

PMID: 10572089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Biochem J. 1999 Nov 1;343 Pt 3:615-20.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase mediates erythropoietin-induced phosphorylation 
of the TAL1/SCL transcription factor in murine proerythroblasts.

Tang T(1), Prasad KS, Koury MJ, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
37232, USA.

Ectopic expression of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor TAL1 (or
SCL) is the most frequent gain-of-function mutation in T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia. Gene-knockout studies in mice have demonstrated that TAL1 is required 
for embryonic and adult haematopoiesis, and considerable evidence suggests it
also has important functions in terminal erythroid differentiation. We reported
previously that TAL1 phosphorylation is stimulated by erythropoietin in splenic
proerythroblasts isolated from mice infected with the anaemia-inducing strain of 
Friend virus and show here the signalling pathway responsible. Erythropoietin was
found to stimulate nuclear mitogen-activated protein kinase activity in addition 
to TAL1 protein phosphorylation, both of which were quantitatively inhibited by
the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase inhibitor PD 098059 and the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor wortmannin. Tryptic phosphopeptide
analysis of radiolabelled TAL1 immunoprecipitated from nuclear extracts of Friend
virus-induced proerythroblasts revealed that phosphorylation of Ser(122), shown
previously to be a substrate for the mitogen-activated protein kinase ERK1
(extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase) in vitro, was specifically,
although not exclusively, increased by erythropoietin and inhibited by wortmannin
and PD 098059. These results are consistent with an erythropoietin-stimulated
signalling pathway in which there is direct activation of a mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinase by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and identify TAL1 as one
of its nuclear targets. These data suggest, in addition, a specific mechanism by 
which the principal regulator of erythroid differentiation could enhance TAL1
function, in addition to increasing its expression.

PMCID: PMC1220593
PMID: 10527940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Development. 1999 Oct;126(20):4603-15.

Specification of hematopoietic and vascular development by the bHLH transcription
factor SCL without direct DNA binding.

Porcher C(1), Liao EC, Fujiwara Y, Zon LI, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital and Dana Farber
Cancer Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School and Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Transcription factors, such as those of the basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and
homeodomain classes, are primary regulators of cell fate decisions and
differentiation. It is considered axiomatic that they control their respective
developmental programs via direct binding to cognate DNA sequences in critical
targets genes. Here we test this widely held paradigm by in vivo functional assay
of the leukemia oncoprotein SCL, a bHLH factor that resembles myogenic and
neurogenic proteins and is essential for both hematopoietic and vascular
development in vertebrates. Contrary to all expectation, we find that SCL
variants unable to bind DNA rescue hematopoiesis from gene-targeted SCL(-)(/)(-) 
embryonic stem cells and complement hematopoietic and vascular deficits in the
zebrafish mutant cloche. Our findings establish DNA-binding-independent functions
of SCL critical for transcriptional specification, and should encourage
reassessment of presumed requirements for direct DNA binding by other
transcription factors during initiation of developmental programs.

PMID: 10498694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 2;18(35):4958-67.

p300 functions as a transcriptional coactivator for the TAL1/SCL oncoprotein.

Huang S(1), Qiu Y, Stein RW, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, TN 37232, USA.

Activation of the TAL1 (or SCL) gene, originally identified through its
involvement by a recurrent chromosomal translocation, is the most frequent
gain-of-function mutation recognized in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL). The TAL1 proteins contain a basic helix - loop - helix (bHLH) motif
characteristic of a large family of transcription factors that control
transcription from an E box target element as heterodimers with the E2A- and
HEB-encoded gene products. Gene knockout studies in mice indicate that this
transcription factor is required for embryonic and adult hematopoiesis, and
considerable evidence suggests it has specific functions in terminal erythroid
differentiation. We investigated whether the broadly expressed nuclear protein
p300, known to function as a coactivator for other bHLH proteins involved in
cellular differentiation, also interacts with TAL1. p300 was found to
coimmunoprecipitate with Tal1 in extracts from murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells
induced to differentiate with dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), and p300 and Tal1 were
observed in a common E box DNA-binding complex in extracts from differentiating
MEL cells. p300 also interacted with Tal1 in protein pulldown assays, suggesting 
this was a direct interaction. Finally, p300 augmented transcription by Tal1 from
an E box-containing promoter and by a GAL4-Tal1 fusion from a promoter containing
the GAL4 DNA-binding element. Deletion analysis identified the bHLH domain of
Tal1 and amino-terminal sequences of p300 as necessary for p300-stimulated
transactivation and Tal1-p300 interaction in vitro. These results indicate that
recruitment of the transcriptional coactivator p300 can positively regulate
TAL1-directed gene expression. The dependence of their interaction in MEL cells
on addition of a differentiation inducer suggests, further, that this TAL1-p300
complex may have an important role in terminal erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 10490830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Development. 1999 Sep;126(17):3891-904.

An SCL 3' enhancer targets developing endothelium together with embryonic and
adult haematopoietic progenitors.

Sánchez M(1), Göttgens B, Sinclair AM, Stanley M, Begley CG, Hunter S, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, MRC Centre, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK.

The SCL gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor which is
expressed in early haematopoietic progenitors throughout ontogeny and is
essential for the normal development of blood and blood vessels. Transgenic
studies have characterised spatially distinct 5' enhancers which direct lacZ
expression to subdomains of the normal SCL expression pattern, but the same
elements failed to produce appropriate haematopoietic expression. We now describe
an SCL 3' enhancer with unique properties. It directed lacZ expression in
transgenic mice to extra-embryonic mesoderm and subsequently to both endothelial 
cells and to a subset of blood cells at multiple sites of embryonic
haematopoiesis including the yolk sac, para-aortic splanchnopleura and AGM
region. The 3' enhancer also targeted expression to haematopoietic progenitors in
both foetal liver and adult bone marrow. Purified lacZ(+ )cells were highly
enriched for clonogenic myeloid and erythroid progenitors as well as day-12
spleen colony forming units (CFU-S). Within the total gated population from bone 
marrow, 95% of the myeloid and 90% of the erythroid colony-forming cells were
contained in the lacZ(+) fraction, as were 98% of the CFU-S. Activation of the
enhancer did not require SCL protein. On the contrary, transgene expression in
yolk sacs was markedly increased in an SCL-/- background, suggesting that SCL is 
subject to negative autoregulation. Alternatively the SCL-/- environment may
alter differentiation of extra-embryonic mesoderm and result in an increased
number of cells capable of expressing high levels of the transgene. Our data
represents the first description of an enhancer that integrates information
necessary for expression in developing endothelium and early haematopoietic
progenitors at distinct times and sites throughout ontogeny. This enhancer
provides a potent tool for the manipulation of haematopoiesis and vasculogenesis 
in vivo.

PMID: 10433917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Leukemia. 1999 May;13(5):750-9.

Chromatin structure and transcriptional regulation of the stem cell leukaemia
(SCL) gene in mast cells.

Fordham JL(1), Göttgens B, McLaughlin F, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, MRC Centre, UK.

The stem cell leukaemia (SCL) gene is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix
family of transcription factors and is essential for the development of all
haematopoietic lineages. SCL is expressed in pluripotent haematopoietic stem
cells and also following commitment to the erythroid, mast and megakaryocytic
lineages. The mechanisms responsible for this pattern of expression are poorly
understood, but are likely to illuminate the molecular basis for stem cell
development and lineage commitment. Here we present the first description of the 
regulation of the SCL gene in mast cells. In this study we systematically
analysed the chromatin structure of a 45 kb region of the murine SCL locus in
mast cells. The pattern of DNase 1 and restriction endonuclease hypersensitive
sites in mast cells was distinct from, but overlapped with, the pattern
previously described in erythroid and primitive myeloid cells. Each potential
regulatory element was tested using transient reporter assays to assess their
functional significance in mast cells. These studies identified two potent
enhancers, one of which was downstream of the SCL gene. Further characterisation 
of this 3' enhancer demonstrated that it required the presence of two distinct
DNase 1 hypersensitive sites for full activity, and that it was capable of
stimulating transcription from both promoter 1a and 1b. Since the 3' enhancer is 
active in both erythroid and mast cells, it will now be important to see whether 
it is independently activated in these lineages, or whether it is also active in 
haematopoietic stem cells.

PMID: 10374880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jul;19(7):5025-35.

Disordered T-cell development and T-cell malignancies in SCL LMO1
double-transgenic mice: parallels with E2A-deficient mice.

Chervinsky DS(1), Zhao XF, Lam DH, Ellsworth M, Gross KW, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New
York 14263, USA.

The gene most commonly activated by chromosomal rearrangements in patients with
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is SCL/tal. In collaboration with
LMO1 or LMO2, the thymic expression of SCL/tal leads to T-ALL at a young age with
a high degree of penetrance in transgenic mice. We now show that SCL LMO1
double-transgenic mice display thymocyte developmental abnormalities in terms of 
proliferation, apoptosis, clonality, and immunophenotype prior to the onset of a 
frank malignancy. At 4 weeks of age, thymocytes from SCL LMO1 mice show 70% fewer
total thymocytes, with increased rates of both proliferation and apoptosis, than 
control thymocytes. At this age, a clonal population of thymocytes begins to
populate the thymus, as evidenced by oligoclonal T-cell-receptor gene
rearrangements. Also, there is a dramatic increase in immature CD44(+) CD25(-)
cells, a decrease in the more mature CD4(+) CD8(+) cells, and development of an
abnormal CD44(+) CD8(+) population. An identical pattern of premalignant changes 
is seen with either a full-length SCL protein or an amino-terminal truncated
protein which lacks the SCL transactivation domain, demonstrating that the
amino-terminal portion of SCL is not important for leukemogenesis. Lastly, we
show that the T-ALL which develop in the SCL LMO1 mice are strikingly similar to 
those which develop in E2A null mice, supporting the hypothesis that SCL exerts
its oncogenic action through a functional inactivation of E proteins.

PMCID: PMC84335
PMID: 10373552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Dev Dyn. 1999 Jun;215(2):139-47.

Detailed characterization of the human aorta-gonad-mesonephros region reveals
morphological polarity resembling a hematopoietic stromal layer.

Marshall CJ(1), Moore RL, Thorogood P, Brickell PM, Kinnon C, Thrasher AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, England.
C.Marshall@ich.ucl.ac.uk

The definitive long-term repopulating human hematopoietic stem cell, which seeds 
the adult blood system, was previously thought to derive from the extra-embryonic
yolk sac. However, there is now considerable evidence that in both avian and
murine systems, yolk sac hematopoietic cells are largely a transient, embryonic
population and the definitive stem cell, in fact, derives from a distinct region 
within the embryonic mesoderm, the aorta-gonad-mesonephros region. In the human
embryo, an analogous region has been found to contain a cluster of cells distinct
from, but closely associated with, the ventral endothelium of the dorsal aorta,
the appearance of which is restricted both spatially and temporally. We have used
antibodies recognising hematopoietic regulatory factors to further characterise
this region in the human embryo. These studies indicate that all factors
examined, including vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptor FLK-1,
Flt-3 ligand and its receptor STK-1, and stem cell leukemia transcription factor,
are expressed by both hematopoietic cells in the cluster and endothelial cells.
However, there is some discontinuity in cells directly underlying the cluster.
Furthermore, we have identified a morphologically distinct region of
densely-packed, rounded cells in the mesenchyme directly beneath the ventral wall
of the dorsal aorta, and running along its entire length. In the preumbilical AGM
region, directly underlying the hematopoietic cluster, but not at more rostral
and caudal levels, this region of mesenchyme expresses tenascin-C, an
extracellular matrix glycoprotein known to facilitate cell-cell interactions and 
migration. This region of cells may therefore provide the microenvironmental
support for the intraembryonic development of definitive hematopoietic stem
cells, a process in which tenascin-C may play a pivotal role.

PMID: 10373018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Haematologica. 1999 Jun;84(6):554-7.

Cytogenetic and molecular characterization of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
as a second tumor after anaplastic large-cell lymphoma in a boy.

Perotti D(1), Sozzi G, Ferrari A, Casanova M, Gambirasio F, Mondini P, Mezzelani 
A, Giardini R, Pettenella F, Papini D, Biondi A, Fossati-Bellani F, Massimino M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, via G. Venezian 1, 
20133 Milan, Italy. perotti@istitutotumori.mi.it

We report a case of acute T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia which developed in a boy 
8.5 years after successful treatment for anaplastic large-cell lymphoma.
Cytogenetic and molecular characterizations of the second tumor were performed.
The cytogenetic investigation revealed a complex pattern of karyotypic
alterations, including double minutes, ring chromosomes, and a duplication of the
p21-32 region of chromosome 1. The microsatellite DNA analysis excluded
rearrangement or deletion of the TAL1 gene in the tumor cells; rearrangements of 
the MLL gene were excluded by Southern blot analysis. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first report of T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia arising
after treatment of CD 30+ anaplastic large-cell lymphoma. The different T-cell
receptor rearrangement evidenced in the two tumors indicates that this second
malignancy most likely emerged de novo, but was plausibly related to the previous
radiation and chemotherapy.

PMID: 10366801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Seikagaku. 1999 Apr;71(4):269-73.

[Synergistic function of TAL1 and LMO in hematopoietic differentiation and T cell
tumorigenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Ono Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shionogi Institute for Medical Science, Osaka.

PMID: 10358438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Development. 1999 Jun;126(12):2799-811.

Different sequence requirements for expression in erythroid and megakaryocytic
cells within a regulatory element upstream of the GATA-1 gene.

Vyas P(1), McDevitt MA, Cantor AB, Katz SG, Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital
and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The lineage-restricted transcription factor GATA-1 is required for
differentiation of erythroid and megakaryocytic cells. We have localized a 317
base pair cis-acting regulatory element, HS I, associated with a
hematopoietic-specific DNase I hypersensitive site, which lies approx. 3.7
kilobases upstream of the murine hematopoietic-specific GATA-1 IE promoter. HS I 
directs high-level expression of reporter GATA-1/lacZ genes to primitive and
definitive erythroid cells and megakaryocytes in transgenic mice. Comparative
sequence analysis of HS I between human and mouse shows approx. 63% nucleotide
identity with a more conserved core of 169 base pairs (86% identity). This core
contains a GATA site separated by 10 base pairs from an E-box motif. The
composite motif binds a multi-protein hematopoietic-specific transcription factor
complex which includes GATA-1, SCL/tal-1, E2A, Lmo2 and Ldb-1. Point mutations of
the GATA site abolishes HS I function, whereas mutation of the E-box motif still 
allows reporter gene expression in both lineages. Strict dependence of HS I
activity on a GATA site implies that assembly of a protein complex containing a
GATA-factor, presumably GATA-1 or GATA-2, is critical to activating or
maintaining its function. Further dissection of the 317 base pair region
demonstrates that, whereas all 317 base pairs are required for expression in
megakaryocytes, only the 5' 62 base pairs are needed for erythroid-specific
reporter expression. These findings demonstrate differential lineage requirements
for expression within the HS I element.

PMID: 10331989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Oncogene. 1999 Apr 8;18(14):2373-9.

Effects of chromosomal integration site upon p53 interactions with DNA consensus 
sequence homologies.

Cook JL(1), Zhang Z, Alam J, Re RN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research, Alton Ochsner Medical Foundation, New Orleans, Louisiana
70121, USA.

In the present study, we report that, despite the presence of one perfect p53
consensus sequence homology (designated SCL CS) and four half-sites within the
3'-untranslated region of the stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene, the native
endogenous gene is not regulated by p53. We employ a tet-repressible system to
show that, under conditions in which the WAF1 mRNA steady-state level is
upregulated fourfold by p53, the SCL mRNA level is not altered. In a previous
report, we demonstrated that p53 interactions with the SCL CS can upregulate
downstream reporter gene activity 43-fold in transient reporter assays. This
disparity prompted us to explore the differences between p53 regulation of SCL CS
activity in organized (chromosomally integrated) and disorganized
(non-replicating episomal plasmid) chromatin. We show that p53 can increase
(between 3-80-fold), decrease (between 5-33-fold) or have no effect upon
transactivation of an SCL CS/reporter fusion gene depending upon chromosomal
integration site. Most studies used to characterize p53 binding sites employ
transient transfection assays. Our results suggest that characterization of
consensus sequence homologies by assay of transiently transfected cells may be
inaccurate.

PMID: 10327058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Blood. 1999 May 15;93(10):3355-68.

Unicellular-unilineage erythropoietic cultures: molecular analysis of regulatory 
gene expression at sibling cell level.

Ziegler BL(1), Müller R, Valtieri M, Lamping CP, Thomas CA, Gabbianelli M,
Giesert C, Bühring HJ, Kanz L, Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology,
Eberhard-Karls-University Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
benedikt.ziegler@uni-tuebingen.de

In vitro studies on hematopoietic control mechanisms have been hampered by the
heterogeneity of the analyzed cell populations, ie, lack of lineage specificity
and developmental stage homogeneity of progenitor/precursor cells growing in
culture. We developed unicellular culture systems for unilineage differentiation 
of purified hematopoietic progenitor cells followed by daughter cell analysis at 
cellular and molecular level. In the culture system reported here, (1) the growth
factor (GF) stimulus induces cord blood (CB) progenitor cells to proliferate and 
differentiate/mature exclusively along the erythroid lineage; (2) this
erythropoietic wave is characterized by less than 4% apoptotic cells; (3)
asymmetric divisions are virtually absent, ie, nonresponsive hematopoietic
progenitors with no erythropoietic potential are forced into apoptosis; (4) the
system is cell division controlled (cdc), ie, the number of divisions performed
by each cell is monitored. Single-cell reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis was applied to this culture system to investigate gene
expression of diverse receptors, markers of differentiation, and transcription
factors (EKLF, GATA-1, GATA-2, p45 NF-E2, PU.1, and SCL/Tal1) at discrete stages 
of erythropoietic development. Freshly isolated CD34(+) cells expressed CD34,
c-kit, PU.1, and GATA-2 but did not express CD36, erythropoietin receptor (EpoR),
SCL/Tal1, EKLF, NF-E2, GATA-1, or glyocophorin A (GPA). In early to intermediate 
stages of erythroid differentiation we monitored the induction of CD36, Tal1,
EKLF, NF-E2, and GATA-1 that preceeded expression of EpoR. In late stages of
erythroid maturation, GPA was upregulated, whereas CD34, c-kit, PU.1, and GATA-2 
were barely or not detected. In addition, competitive single-cell RT-PCR was used
to assay CD34 mRNA transcripts in sibling CD34(+)CD38(-) cells differentiating in
unilineage erythroid cultures: this analysis allowed us to semiquantitate the
gradual downmodulation of CD34 mRNA from progenitor cells through their
differentiating erythroid progeny. It is concluded that this novel culture
system, coupled with single-cell RT-PCR analysis, may eliminate the ambiguities
intrinsic to molecular studies on heterogeneous populations of hematopoietic
progenitors/precursors growing in culture, particularly in the initial stages of 
development.

PMID: 10233888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Am J Pathol. 1999 Apr;154(4):1023-35.

Development and validation of a quantitative polymerase chain reaction assay to
evaluate minimal residual disease for T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and
follicular lymphoma.

Hosler GA(1), Bash RO, Bai X, Jain V, Scheuermann RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas 75235-9072, USA.

The presence of occult disease in cancer patients after therapy is one of the
major problems faced by oncologists. For example, although 95% of pediatric
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) patients have a complete therapeutic 
response to multiagent chemotherapy, half will relapse, indicating that they must
have harbored low levels of residual cancer cells at the end of therapy.
Sensitive detection assays promise to help identify those patients that carry
this minimal residual disease (MRD) and are at risk of relapse. We have developed
and validated a quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay targeting
tumor-specific chromosomal rearrangements, including del(1) involving the tal-1
locus in pediatric T-ALL and t(14;18) involving the bcl-2 locus in follicular
lymphoma. This quantitative PCR assay utilizes a synthetic internal calibration
standard (ICS) that contains priming sequences identical to those found flanking 
the chromosomal rearrangement breakpoints. Using this ICS-PCR method, the limits 
of detection were 5 tumor cells at ratios of 1 tumor cell in 10(5) normal cells
and a linear range up to 100% tumor cells. This ICS-PCR method has also performed
well in terms of precision and accuracy as indicated by low coefficients of
variation, minimal random, proportional, and constant errors, and good clinical
sensitivity and specificity characteristics. This technique will allow for the
evaluation of parameters such as the rate of therapeutic response and the levels 
of MRD as predictors of patient outcome.

PMCID: PMC1866560
PMID: 10233841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Blood. 1999 May 1;93(9):2760-70.

The SCL gene: from case report to critical hematopoietic regulator.

Begley CG(1), Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research and the Rotary Bone Marrow
Research Laboratories, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

PMID: 10216069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Dev Biol. 1999 May 1;209(1):128-42.

Distinct 5' SCL enhancers direct transcription to developing brain, spinal cord, 
and endothelium: neural expression is mediated by GATA factor binding sites.

Sinclair AM(1), Göttgens B, Barton LM, Stanley ML, Pardanaud L, Klaine M, Gering 
M, Bahn S, Sanchez M, Bench AJ, Fordham JL, Bockamp E, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, MRC Centre, Hills Road,
Cambridge, CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

The SCL gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor with a pivotal
role in the development of endothelium and of all hematopoietic lineages. SCL is 
also expressed in the central nervous system, although its expression pattern has
not been examined in detail and its function in neural development is unknown. In
this article we present the first analysis of SCL transcriptional regulation in
vivo. We have identified three spatially distinct regulatory modules, each of
which was both necessary and sufficient to direct reporter gene expression in
vivo to three different regions within the normal SCL expression domain, namely, 
developing endothelium, midbrain, and hindbrain/spinal cord. In addition we have 
demonstrated that GATA factor binding sites are essential for neural expression
of the SCL constructs. The midbrain element was particularly powerful and axonal 
lacZ expression revealed the details of axonal projections, thus implicating SCL 
in the development of occulomotor, pupillary, or retinotectal pathways. The
neural expression pattern of the SCL gene was highly conserved in mouse, chicken,
and zebrafish embryos and the 5' region of the chicken SCL locus exhibited a
striking degree of functional conservation in transgenic mice. These data suggest
that SCL performs critical functions in neural development. The regulatory
elements identified here provide important tools for analyzing these functions.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10208748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Haematologica. 1999 Feb;84(2):110-3.

Molecular analysis of 1p32 genetic involvement in pediatric T-cell non-Hodgkin's 
lymphoma.

Perotti D(1), Pettenella F, Luksch R, Giardini R, Gambirasio F, Ferrari D,
Fossati-Bellani F, Biondi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.
perotti@istitutotumori.mi.it

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and
lymphoblastic T-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (T-NHL) are closely related
disorders, and distinguishing between the two may be difficult. Cytogenetic
investigations of large NHL series reported different recurring chromosomal
alterations. Among these, aberrations of chromosome 1p seem to be associated with
T-cell differentiation, the region most frequently involved in breakpoints being 
band 1p32-36. Deletions and translocations involving the same chromosomal region 
are frequently observed in T-ALL, in which one of the most common genetic changes
is the breakage of the TAL1 gene, mapped to the 1p32 chromosomal region. The
objective of this study was to assess the possibility of TAL1 involvement also in
T-NHL.
DESIGN AND METHODS: A series of 17 pediatric T-NHL patients was molecularly
characterized by microsatellite markers analysis and by TAL1 gene microdeletions.
RESULTS: TAL1 gene rearrangement was found in one case, while loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) and microsatellite instability (MI) was identified in
another case.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: Overall our findings indicate that, differently
from T-ALL, neither TAL1 gene involvement nor LOH or MI at 1p32 appear
particularly relevant in the oncogenic process of T-NHL transformation.

PMID: 10091407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Leuk Lymphoma. 1998 Dec;32(1-2):65-75.

Detection of minimal residual disease: methods and relationship to outcome in
T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Dibenedetto SP(1), Lo Nigro L, Di Cataldo A, Schilirò G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University of Catania, Italy.

The molecular basis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) of both B-cell and
T-cell lineages seems better understood using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
methods. The analysis of clone-specific junctional regions of rearranged genes
for both Immunoglobulin (Ig H) and T-cell receptor (TcR) is the most sensitive
tool for detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) in ALL. Because of the
heterogeneity of all ALL patients examined in several studies, the detection of
MRD at different times of treatment has not as yet been correlated with disease
outcome. In contrast, T-ALL is a homogeneous disease characterized by expansion
of a single clone showing a specific Rearranged junctional region of TcR delta
and/or gamma genes. The use of a clone-specific probe allows detection of
residual leukemia throughout treatment. However, 60 % of patients with T-ALL
relapse during treatment or towards the end of therapy, with resurgence of the
original leukemic clone. It is possible that the detection of MRD at a specific
time-point after diagnosis, as well as at the beginning of maintenance, may help 
to identify a group of T-ALL patients at high risk of relapse. The correlation
between detection of MRD and treatment phase may be used in the future to
evaluate whether treatment regimens can be improved allowing for stratification, 
based on PCR-mediated detection of MRD.

PMID: 10037002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 28;18(4):995-1005.

Physical interaction of the bHLH LYL1 protein and NF-kappaB1 p105.

Ferrier R(1), Nougarede R, Doucet S, Kahn-Perles B, Imbert J, Mathieu-Mahul D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire, UMR 5535, Montpellier, France.

The LYL1 gene was first identified upon the molecular characterization of the
t(7;9)(q35;p13) translocation associated with some human T-cell acute leukemias
(T-ALLs). In adult tissues, LYL1 expression is restricted to hematopoietic cells 
with the notable exclusion of the T cell lineage. LYL1 encodes a basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein highly related to TAL-1, whose activation is also
associated with a high proportion of human T-ALLs. A yeast two-hybrid system was 
used to identify proteins that specifically interact with LYL1 and might mediate 
its activities. We found that p105, the precursor of NF-kappaB1 p50, was the
major LYL1-interacting protein in this system. The association between LYL1 and
p105 was confirmed both in vitro and in vivo in mammalian cells. Biochemical
studies indicated that the interaction was mediated by the bHLH motif of LYL1 and
the ankyrin-like motifs of p105. Ectopic expression of LYL1 in a human T cell
line caused a significant decrease in NF-kappaB-dependent transcription,
associated with a reduced level of NF-kappaB1 proteins.

PMID: 10023675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Leukemia. 1999 Jan;13(1):110-8.

Primers and protocols for standardized detection of minimal residual disease in
acute lymphoblastic leukemia using immunoglobulin and T cell receptor gene
rearrangements and TAL1 deletions as PCR targets: report of the BIOMED-1
CONCERTED ACTION: investigation of minimal residual disease in acute leukemia.

Pongers-Willemse MJ(1), Seriu T, Stolz F, d'Aniello E, Gameiro P, Pisa P,
Gonzalez M, Bartram CR, Panzer-Grümayer ER, Biondi A, San Miguel JF, van Dongen
JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Rotterdam/Erasmus University
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2001 Aug;15(8):1301-3.

It is now widely accepted that the detection of minimal residual disease (MRD)
has prognostic value in acute leukemia. However clinical MRD studies need
standardized techniques. Therefore, several European laboratories have aligned
their goals and performed comparative studies to achieve optimization and
standardization of MRD techniques. This was achieved via the BIOMED-1 Concerted
Action "Investigation of minimal residual disease in acute leukemia:
International standardization and clinical evaluation." This report describes the
development of PCR primers and protocols for the detection of MRD in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) using clone-specific junctional regions of
immunoglobulin and T cell receptor gene rearrangements and TAL1 deletions as PCR 
targets. A total of 54 primers was developed (1) to amplify rearrangements of the
TCRD, TCRG, and IGK (Kde) genes as well as TAL1 deletions; (2) to sequence the
junctional regions and breakpoint fusion regions; and (3) to perform MRD
detection in bone marrow or peripheral blood samples during follow-up of ALL
patients. Protocols were established to identify PCR targets at diagnosis by
performing 25 PCR reactions per patient using appropriate positive and negative
controls. Standardized protocols were developed for MRD monitoring via single
amplification of the PCR target followed by dot blot hybridization with the
corresponding patient-specific junctional region probe. In addition, alternative 
approaches were designed for cases where the target sensitivity of at least
10(-4) was not obtained. The standardization described here of MRD-PCR techniques
is essential for the process of translating MRD research into clinical practice.

PMID: 10049045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Med Pediatr Oncol. 1999 Feb;32(2):148.

Detection of minimal residual disease by PCR in childhood T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia with TAL1 gene rearrangement: a preliminary report.

Kikuchi A(1), Hanada R, Yamamoto K, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Saitama Children's Medical Center, Japan.

PMID: 9950206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Exp Med. 1999 Feb 1;189(3):501-8.

Growth inhibition and apoptosis due to restoration of E2A activity in T cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells.

Park ST(1), Nolan GP, Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University Medical Center, New York
10016, USA.

Two models have been proposed for the molecular mechanism by which the Tal1
oncogene causes T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). The activation model
suggests that Tal1 as heterodimers with the E2A transcription factor activates
the expression of oncogenes. The inhibition model postulates that Tal1 interferes
with the tumor-suppressing function of E2A. In the Jurkat T cell line, originally
derived from a patient with T-ALL, Tal1 is complexed with E2A proteins and the
transcriptional activity of E2A is very low. When E2A activity was restored by
expressing an E2A-Tal1 fusion protein, E-T/2, the Jurkat cells underwent growth
arrest and subsequently apoptosis, thus supporting the inhibition model and
suggesting that E2A loss may contribute to leukemic progression.

PMCID: PMC2192921
PMID: 9927512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1998 Oct 23;857:155-79.

Morphogenesis of the first blood vessels.

Drake CJ(1), Hungerford JE, Little CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston 29425-2204, USA.

The initial phase of vessel formation is the establishment of nascent endothelial
tubes from mesodermal precursor cells. Development of the vascular epithelium is 
examined using the transcription factor TAL1 as a marker of endothelial precursor
cells (angioblasts), and a functional assay based on intact, whole-mounted quail 
embryos. Experimental studies examining the role(s) of integrins and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) establish that integrin-mediated cell adhesion
is necessary for normal endothelial tube formation and that stimulation of
embryonic endothelial cells with exogenous VEGF results in a massive "fusion" of 
vessels and the obliteration of normally avascular zones. The second phase of
vessel morphogenesis is assembly of the vessel wall. To understand the process by
which mesenchyme gives rise to vascular smooth muscle, a novel monoclonal
antibody, 1E12, that recognizes smooth muscle precursor cells was used.
Additionally, development of the vessel wall was examined using the expression fo
extracellular matrix proteins as markers. Comparison of labeling patterns of 1E12
and the extracellular matrix molecules fibulin-1 and fibrillin-2 indicate vessel 
wall heterogeneity at the earliest stages of development; thus smooth muscle cell
diversity is manifested during the differentiation and assembly of the vessel
wall. From these studies it is postulated that the extracellular matrix
composition of the vessel wall may prove to be the best marker of smooth muscle
diversity. The data are discussed in the context of recent work by others,
especially provocative new studies suggesting an endothelial origin for vascular 
smooth muscle cells. Also discussed is recent work that provides clues to the
mechanism of vascular smooth muscle induction and recruitment. Based on these
findings, vascular smooth muscle cells can be thought of as existing along a
continuum of phenotypes. This spectrum varies from mainly matrix-producing cells 
to primarily contractile cells; thus no one cell type typifies vascular smooth
muscle. This view of the smooth muscle cell is considered in terms of a
contrasting opinion that views smooth muscle cell as existing in either a
synthetic or proliferative state.

PMID: 9917840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Int J Dev Biol. 1998;42(7):927-34.

Embryonic stem cells and transgenic mice in the study of hematopoiesis.

Orkin SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital and the Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
Orkin@rascal.med.harvard.edu

Blood formation (hematopoiesis) entails the generation of hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs) within the embryo and subsequent commitment of multipotential
progenitors to differentiation along single lineages. These processes are
controlled in large part by cell-restricted transcription factors which cooperate
with more widely expressed factors to direct lineage-specific gene expression.
Candidate hematopoietic transcriptional regulators have been identified by
characterizing factors mediating cell-specific gene transcription and by defining
genes involved in chromosomal rearrangements in leukemia. The application of
transgenic and embryonic stem cell methods have provided insights into their in
vivo functions and suggested mechanisms by which lineage selection may be
achieved. One of the first, and best, characterized hematopoietic transcription
factors is GATA-1. Herein studies of GATA-1 are reviewed to illustrate how
manipulations of its locus in the mouse have contributed to current understanding
in unique and unexpected ways.

PMID: 9853823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Lancet. 1998 Nov 28;352(9142):1731-8.

Prognostic value of minimal residual disease in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia in 
childhood.

van Dongen JJ(1), Seriu T, Panzer-Grümayer ER, Biondi A, Pongers-Willemse MJ,
Corral L, Stolz F, Schrappe M, Masera G, Kamps WA, Gadner H, van Wering ER,
Ludwig WD, Basso G, de Bruijn MA, Cazzaniga G, Hettinger K, van der Does-van den 
Berg A, Hop WC, Riehm H, Bartram CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Rotterdam/Erasmus University
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Lancet. 1999 Feb 27;353(9154):752-3.

BACKGROUND: Sensitive techniques for detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) 
at degrees of one leukaemic cell per 10(3)-10(6) cells (10(-3)-10(-6)) during
follow-up of children with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) can provide
insight into the effectiveness of cytotoxic treatment. However, it is not yet
clear how information on MRD can be applied to treatment protocols.
METHODS: We monitored 240 patients with childhood ALL who were treated according 
to national protocols of the International BFM Study Group. 60 patients relapsed 
and the patients in continuous complete remission (CCR) had a median event-free
follow-up of 48 months. Bone-marrow samples were collected at up to nine time
points during and after treatment. Standardised PCR analysis of patient-specific 
immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor gene rearrangements and TAL1 deletions were
used as targets for semiquantitative estimation of MRD. Amount of MRD was classed
as 10(-2) or more, 10(-3), and 10(-4) or less.
FINDINGS: MRD negativity at the various follow-up times was associated with low
relapse rates (3-15% at 3 years), but five-fold to ten-fold higher relapse rates 
(39-86% at 3 years) were found in MRD-positive patients. The distinct degrees of 
MRD appeared to have independent prognostic value (p [trend]<0.001) at all
separate time points, especially at the first two time points (at the end of
induction treatment and before consolidation treatment). At these two time points
a high degree of MRD (> or = 10(-2)) was associated with a three-fold higher
relapse rate when compared with patients with a low degree of MRD (< or =
10(-4)). At later time points (including the end of treatment) even a low degree 
of MRD was associated with a poor outcome. Positivity in patients in CCR after
treatment was rare (< 1%). With the combined MRD information from the first two
follow-up time points, it was possible to recognise three different risk
groups--55 (43%) were in a low-risk group and had a 3-year relapse rate of only
2% (95% CI 0.05-12%); 19 (15%) were in a high-risk group and had a relapse rate
of 75% (55-95%); and 55 (43%) were in an intermediate-risk group and had a 3-year
relapse rate of 23% (13-36%).
INTERPRETATION: Our collaborative MRD study shows that monitoring patients with
childhood ALL at consecutive time points gives clinically relevant insight into
the effectiveness of treatment. Combined information on MRD from the first 3
months of treatment distinguishes patients with good prognoses from those with
poor prognoses, and this helps in decisions whether and how to modify treatment.

PMID: 9848348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Nov 19;1448(1):109-14.

SCL binds the human homologue of DRG in vivo.

Zhao XF(1), Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Molecular Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer
Institute, Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

A suspected oncoprotein, human development regulated GTP-binding protein (DRG)
has never been identified though homologues were found in mouse, Xenopus,
Drosophila, yeast and Halobacteria. During a search for SCL binding partners
using the yeast 2-hybrid system, we isolated two independent cDNA clones (clone
L51 and clone V3) of the human DRG homologue from human fetal liver and human
thymus cDNA libraries. Only one amino acid difference was found between human and
mouse DRG proteins. Although a human DRG has been previously deposited in the
SWISS-PROT Database, we believe that we have cloned the bona fide human DRG based
on the highly conserved primary amino acid structure between our cloned human
homologue and the mouse DRG.

PMID: 9824680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Dec;18(12):6939-50.

TAL1 and LIM-only proteins synergistically induce retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2
expression in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia by acting as cofactors for
GATA3.

Ono Y(1), Fukuhara N, Yoshie O.

Author information: 
(1)Shionogi Institute for Medical Science, Settsu-shi, Osaka 566-0022, Japan.

Previously, we have shown that TAL1 and the LIM-only protein gene (LMO) are
regularly coactivated in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). This
observation is likely to relate to the findings that TAL1 and LMO are highly
synergistic in T-cell tumorigenesis in double-transgenic mice. To understand the 
molecular mechanisms of functional synergy between TAL1 and LMO in tumorigenesis 
and transcriptional regulation, we tried to identify downstream target genes
regulated by TAL1 and LMO by a subtractive PCR method. One of the isolated genes,
that for retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (RALDH2), was regularly expressed in most 
of the T-ALL cell lines that coexpressed TAL1 and LMO. Exogenously transfected
TAL1 and LMO, but not either alone, induced RALDH2 expression in a T-ALL cell
line, HPB-ALL, not expressing endogeneous TAL1 or LMO. The RALDH2 transcripts in 
T-ALL were, however, mostly initiated within the second intron. Promoter analysis
revealed that a GATA site in a cryptic promoter in the second intron was
essential and sufficient for the TAL1- and LMO-dependent transcriptional
activation, and GATA3 binds to this site. In addition, forced expression of GATA3
potentiated the induction of RALDH2 by TAL1 and LMO, and these three factors
formed a complex in vivo. Furthermore, a TAL1 mutant not binding to DNA also
activated the transcription of RALDH2 in the presence of LMO and GATA3.
Collectively, we have identified the RALDH2 gene as a first example of direct
transcriptional target genes regulated by TAL1 and LMO in T-ALL. In this case,
TAL1 and LMO act as cofactors for GATA3 to activate the transcription of RALDH2.

PMCID: PMC109277
PMID: 9819382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Int Immunol. 1998 Oct;10(10):1539-49.

Helix-loop-helix (E2-5, HEB, TAL1 and Id1) protein interaction with the
TCRalphadelta enhancers.

Bernard M(1), Delabesse E, Smit L, Millien C, Kirsch IR, Strominger JL, Macintyre
EA.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA1461, CHU Necker-Enfants Malades and Université Paris V, France.

In order to dissect the correlation between aberrant TAL1 basic-helix-loop-helix 
(b-HLH) expression and the exclusive development of T cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemias (T-ALL) of the TCRalphabeta lineage, we have assessed the ability of
class A b-HLH proteins to regulate the TCRalpha and delta enhancers. We
demonstrate that E47S binds to TCRalpha but not to TCRdelta E-boxes in vitro.
Despite this, neither E2-5 nor HEB transactivate the TCRalpha enhancer in NIH
3T3, nor did Id1 modify endogenously driven TCRalpha [alphaE1-4] activity in a
TCRalphabeta cell line. We also demonstrate that TAL1 inhibits both binding of
E47S to aE3 and aE4 and endogenous transactivation of the TCRalpha enhancer.
Comparison of the activity of the minimal [alphaE1-2] fragment, which contains no
E-boxes, with the accessory [aE3-4] fragment, which contains two, suggested some 
contribution from the latter to TCRalpha enhancer activity in HPB-ALL. TCR
[alphaE1-2] activity was partially (40%) inhibited by TAL1 but not at all by Id1.
In contrast, [alphaE3-4] activity was almost completely inhibited by TAL1 (80%)
and slightly reduced by Id1 (15%). These data demonstrate that class A b-HLH
regulation of the TCRalpha enhancer E-boxes differs from their B lymphoid Igmicro
counterparts and suggest a novel mechanism of transcriptional inhibition by TAL1,
which may be, at least partly, independent of E-box-mediated activation, as we
currently recognize it. They also clearly demonstrate that the restriction of
TAL1 deregulation to T-ALL of the TCRalphabeta lineage is not due to induction of
TCRalpha enhancer activity by the TAL1 protein.

PMID: 9796921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 30;273(44):29032-42.

Transcriptional regulation of the stem cell leukemia gene by PU.1 and Elf-1.

Bockamp EO(1), Fordham JL, Göttgens B, Murrell AM, Sanchez MJ, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, Medical Research Council
Centre, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

The SCL gene, also known as tal-1, encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor that is pivotal for the normal development of all hematopoietic lineages. 
SCL is expressed in committed erythroid, mast, and megakaryocytic cells as well
as in hematopoietic stem cells. Nothing is known about the regulation of SCL
transcription in mast cells, and in other lineages GATA-1 is the only
tissue-specific transcription factor recognized to regulate the SCL gene. We have
therefore analyzed the molecular mechanisms underlying SCL expression in mast
cells. In this paper, we demonstrate that SCL promoter 1a was regulated by GATA-1
together with Sp1 and Sp3 in a manner similar to the situation in erythroid
cells. However, SCL promoter 1b was strongly active in mast cells, in marked
contrast to the situation in erythroid cells. Full activity of promoter 1b was
dependent on ETS and Sp1/3 motifs. Transcription factors PU.1, Elf-1, Sp1, and
Sp3 were all present in mast cell extracts, bound to promoter 1b and
transactivated promoter 1b reporter constructs. These data provide the first
evidence that the SCL gene is a direct target for PU.1, Elf-1, and Sp3.

PMID: 9786909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Bull Cancer. 1998 Sep;85(9):740.

Fiche n 8 : TAL1 (SCL) (T cell leukemia 1)

[No authors listed]

PMID: 9770605  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


130. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 29;95(20):11897-902.

Characterization of hematopoietic progenitor cells that express the transcription
factor SCL, using a lacZ "knock-in" strategy.

Elefanty AG(1), Begley CG, Metcalf D, Barnett L, Köntgen F, Robb L.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research and the Cooperative
Research Centre for Cellular Growth Factors, P.O. Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Victoria 3050, Australia. elefanty@wehi.edu.au

Gene targeting experiments have demonstrated that the transcription factor SCL is
essential for primitive and definitive hematopoiesis in the mouse. To study the
functional properties of hematopoietic cells expressing SCL, we have generated
mutant mice (SCLlacZ/w) in which the Escherichia coli lacZ reporter gene has been
"knocked in" to the SCL locus, thereby linking beta-galactosidase expression to
transcription from the SCL promoter. Bone marrow cells from heterozygous
SCLlacZ/w mice were sorted into fractions expressing high, intermediate and low
levels of beta-galactosidase (designated lacZhigh, lacZint, and lacZneg). Cells
that were lacZhigh or lacZint were enriched for day 12 spleen colony-forming
units and myeloid and erythroid colony-forming cells (CFCs). These fractions
included >99% of the erythroid and >90% of the myeloid CFCs. Culture of sorted
bone marrow populations on stromal cells secreting interleukin-7 or in fetal
thymic organ cultures showed that B and T lymphoid progenitors were also present 
in the lacZhigh and lacZint fractions. These data provide a functional
correlation between SCL expression and colony-forming ability in immature
hematopoietic cells. Our data also suggested that expression of SCL was transient
and confined to hematopoietic stem and/or progenitor cells, because the
differentiated progeny of most lineages (except the erythroid) were
beta-galactosidase-negative.

PMCID: PMC21737
PMID: 9751762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cancer Detect Prev. 1998;22(5):405-15.

Expression of lymphomagenic oncogenes in T-cell lymphomas of HPV 16 transgenic
mice.

Yang JT(1), Liu CZ, Domer P, Iannaccone P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and the Children's Memorial Institute for Education
and Research, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

We have previously established that a dimer repeat of the complete HPV 16 genome 
is sufficient to cause multiple organ malignancies, either carcinomas or T-cell
lymphomas, in transgenic mice. Here, we report the expression of oncogenes
supporting the notion that these tumors arose via multiple oncogenic pathways. In
these mice, the transgenic HPV 16 genome cosegregated with the tumor phenotype.
E6/E7 expression was observed in both carcinomas and T-cell lymphomas, while E2
expression was observed only in T-cell lymphomas. Some of the T-cell lymphomas
revealed E2 expression alone, implying that oncogenic pathways of HPV other than 
the one involving E6/E7 existed in these transgenic mice. To establish that this 
is the case, expression of genes downstream from E6/E7 and oncogenes involved in 
T-cell lymphoma formation were analyzed. p53 mutations were observed in two of
five tumors that lacked E6 expression. High levels of c-myc gene expression were 
observed in five of six tumors with E7 expression, suggesting that a pathway
involving E7, inactivation of Rb, and activation of c-myc is important in
tumorigenesis of HPV 16 in these transgenic animals. High levels of expression of
the c-Pim gene were also noted in two of three c-myc-expressing T-cell lymphomas,
suggesting cooperation between these two proto-oncogenes. Activation of Hox-11,
Tal2/SCL-2, and Rbtn1/Ttg1 expression, which are highly associated with human
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), was observed in three of three
T-cell lymphomas with E2 expression but not E6/E7 expression, showing that
pathways to tumor formation not involving E6/E7 exist in these transgenic
animals. At least two oncogenic pathways to tumors in HPV 16 transgenic mice
exist, one involving E6/E7 and c-myc and the other involving E2 and lymphomagenic
oncogenes.

PMID: 9727621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 11;273(37):24223-31.

Identity of the beta-globin locus control region binding protein HS2NF5 as the
mammalian homolog of the notch-regulated transcription factor suppressor of
hairless.

Lam LT(1), Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Department of Pharmacology, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Previously, we characterized a DNA-binding protein, HS2NF5, that bound tightly to
a conserved region within hypersensitive site 2 (HS2) of the human beta-globin
locus control region (LCR) (Lam, L. T. , and Bresnick, E. H. (1996) J. Biol.
Chem. 271, 32421-32429). The beta-globin LCR controls the chromatin structure,
transcription, and replication of the beta-globin genes. We have now purified
HS2NF5 to near-homogeneity from fetal bovine thymus. Two polypeptides of 56 and
61 kDa copurified with the DNA binding activity. The two proteins bound to the
LCR recognition site with an affinity (3.1 nM) and specificity similar to mouse
erythroleukemia cell HS2NF5. The amino acid sequences of tryptic peptides of
purified HS2NF5 revealed it to be identical to the murine homolog of the
suppressor of hairless transcription factor, also known as recombination signal
binding protein Jkappa or C promoter binding factor 1 (CBF1). The CBF1 site
within HS2 resides near sites for hematopoietic regulators such as GATA-1, NF-E2,
and TAL1. An additional conserved, high affinity CBF1 site was localized within
HS4 of the LCR. As CBF1 is a downstream target of the Notch signaling pathway, we
propose that Notch may modulate LCR activity during hematopoiesis.

PMID: 9727046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. EMBO J. 1998 Sep 1;17(17):5151-60.

Chromatin immunoselection defines a TAL-1 target gene.

Cohen-Kaminsky S(1), Maouche-Chrétien L, Vitelli L, Vinit MA, Blanchard I,
Yamamoto M, Peschle C, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U474, Hématologie Moléculaire, Hôpital Henri Mondor, 51 avenue du
Maréchal de Lattre de Tassigny, 94010 Créteil, France.

Despite the major functions of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
TAL-1 in hematopoiesis and T-cell leukemogenesis, no TAL-1 target gene has been
identified. Using immunoprecipitation of genomic fragments bound to TAL-1 in the 
chromatin of murine erythro-leukemia (MEL) cells, we found that 10% of the
immunoselected fragments contained a CAGATG or a CAGGTG E-box, followed by a GATA
site. We studied one of these fragments containing two E-boxes, CAGATG and
CAGGTC, followed by a GATA motif, and showed that TAL-1 binds to the CAGGTG E-box
with an affinity modulated by the CAGATG or the GATA site, and that the
CAGGTG-GATA motif exhibits positive transcriptional activity in MEL but not in
HeLa cells. This immunoselected sequence is located within an intron of a new
gene co-expressed with TAL-1 in endothelial and erythroid cells, but not
expressed in fibroblasts or adult liver where no TAL-1 mRNA was detected.
Finally, in vitro differentiation of embryonic stem cells towards the
erythro/megakaryocytic pathways showed that the TAL-1 target gene expression
followed TAL-1 and GATA-1 expression. These results establish that TAL-1 is
likely to activate its target genes through a complex that binds an E-box-GATA
motif and define the first gene regulated by TAL-1.

PMCID: PMC1170843
PMID: 9724651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1998 Sep;23(1):36-43.

Deregulated expression of the TAL1 gene by t(1;5)(p32;31) in patient with T-cell 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

François S(1), Delabesse E, Baranger L, Dautel M, Foussard C, Boasson M, Blanchet
O, Bernard O, Macintyre EA, Ifrah N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Hematology, Hôtel Dieu Hospital, Angers, France.

TAL1 gene deregulation is frequent in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL)
and can result from translocations involving 1p32 or, more frequently, from a
cytogenetically undetectable interstitial deletion of chromosome 1. This study
presents a case of T-ALL with a t(1;5)(p32;q31) involving TAL1, in which the
breakpoint occurs approximately 10kbp 5' to the gene and leads to transcriptional
activation and synthesis of a TAL1 protein, and extends the spectrum of
recognized TAL1 gene translocations associated with T-ALL.

PMID: 9713995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Hybridoma. 1998 Jun;17(3):251-5.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against Tal1
oncoprotein.

Hsu SF(1), Chang AC, Wang JK, Cheng JT.

Author information: 
(1)Yu-Ing Professional School of Nursing, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.

TAL1 (or SCL) oncogene functions as a transcription regulatory factor that is
necessary for the early development of all hematopoietic lineages. Aberrant
expression of Tall protein in T cells is the cause of T-cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia (T-ALL) in children. We generated two hybridomas that secreted
monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) that reacted strongly with GST-TAL(1-210) but not
with GST fusion protein in ELISA assay. These two MAbs, TWN3 and TWN60,
recognized TALI oncoprotein expressed in transfected COS-1 cells by Western
blotting. In addition, both MAbs were also effective in detecting TAL1
oncoprotein in leukemic cells by immunoprecipitation and immunocytochemistry.
Therefore, they should be useful in the studies of Tall protein functions in both
hematopoietic development and oncogenesis.

PMID: 9708827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Gene Expr. 1998;7(2):87-101.

Sequence determinants of DNA binding by the hematopoietic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor TAL1: importance of sequences flanking the E-box core.

Gould KA(1), Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Department of Pharmacology, Madison
53706, USA.

TAL1 is a helix-loop-helix transcription factor that is essential for
hematopoiesis. In vitro DNA binding site selection experiments have previously
identified the preferred binding site for TAL1 heterodimers as AACAGATGGT. TAL1
homodimers do not bind DNA with significant affinity. A subset of other E-box
sequences is also bound by TAL1 heterodimers. Here, we present an analysis of
TAL1 heterodimer DNA binding specificity, using E-boxes derived from genomic
clones, which were isolated by immunoadsorption of K562 erythroleukemia cell
chromatin with a TAL1 antibody. We show that TAL1 heterodimer binding to a CAGATG
E-box is strongly modulated by nucleotides flanking the E-box. A 10 base pair
element consisting of the CAGATG E-box and two flanking nucleotides in both the
5' and 3' direction is sufficient for high-affinity binding. Certain mutations of
nucleotides in either the 5' (-1 and -2) or 3' (+1 and +2) direction strongly
inhibit binding. The importance of flanking nucleotides also exists in the
context of nonpreferred E-boxes recognized by TAL1 heterodimers. Although there
are no known target genes for TAL1, the regulatory regions of several genes
involved in hematopoiesis contain the preferred E-box CAGATG. However, based on
our results, the E-boxes in these potential target genes contain flanking
sequences that would be expected to significantly reduce TAL1 heterodimer binding
in vitro. Thus, additional stabilizing forces, such as protein-protein
interactions between TAL1 heterodimers and accessory factors, may be required to 
confer high-affinity TAL1 heterodimer binding to such sequences.

PMID: 9699481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Br J Haematol. 1998 Jul;102(2):449-57.

TAL1 expression does not occur in the majority of T-ALL blasts.

Delabesse E(1), Bernard M, Meyer V, Smit L, Pulford K, Cayuela JM, Ritz J,
Bourquelot P, Strominger JL, Valensi F, Macintyre EA.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1461 and Department of Haematology, CHU Necker-Enfants Malades and
Université Paris V, France.

The TAL1 gene is disrupted by translocation or deletion (tal(d)) in up to 30% of 
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL), leading to aberrant transcriptional
activation, as a SIL-TAL1 fused transcript in tal(d). It has been suggested that 
TAL1 transcription occurs in approximately 50% of a T-ALLs without apparent
rearrangement. SIL-TAL1 was positive in 15/60 (25%) of T-ALL, whereas wild-type
TAL1 transcripts were detected in all 13 SIL-TAL1 and in 19/43 (44%) T-ALL
without SIL-TAL1. To investigate the cellular origin of TAL1 we exploited the
fact that GATA1 and TAL1 are co-ordinately expressed in non-lymphoid haemopoietic
cells, whereas only the latter is found in T-ALL. GATA1 was detected in 10/23
(43%) TAL1-negative T-ALLs but in 17/19 (89%) 'unexplained' TAL1-positive cases, 
suggesting a common non-lymphoid cellular origin. Immunocytochemical analysis
with a TAL1-specific monoclonal antibody showed nuclear expression in the blasts 
of 10/34 (29%) cases, including 8/10 SIL-TAL1+ and two RT-PCR TAL1+, SIL-TAL1-
cases. In the remaining cases TAL1 expression was restricted to a minor
population (< 5%) of larger, strongly TAL1-positive cells which comprised
erythroid cells, CD34+ CD3- precursors and an unidentified TAL1+ CD45- population
which morphologically resembled monocytes/macrophages. We therefore suggest that 
appropriate diagnostic evaluation of T-ALL should include molecular detection of 
SIL-TAL1 transcripts and in situ immunocytochemical detection of TAL1 protein
expression by leukaemic blasts. This approach will enable accurate analysis of
the prognostic significance of TAL1 deregulation in T-ALL.

PMID: 9695959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Int J Hematol. 1998 Jun;67(4):369-78.

Frequent expression of human Thy-1 antigen on pre-B cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia with t(9;22).

Takahashi T(1), Mizutani M, Miwa H, Katayama N, Nishii K, Shikami M, Yamaguchi M,
Shiku H, Kamada N, Kita K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Mie University School of Medicine,
Tsu, Japan.

Thy-1 (CDw90) is a phosphatidylinositol-anchored protein, and is expressed on
human pluripotential hematopoietic stem cells. The expression pattern of this
antigen on leukemia cells is still controversial. In this study, 72 adult
patients with pre-B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (pre-B ALL) were examined
for the expression pattern of Thy-1 by using indirect immunofluorescence and
reversed transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) methods. Twelve cases
were judged positive on the basis of conventional immunophenotype criteria.
Thirteen cases showed a weak clonal shift on the fluorogram, even though their
positive percentages were from 6.7% to 14.9%. Thy-1 gene transcripts were
detected in all of the 13 cases showing a weak clonal shift. The study of
antibody binding capacity, which was calculated by the mean fluorescence
intensity of the test sample on the basis of a calibration curve using standard
beads, showed that cases with more than 150 sites/cell could be positive. Thy-1
positivity in pre-B ALL was not associated with the expression of B-cell
differentiation antigens. Thy-1 expression was significantly higher in pre-B ALL 
cases with karyotypic abnormalities than in those with normal karyotype (p =
0.0071). The t(9;22) abnormality was found in 18 of the 25 Thy-1+ cases.
Simultaneous expression of transcriptional factors, GATA-2 and SCL, was
frequently detected in the Thy-1+ cases. bcr-abl and GATA-2 are thought to play
important roles in the proliferation of immature hematopoietic cells. Indeed,
cell-cycle analysis showed that the cell population in the S/G2/M phase of the
present Thy-1+ cases was less than that in the Thy-1- cases (p = 0.001770). Our
data suggest that Thy-1 expression indicates the proliferative status of the
leukemia cells, not their phenotypic immaturity.

PMID: 9695410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Exp Med. 1998 Aug 3;188(3):439-50.

Transcription factor SCL is required for c-kit expression and c-Kit function in
hemopoietic cells.

Krosl G(1), He G, Lefrancois M, Charron F, Roméo PH, Jolicoeur P, Kirsch IR,
Nemer M, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Montreal, Montréal, Quebec H2W 1R7, Canada.

In normal hemopoietic cells that are dependent on specific growth factors for
cell survival, the expression of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor 
SCL/Tal1 correlates with that of c-Kit, the receptor for Steel factor (SF) or
stem cell factor. To address the possibility that SCL may function upstream of
c-kit, we sought to modulate endogenous SCL function in the CD34(+) hemopoietic
cell line TF-1, which requires SF, granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating
factor, or interleukin 3 for survival. Ectopic expression of an antisense SCL
cDNA (as-SCL) or a dominant negative SCL (dn-SCL) in these cells impaired SCL DNA
binding activity, and prevented the suppression of apoptosis by SF only,
indicating that SCL is required for c-Kit-dependent cell survival. Consistent
with the lack of response to SF, the level of c-kit mRNA and c-Kit protein was
significantly and specifically reduced in as-SCL- or dn-SCL- expressing cells.
c-kit mRNA, c-kit promoter activity, and the response to SF were rescued by SCL
overexpression in the antisense or dn-SCL transfectants. Furthermore, ectopic
c-kit expression in as-SCL transfectants is sufficient to restore cell survival
in response to SF. Finally, enforced SCL in the pro-B cell line Ba/F3, which is
both SCL and c-kit negative is sufficient to induce c-Kit and SF responsiveness. 
Together, these results indicate that c-kit, a gene that is essential for the
survival of primitive hemopoietic cells, is a downstream target of the
transcription factor SCL.

PMCID: PMC2212476
PMID: 9687522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. EMBO J. 1998 Jul 15;17(14):4029-45.

The SCL gene specifies haemangioblast development from early mesoderm.

Gering M(1), Rodaway AR, Göttgens B, Patient RK, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, MRC Centre, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK.

The SCL gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor that is
essential for the development of all haematopoietic lineages. SCL is also
expressed in endothelial cells, but its function is not essential for
specification of endothelial progenitors and the role of SCL in endothelial
development is obscure. We isolated the zebrafish SCL homologue and show that it 
was co-expressed in early mesoderm with markers of haematopoietic, endothelial
and pronephric progenitors. Ectopic expression of SCL mRNA in zebrafish embryos
resulted in overproduction of common haematopoietic and endothelial precursors,
perturbation of vasculogenesis and concomitant loss of pronephric duct and
somitic tissue. Notochord and neural tube formation were unaffected. These
results provide the first evidence that SCL specifies formation of
haemangioblasts, the proposed common precursor of blood and endothelial lineages.
Our data also underline the striking similarities between the role of SCL in
haematopoiesis/vasculogenesis and the function of other bHLH proteins in muscle
and neural development.

PMCID: PMC1170736
PMID: 9670018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Exp Cell Res. 1998 Jul 10;242(1):274-84.

Identification of a repressor of the differentiation of WEHI-3B D- leukemia
cells.

Li J(1), Finch RA, Xiao W, Sartorelli AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA.

The WEHI-3B D+ leukemia is a near-diploid differentiation-competent cell line
that undergoes myeloid differentiation in response to retinoic acid. WEHI-3B D-
cells, derived from WEHI-3B D+ cells, are near tetraploid and not responsive to
the differentiation-inducing properties of the retinoid. To gain information on
mechanisms that regulate the maturation of these two cell lines, several
multiploid cell lines have been established through fusion of WEHI-3B D+ and
WEHI-3B D- cells. Studies with the multiploid cell lines have shown that (a) the 
cellular growth rate decreases with increased DNA ploidy; (b) near-tetraploid
D+/+ cells, obtained by fusing WEHI-3B D+ with WEHI-3B D+ cells, remain
differentiation-competent, demonstrating that no direct relationship exists
between differentiation competency and DNA ploidy; and (c) near-hexaploid D +/-
and D -/+ cells, formed by fusion of WEHI-3B D+ with WEHI-3B D- cells, do not
respond to differentiation inducers, suggesting the inhibition of the
differentiation machinery of WEHI-3B D+ cells by components from
maturation-incompetent WEHI-3B D- cells. The scl transcription factor gene is
expressed in WEHI-3B D- cells and is absent in WEHI-3B D+ cells. Overexpression
of scl by transfection of scl cDNA in WEHI-3B D+ cells markedly decreased the
capacity of retinoic acid to induce differentiation, suggesting that scl
functions as a repressor of differentiation in WEHI-3B cell lines.

PMID: 9665825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Leukemia. 1998 Jul;12(7):1081-8.

Immunoglobulin and T cell receptor gene rearrangement patterns in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia are less mature in adults than in children: implications
for selection of PCR targets for detection of minimal residual disease.

Szczepanski T(1), Langerak AW, Wolvers-Tettero IL, Ossenkoppele GJ, Verhoef G,
Stul M, Petersen EJ, de Bruijn MA, van't Veer MB, van Dongen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Rotterdam/Erasmus University
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

In order to gain insight into immunoglobulin (Ig) and T cell receptor (TCR) gene 
rearrangements in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), we studied 48 adult
patients: 26 with precursor-B-ALL and 22 with T-ALL. Southern blotting (SB) with 
multiple DNA probes for the IGH, IGK, TCRB, TCRG, TCRD and TAL1 loci revealed
rearrangement patterns largely comparable to pediatric ALL, but several
differences were found for precursor-B-ALL patients. Firstly, adult patients
showed a lower level of oligoclonality in the IGH gene locus (five out of 26
patients; 19%) despite a comparable incidence of IGH gene rearrangements (24 out 
of 26 patients; 92%). Secondly, all detected IGK gene deletions (n = 12)
concerned rearrangements of the kappa deleting element (Kde) to Vkappa gene
segments, which represent two-thirds of the Kde rearrangements in pediatric
precursor-B-ALL and only half of the Kde rearrangements in mature B cell
leukemias. Thirdly, a striking predominance of immature Ddelta2-Ddelta3
cross-lineage recombinations was observed (seven out of 16 TCRD rearrangements;
44%), whereas more mature Vdelta2-Ddelta3 gene rearrangements occurred less
frequently (six out of 16 TCRD rearrangements; 38% vs >70% in pediatric
precursor-B-ALL). Together these data suggest that the Ig/TCR genotype of
precursor-B-ALL is more immature and more stable in adults than in children. We
also evaluated whether heteroduplex analysis of polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
products of rearranged Ig and TCR genes can be used for identification of
molecular targets for minimal residual disease (MRD) detection. Using five of the
major gene targets (IGH, IGK, TCRG, TCRD and TAL1 deletion), we compared the SB
data and heteroduplex PCR results. High concordance between the two methods
ranging from 96 to 100% was found for IGK, TCRG and TAL1 genes. The concordance
was lower for IGH (70%) and TCRD genes (90%), which may be explained by
incomplete or 'atypical' rearrangements or by translocations detectable only by
SB. Finally, the heteroduplex PCR data indicate, that MRD monitoring is possible 
in almost 90% of adult precursor-B-ALL and >95% of adult T-ALL patients.

PMID: 9665194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Cancer Res. 1998 Jun 15;58(12):2680-7.

Antiapoptotic effect of ectopic TAL1/SCL expression in a human leukemic T-cell
line.

Bernard M(1), Delabesse E, Novault S, Hermine O, Macintyre EA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique URA1461, Hospital Necker-Enfants 
Malades, Paris, France.

Aberrant expression of TAL1 occurs frequently in human T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. The effect of TAL1 expression in the T-cell lymphoid precursor,
however, remains unclear. In the current study, we have developed TAL1 stable
transfectants in a human immature T-cell lymphoid cell line. Whereas no effect on
proliferation, cell culture density, or cell cycle was detected, the
transfectants were more resistant than the parental cell line to apoptosis
induced by chemotherapeutic agents including etoposide, daunorubicin,
doxorubicin, cytosine arabinoside, methotrexate and vincristine and also to
apoptosis induced by Fas/CD95 cross-linking. This effect was independent of the
cytostatic effects of the drugs. The basic domain-deleted transfectants did not
demonstrate altered sensitivity, suggesting that DNA binding was necessary for
resistance to apoptosis. The ability to alter the response to a wide range of
cell death-inducing stimuli suggests that TAL1 acts at a late stage of the
apoptotic cascade. These data therefore provide direct evidence of an
antiapoptotic effect of ectopic TAL1 expression in response to cytotoxic agents, 
thus providing insight into its oncogenic function in T-cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia and a novel experimental model to further investigate the underlying
mechanisms. These data also have potential practical significance for cytotoxic
therapy of this disorder.

PMID: 9635597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jun 9;247(1):65-9.

Transcription factor NF-E2 is essential for the polyploidization of a human
megakaryoblastic cell line, Meg-J.

Kobayashi S(1), Teramura M, Ito K, Iwabe K, Inaba T, Mizoguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tokyo Women's Medical College, Japan.

Transcription factors regulating the process of megakaryocyte development remain 
largely unclarified. To clarify them further, we used a human megakaryoblastic
cell line, Meg-J, which showed prominant polyploidization and augmented platelet 
glycoprotein (GP) Ib expression after incubation with thrombopoietin (TPO, c-mpl 
ligand) and K252a (an indolocarbasole derivative). Under these conditions, we
analyzed the expression of the transcription factors and observed that the
expression of NF-E2 p45, but not those of GATA-1, GATA-2, Tal-1/SCL, Evi-1, and
MafK, was increased after TPO and K252a stimulation. Gel-shift assay confirmed
the enhanced binding activity to the NF-E2 site. The abolishment of NF-E2 p45
with NF-E2 antisense oligomers inhibited TPO plus K252a-induced polyploidization.
These findings suggest that NF-E2 p45 is essential for the polyploidization of
megakaryocytic cells.

PMID: 9636655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Development. 1998 Jul;125(14):2611-20.

SCL specifies hematopoietic mesoderm in Xenopus embryos.

Mead PE(1), Kelley CM, Hahn PS, Piedad O, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Children's
Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

Targeted gene disruption experiments in the mouse have demonstrated an absolute
requirement for several transcription factors for the development of
hematopoietic progenitors during embryogenesis. Disruption of the basic
helix-loop-helix gene SCL (stem cell leukemia) causes a block early in the
hematopoietic program with defects in all hematopoietic lineages. To understand
how SCL participates in the organogenesis of blood, we have isolated cDNAs
encoding Xenopus SCL and characterized the function of SCL during embryogenesis. 
We demonstrate that SCL is expressed in ventral mesoderm early in embryogenesis. 
SCL expression is induced by BMP-4, and a dominant negative BMP-4 receptor
inhibits SCL expression in the ventral region of the embryo. Expression of SCL in
either bFGF-treated animal pole explants or dorsal marginal zone explants leads
to the expression of globin protein. Furthermore, over-expression of SCL does not
alter normal dorsal-ventral patterning in the embryo, indicating that SCL acts to
specify mesoderm to a hematopoietic fate after inductive and patterning events
have occurred. We propose that SCL is both necessary and sufficient to specify
hematopoietic mesoderm, and that it has a similar role in specifying
hematopoietic cell fate as MyoD has in specifying muscle cell fate.

PMID: 9636076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Blood. 1998 May 15;91(10):3756-65.

Enhanced megakaryocyte and erythroid development from normal human CD34(+) cells:
consequence of enforced expression of SCL.

Elwood NJ(1), Zogos H, Pereira DS, Dick JE, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Rotary Bone Marrow Research Laboratories, Victoria, Australia.
elwood@wehi.edu.au

The product of the SCL gene is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor that is essential for the development of hematopoietic stem cells in both 
the embryo and the adult. However, once the stem cell compartment is established,
the function of SCL in subsequent differentiation and commitment events within
normal hematopoietic cells remains undefined. The aim of the current study was to
investigate this role using purified normal human hematopoietic CD34(+) cells. An
SCL retrovirus was used to transduce CD34(+) cells isolated from human bone
marrow, peripheral blood, and umbilical cord blood. Enforced expression of SCL
increased by a median of twofold the number of erythroid colonies, with an
increase in both colony size and the rate of hemoglobinization. Unexpectedly,
enforced expression in CD34(+) cells also significantly increased the number of
megakaryocyte colonies, but with no impact on the size of colonies. There was no 
consistent effect on the number nor size of granulocyte-macrophage (GM) colonies.
The proliferative effect of enforced SCL expression on erythroid cells was
attributed to a shortened cell cycle time; the self-renewal capacity of erythroid
or GM progenitors was unchanged, as was survival of cells within colonies. These 
results demonstrate a role for SCL in determining erythroid and megakaryocyte
differentiation from normal human hematopoietic CD34(+) cells.

PMID: 9573012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Exp Biol. 1998 Apr;201(Pt 8):1099-117.

Hemoglobins from bacteria to man: evolution of different patterns of gene
expression.

Hardison R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA
16802, USA. rch8@psu.edu

The discovery of hemoglobins in virtually all kingdoms of organisms has shown (1)
that the ancestral gene for hemoglobin is ancient, and (2) that hemoglobins can
serve additional functions besides transport of oxygen between tissues, ranging
from intracellular oxygen transport to catalysis of redox reactions. These
different functions of the hemoglobins illustrate the acquisition of new roles by
a pre-existing structural gene, which requires changes not only in the coding
regions but also in the regulatory elements of the genes. The evolution of
different regulated functions within an ancient gene family allows an examination
of the types of biosequence data that are informative for various types of
issues. Alignment of amino acid sequences is informative for the phylogenetic
relationships among the hemoglobins in bacteria, fungi, protists, plants and
animals. Although many of these diverse hemoglobins are induced by low oxygen
concentrations, to date none of the molecular mechanisms for their hypoxic
induction shows common regulatory proteins; hence, a search for matches in
non-coding DNA sequences would not be expected to be fruitful. Indeed, alignments
of non-coding DNA sequences do not reveal significant matches even between
mammalian alpha- and beta-globin gene clusters, which diverged approximately 450 
million years ago and are still expressed in a coordinated and balanced manner.
They are in very different genomic contexts that show pronounced differences in
regulatory mechanisms. The alpha-globin gene is in constitutively active
chromatin and is encompassed by a CpG island, which is a dominant determinant of 
its regulation, whereas the beta-globin gene is in A+T-rich genomic DNA.
Non-coding sequence matches are not seen between avian and mammalian beta-globin 
gene clusters, which diverged approximately 250 million years ago, despite the
fact that regulation of both gene clusters requires tissue-specific activation of
a chromatin domain regulated by a locus control region. The cis-regulatory
sequences needed for domain opening and enhancement do show common binding sites 
for transcription factors. In contrast, alignments of non-coding sequences from
species representing multiple eutherian mammalian orders, some of which diverged 
as long as 135 million years ago, are reliable predictors of novel cis-regulatory
elements, both proximal and distal to the genes. Examples include a potential
target for the hematopoietic transcription factor TAL1.

PMID: 9510523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Rinsho Ketsueki. 1998 Apr;39(4):259-66.

[TAL1 gene analysis in T-cell malignancies].

[Article in Japanese]

Kikuchi A(1), Kobayashi S, Hanada R, Moriwaki K, Yamamoto K, Fujimoto J, Kaneko
Y, Yamamori S, Miwa H, Kita K, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Saitama Children's Medical Center.

Site-specific recombination of the TAL1 gene was analyzed by Southern blotting
and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in 44 cases of childhood T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), 20 cases of childhood T-cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma (T-NHL) and 35 cases of adult T-cell malignancies. This recombination
was found in 10 (22.7%) of 44 childhood T-ALL patients, but in none of the T-NHL 
or adult T-cell malignancies. Recombination of the TAL1 gene was therefore
suggested to be specific for childhood T-ALL. The immunophenotypic features of
the 10 T-ALL patients with this recombination were CD1-, CD2+, CD4-, CD7+, CD10-,
and they had a significantly better outcome than other T-ALL cases without the
recombination. The PCR technique revealed minimal residual disease (MRD) in 2
patients. One showed persistent MRD, while in the other MRD was recognized only
at initial diagnosis. Further investigation is needed whether T-ALL with this
recombination constitutes a distinct clinical subgroup among childhood T-ALL
patients.

PMID: 9597892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 3;273(14):8278-86.

Lymphoid-specific expression of the Id3 gene in hematopoietic cells. Selective
antagonism of E2A basic helix-loop-helix protein associated with Id3-induced
differentiation of erythroleukemia cells.

Deed RW(1), Jasiok M, Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Department of Gene Regulation, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
Christie Hospital NHS Trust, Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 9BX, United Kingdom.

Accumulating evidence implicates functions of the Id family of helix-loop-helix
proteins in the regulation of cell growth and differentiation in metazoa. Within 
the mammalian hematopoietic organ, expression of the Id3 gene is restricted to
the lymphoid cell compartment. We show here that in non-lymphoid hematopoietic
cells, repression of transcription is correlated with hypermethylation of
sequences in the vicinity of the upstream regulatory region of the Id3 gene,
suggestive of a strict developmental control of expression of this gene in
lymphoid versus non-lymphoid hematopoietic cells. Enforced ectopic expression of 
Id3 in K562 erythroid progenitor cells promotes erythroid differentiation and is 
correlated with a quantitative/qualitative shift in the profile of interacting
TAL1 and E protein heterodimers that bind to a consensus E box sequence in in
vitro band shift assays, consistent with selective targeting of E2A E protein(s) 
by Id3 and suggesting a possible mechanism involving TAL1-mediated
differentiation. By using a Gal 4-VP16 two-hybrid competition assay and an E
box-dependent reporter assay, we demonstrate directly that the E2A protein E47
preferentially associates with Id3 in vivo. These observations provide a paradigm
for understanding how overlapping but distinct specificities of individual Id
proteins may constitute a developmentally regulated program underlying cell
determination in diverse lineages.

PMID: 9525934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 31;95(7):3890-5.

The T cell leukemia LIM protein Lmo2 is necessary for adult mouse hematopoiesis.

Yamada Y(1), Warren AJ, Dobson C, Forster A, Pannell R, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

The LIM-finger protein Lmo2, which is activated in T cell leukemias by
chromosomal translocations, is required for yolk sac erythropoiesis. Because Lmo2
null mutant mice die at embryonic day 9-10, it prevents an assessment of a role
in other stages of hematopoiesis. We have now studied the hematopoietic
contribution of homozygous mutant Lmo2 -/- mouse embryonic stem cells and found
that Lmo2 -/- cells do not contribute to any hematopoietic lineage in adult
chimeric mice, but reintroduction of an Lmo2-expression vector rescues the
ability of Lmo2 null embryonic stem cells to contribute to all lineages tested.
This disruption of hematopoiesis probably occurs because interaction of Lmo2
protein with factors such as Tal1/Scl is precluded. Thus, Lmo2 is necessary for
early stages of hematopoiesis, and the Lmo2 master gene encodes a protein that
has a central and crucial role in the hematopoietic development.

PMCID: PMC19933
PMID: 9520463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Gene Expr. 1998;7(1):25-38.

Induction of basic helix-loop-helix protein-containing complexes during erythroid
differentiation.

Lister JA(1), Baron MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

The involvement of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors in
erythroid differentiation and development has been established by forced
expression of the proteins TAL1 and Id1 in cultured cell lines and by targeted
disruption of the mouse TAL1 gene. To better understand the mechanism by which
bHLH proteins regulate erythropoiesis, we have investigated HLH protein-DNA
interactions in mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cells before and during chemically
induced differentiation. Three bHLH (E-box) binding activities were found to be
induced in nuclei from differentiating MEL cells. Using specific antisera, we
have demonstrated that these complexes are dimers of TAL1 and ubiquitous E
proteins. Similar complexes were detected in nuclear extracts from a human
erythroid cell line, K562, and from mouse fetal liver. All three bHLH complexes
were disrupted in vitro by Id1, a dominant-negative HLH protein that we and
others have previously shown to antagonize MEL cell differentiation. During
differentiation of an Id1-overexpressing MEL cell line, induction of a complex
containing TAL1 and E2A was not only blocked but reduced below the levels seen in
undifferentiating cells. These observations are consistent with the idea that
TAL1 and Id1 have opposing effects on erythroid differentiation and that the
level of TAL1/E2A heterodimer and/or another E protein-containing complex may
influence the decision of a cell to terminally differentiate.

PMID: 9572395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 20;273(12):7030-7.

The Tal1 oncoprotein inhibits E47-mediated transcription. Mechanism of
inhibition.

Park ST(1), Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University Medical Center, New York, New 
York 10016, USA.

The Tal1 oncogene is a class II basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor, overexpressed in as much as 60% of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
cases. Like other class II bHLH proteins, Tal1 can heterodimerize with the class 
I bHLH proteins, such as E47, and bind to a DNA recognition sequence termed E
box. Therefore, it is believed that the oncogenic capacity of Tal1 lies in its
ability, as a heterodimer with E47, to activate aberrantly a set of
"leukemogenic" genes in T cells. However, compared with E47 homodimers, Tal1/E47 
heterodimers are very poor transactivators. Thus the effect of Tal1 is actually
to inhibit E47 homodimer activity. Here we propose that the transforming
properties of Tal1 are the result of its ability to inhibit E47 activity. We
address the mechanism of Tal1 inhibition and demonstrate that Tal1/E47
heterodimers cannot activate transcription because their respective activation
domains are incompatible. Furthermore, we present data showing that Tal1 can
inhibit E47-mediated activation of the CIP1 gene. Finally, we demonstrate that
Tal1 inhibits E47 activity in leukemic T cells.

PMID: 9507011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Genes Dev. 1998 Mar 1;12(5):621-6.

SCL/Tal-1 transcription factor acts downstream of cloche to specify hematopoietic
and vascular progenitors in zebrafish.

Liao EC(1), Paw BH, Oates AC, Pratt SJ, Postlethwait JH, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics
and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

SCL/Tal-1 is a transcription factor necessary for hematopoietic stem cell
differentiation. Although SCL is also expressed in endothelial and neural
progenitors, SCL function in these cells remains unknown. In the zebrafish mutant
cloche (clo), SCL expression is nearly abolished in hematopoietic and vascular
tissues. Correspondingly, it was shown previously that clo fails to differentiate
blood and angioblasts. Genetic analysis demonstrates that the clo mutation is not
linked to the SCL locus. Forced expression of SCL in clo embryos rescues the
blood and vascular defects, suggesting that SCL acts downstream of clo to specify
hematopoietic and vascular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC316577
PMID: 9499398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 3;95(5):2429-34.

Cdkn2a, the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor encoding p16INK4a and p19ARF, is a 
candidate for the plasmacytoma susceptibility locus, Pctr1.

Zhang S(1), Ramsay ES, Mock BA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Division of Basic Sciences, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4255, USA.

Plasma cell tumor induction in mice by pristane is under multigenic control.
BALB/c mice are susceptible to tumor development; whereas DBA/2 mice are
resistant. Restriction fragment length polymorphisms between BALB/c and DBA/2 for
Cdkn2a(p16) and Cdkn2b(p15), and between BALB/c and Mus spretus for
Cdkn2c(p18(INK4c)) were used to position these loci with respect to the Pctr1
locus. These cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors mapped to a 6 cM interval
of chromosome 4 between Ifna and Tal1. C.D2-Chr 4 congenic strains harboring
DBA/2 alleles associated with the Pctr1 locus contained DBA/2 "resistant" alleles
of the CDK4/CDK6 inhibitors p16 and p15. On sequencing p16 and p18 cDNAs, two
different allelic variants within ankyrin repeat regions of p16 were found
between BALB/c and DBA/2 mice. By using an assay involving PCR amplification and 
restriction enzyme digestion, allelic variants were typed among several inbred
strains of mice. One of the variants, G232A, was specific to two inbred strains, 
BALB/cAn and ABP/Le, of mice and occurred in a highly conserved amino acid in
both human and rat p16. When tested with wild-type (DBA/2) p16, both A134C and
G232A BALB/c-specific variants of p16 were inefficient in their ability to
inhibit the activity of cyclin D2/CDK4 in kinase assays with retinoblastoma
protein, suggesting this defective, inherited allele plays an important role in
the genetic susceptibility of BALB/c mice for plasmacytoma induction and that
p16(INK4a) is a strong candidate for the Pctr1 locus.

PMCID: PMC19364
PMID: 9482902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Genes Dev. 1998 Feb 15;12(4):473-9.

Unsuspected role for the T-cell leukemia protein SCL/tal-1 in vascular
development.

Visvader JE(1), Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital and the Dana Farber
Cancer Center, Department of Pediatrics, and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The transcription factor SCL/tal-1 is essential for blood cell development.
Though it is also expressed in vascular endothelium, SCL has been considered
dispensable for vessel formation. Through transgenic rescue of hematopoietic
defects of SCL-/- embryos and analysis of chimeras generated with SCL-/- ES cells
tagged with a transgene expressed in vascular endothelial cells, we show that SCL
is essential for angiogenic remodeling of the yolk sac capillary network into
complex vitelline vessels. These findings establish a role for SCL in embryonic
angiogenesis and argue for critical functions in both embryonic blood and
vascular cells, the descendents of the presumptive hemangioblast.

PMCID: PMC316527
PMID: 9472016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Dec 9;94(25):13707-12.

The LIM-domain binding protein Ldb1 and its partner LMO2 act as negative
regulators of erythroid differentiation.

Visvader JE(1), Mao X, Fujiwara Y, Hahm K, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital and the Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The nuclear LIM domain protein LMO2, a T cell oncoprotein, is essential for
embryonic erythropoiesis. LIM-only proteins are presumed to act primarily through
protein-protein interactions. We, and others, have identified a widely expressed 
protein, Ldb1, whose C-terminal 76-residues are sufficient to mediate interaction
with LMO2. In murine erythroleukemia cells, the endogenous Lbd1 and LMO2 proteins
exist in a stable complex, whose binding affinity appears greater than that
between LMO2 and the bHLH transcription factor SCL. However, Ldb1, LMO2, and
SCL/E12 can assemble as a multiprotein complex on a consensus SCL binding site.
Like LMO2, the Ldb1 gene is expressed in fetal liver and erythroid cell lines.
Forced expression of Ldb1 in G1ER proerythroblast cells inhibited cellular
maturation, a finding compatible with the decrease in Ldb1 gene expression that
normally occurs during erythroid differentiation. Overexpression of the LMO2 gene
also inhibited erythroid differentiation. Our studies demonstrate a function for 
Ldb1 in hemopoietic cells and suggest that one role of the Ldb1/LMO2 complex is
to maintain erythroid precursors in an immature state.

PMCID: PMC28370
PMID: 9391090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cancer Res. 1998 Feb 1;58(3):562-9.

Enforced TAL-1 expression stimulates primitive, erythroid and megakaryocytic
progenitors but blocks the granulopoietic differentiation program.

Valtieri M(1), Tocci A, Gabbianelli M, Luchetti L, Masella B, Vitelli L, Botta R,
Testa U, Condorelli GL, Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
Italy.

In human adult hematopoiesis, the TAL-1 gene is up- and down-modulated in
erythropoiesis and granulopoiesis, respectively [G. L. Condorelli et al., Blood, 
86: 164-175, 19951. Here, it is shown that, in a hematopoietic progenitor cell
(HPC) unilineage differentiation culture, tal-1 is induced and then expressed, in
a sustained manner, in the megakaryopoietic lineage, whereas it is barely or not 
detected in the monocytopoietic series. We have investigated the role of enforced
tal-1 expression by retroviral transfer into HPCs [erythroid burst-forming units 
and megakaryocytic and granulomonocytic colony-forming units (CFUs)], primitive
HPCs (high proliferative potential colony-forming cells), and putative
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), assayed as long-term culture initiating cells.
TAL-1 overexpression induces an increase of erythroid burst-forming unit colony
number and size and megakaryocytic CFU colony number and an inhibition of
granulomonocytic CFU and granulocytic CFU (CFU-G) but not monocytic CFU colony
number; conversely, TAL-1 mutants with defective heterodimerizing or DNA-binding 
domains do not exert these effects at a significant level. Although it does not
affect long-term culture initiating cells, exogenous TAL-1 causes a significant
proliferative stimulus on primary and secondary high proliferative potential
colony-forming cells. In conclusion, exogenous tal-1 exerts differential and
stage- and lineage-specific effects on the HPC/HSC differentiation/proliferation 
gene programs. Thus, it induces a stimulatory effect at the level of erythroid
and megakaryocytic HPCs, while exerting a selective proliferative action on
downstream erythropoiesis. Furthermore, it induces differential effects on the
myeloid series: the partial blockade of CFU-G differentiation is possibly linked 
to the sharp down-modulation of endogenous TAL-1 expression at the level of the
CFU-G-to-granulopoietic precursor differentiation step; in contrast, no
significant effect is observed on monocytic CFU colony formation. Finally, the
stimulatory effect on primitive HPCs but not putative stem cells suggests subtle 
differences in the effects exerted by tal-1 overexpression on primitive HPC/HSC
subsets in adult life.

PMID: 9458106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Br J Haematol. 1997 Dec;99(4):901-7.

Simultaneous SIL-TAL1 RT-PCR detection of all tal(d) deletions and identification
of novel tal(d) variants.

Delabesse E(1), Bernard M, Landman-Parker J, Davi F, Leboeuf D, Varet B, Valensi 
F, Macintyre EA.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1461, Université Paris V, CHU Necker-Enfants Malades, France.

Site-specific deletions of the 5' part of the TAL1 gene (tal(d)) are among the
most frequent non-random genetic abnormalities in T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia (T-ALL). They are usually detected by PCR from DNA with several primer 
pairs or by Southern blot analysis. Since tal(d) lead to expression of a SIL-TAL1
fusion transcript, irrespective of the genomic breakpoint, we have used a single 
monoplex RT-PCR reaction to screen 55 T-ALL patients at diagnosis. SIL-TAL1
transcripts were demonstrated in 12 (22%) cases, including 7/27 (26%) children
<15 years of age, 2/8 (25%) adolescents and 2/17 (12%) adults aged >20 years.
SIL-TAL1 RT-PCR was preferrable to tal(d) DNA PCR since it allowed the
simultaneous detection of tal(d), tal(d2) and two previously undescribed tal(d)
variants. SIL-TAL1 RT-PCR screening should therefore increase the detection rate 
of tal(d) by approximately 15-20%, with an at least comparable sensitivity to
tal(d) genomic PCR, and represents a more practical and economic alternative to
multiple DNA PCRs or Southern blotting when incorporated into molecular screening
for multiple transcripts at diagnosis.

PMID: 9432040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 1997 Dec;11(6):1199-206.

Stem cell transcription factors.

Shivdasani RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The individual properties of hematopoietic stem cells, including self-renewal,
maintenance of pluripotency, and asymmetric cell division, must depend at some
level on the functions of specific transcription factors. Recently, valuable
insights into stem cell transcription factor function have emerged from targeted 
gene disruption (knockout) studies in mice. Absence of transcription factors
belonging to diverse protein families results in interference with expansion and 
differentiation of either the stem cell itself or of primitive multipotential
progenitors. The findings from these and complementary experiments provide a
framework for examining the transcription control of the earliest cellular events
in hematopoiesis.

PMID: 9443052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1997 Dec;43(6):1157-61.

The differential transforming activities of Tal1 oncoproteins.

Hsu SF(1), Cheng JT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

TAL1 (Or SCL) oncogene produces both full-length pp42 and truncated pp22
phosphoproteins in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells. To investigate the 
transforming properties of these two oncoproteins, permanent transfected NIH3T3
cell lines were generated that constitutively express either pp42 or pp22. Both
cell lines exhibited similar morphology as parental NIH3T3 cells. However, they
showed differential anchorage independent growth in soft-agar. The clonogenicity 
of pp22 expressing cells was ten folds higher than that of pp42 expressing cells.
This result might implicate the differential transformation potential of the two 
Tal1 oncoproteins.

PMID: 9442912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Dev Biol. 1997 Dec 1;192(1):17-30.

TAL1/SCL is expressed in endothelial progenitor cells/angioblasts and defines a
dorsal-to-ventral gradient of vasculogenesis.

Drake CJ(1), Brandt SJ, Trusk TC, Little CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cardiovascular Developmental Biology Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

In this study we establish that TAL1/SCL, a member of the helix-loop-helix family
of transcription factors, and an important regulator of the hematopoietic lineage
in mice, is expressed in the endothelial lineage of avians. The earliest events
of vascular development were examined using antibodies to TAL1/SCL, and the QH1
antibody, an established marker of quail endothelial cells. Analyses using double
immunofluorescence confocal microscopy show that: (i) TAL1/SCL is expressed by
both quail and chicken endothelial cells; (ii) TAL1/SCL expression precedes that 
of the QH1 epitope; and (iii) TAL1/SCL, but not QH1, expression defines a
subpopulation of primordial cells within the splanchnic mesoderm. Collectively
these data suggest that TAL1/SCL-positive/QH1-negative cells are angioblasts.
Further, using TAL1/SCL expression as a marker of the endothelial lineage, we
demonstrate that in addition to the previously described cranial-to-caudal
gradient, there is a dorsal-to-ventral progression of vasculogenesis.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9405094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Oncogene. 1997 Dec 11;15(24):2975-83.

The CD2-scl transgene alters the phenotype and frequency of T-lymphomas in N-ras 
transgenic or p53 deficient mice.

Curtis DJ(1), Robb L, Strasser A, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne
Hospital, Victoria, Australia.

Abnormal expression of SCL (TAL-1/TCL5) occurs in the majority of paediatric
cases of acute T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Unexpectedly however,
transgenic mice carrying scl coupled to the human T-cell specific CD2 enhancer
(CD2-scl) did not spontaneously develop T-cell lymphomas despite high levels of
scl expression in their thymocytes. Analogous to other transgenic models of
lymphomagenesis, it is likely that additional genetic abnormalities are required 
to cooperate with scl to trigger lymphomagenesis. Two possible candidates are the
p53 and N-ras genes which are mutated in some cases of T-ALL, particularly in
relapsed disease. Therefore, we examined lymphomagenesis in the progeny of
CD2-scl mice crossed with N-ras transgenic mice or p53 deficient. Surprisingly,
the frequency of lymphomas in the p53 nullizygous or N-ras transgenic mice was
not enhanced by expression of the scl transgene. In fact, expression of scl in
both genetic backgrounds paradoxically reduced the frequency of thymic lymphomas 
and, at least in the p53 nullizygous mice, shifted the pattern of organ
involvement to the peripheral lymphoid organs. In contrast, CD2-scl transgene
expression accelerated lymphomagenesis in p53 heterozygous mice. These data
suggest that the collaborative effects of scl with N-ras or p53 vary according to
the developmental stage of the T-cell.

PMID: 9416841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Oncogene. 1997 Nov 13;15(20):2419-28.

Transcription of the SCL gene in erythroid and CD34 positive primitive myeloid
cells is controlled by a complex network of lineage-restricted
chromatin-dependent and chromatin-independent regulatory elements.

Göttgens B(1), McLaughlin F, Bockamp EO, Fordham JL, Begley CG, Kosmopoulos K,
Elefanty AG, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, MRC Centre, UK.

The SCL gene (also known as TAL-1) encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor that is essential for the development of all haematopoietic lineages, and 
ectopic expression of which results in T cell leukaemia. SCL is expressed in
normal pluripotent haematopoietic stem cells and its expression is maintained
during differentiation along erythroid, mast and megakaryocytic lineages, but is 
extinguished following commitment to other cell types. The mechanisms responsible
for this pattern of expression are poorly understood, but are likely to
illuminate the molecular basis for stem cell development and lineage commitment. 
We have identified multiple lineage-restricted DNase I hypersensitive sites in a 
45 kb region spanning the murine SCL locus. Committed erythroid cells and CD34
positive primitive myeloid cells exhibited both shared and unique DNase I
hypersensitive sites whereas none were found in T cells. The function of each
hypersensitive site was studied using both transient and stable reporter assays
in erythroid, primitive myeloid and T cells. Multiple positive and negative
regulatory elements were characterised and found to display lineage-specificity, 
promoter-specificity and/or chromatin-dependence. These results represent the
first description of key components of a complex network of regulatory elements
controlling SCL expression during haematopoiesis.

PMID: 9395238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Blood. 1997 Sep 1;90(5):2068-74.

Expression of SCL is normal in transfusion-dependent Diamond-Blackfan anemia but 
other bHLH proteins are deficient.

Zhang MY(1), Clawson GA, Olivieri NF, Bell LL, Begley CG, Miller BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Pennsylvania State University College of
Medicine, The Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA 17033-0850, USA.

Basic helix-loop-helix proteins, which are tissue specific (SCL) or broadly
expressed (E proteins), interact positively to regulate erythroid specific genes.
Here, expression of SCL and two broadly expressed E proteins, E47 and HEB, was
high early in erythroid differentiation and declined during maturation.
Stimulation of erythroid progenitors/precursors with stem cell factor (SCF)
enhanced SCL and E protein levels, one mechanism by which SCF may increase
erythroid proliferation. Interactions between SCL and E proteins are competed by 
Id2, which binds and sequesters E proteins. Upregulation of Id2, demonstrated
here late in erythroid differentiation, may downregulate genes involved in
erythroid proliferation/differentiation. We examined expression of bHLH proteins 
in transfusion-dependent patients with Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) to determine
if these interactions are disrupted. In erythroblasts from patients, expression
of SCL protein and mRNA was normal and SCL increased in response to SCF. However,
E47 and HEB protein levels were significantly decreased. Id2 was strongly
expressed in patients. Through reduction of SCL/E protein heterodimer formation, 
abnormal levels of bHLH transcription factors may affect expression of erythroid 
specific genes, such as beta globin. Stimulation of Diamond-Blackfan cells with
SCF partially compensated for this defect, enhancing expression of E47, HEB, and 
SCL. SCF may function to increase SCL/E protein heterodimer formation, which may 
be one of the mechanisms through which SCF stimulates erythroid
proliferation/differentiation in DBA.

PMID: 9292545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Blood. 1997 Aug 15;90(4):1435-47.

Hematopoietic-specific genes are not induced during in vitro differentiation of
scl-null embryonic stem cells.

Elefanty AG(1), Robb L, Birner R, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

The helix-loop-helix transcription factor, scl, plays an essential role in
hematopoietic development. Embryos in which the gene has been disrupted fail to
develop yolk sac erythropoiesis, and scl-null embryonic stem cells do not
contribute to hematopoiesis in chimeric mice. To analyze the molecular
consequences of scl deficiency, we compared the gene expression profiles of
control (wild-type and scl-heterozygous) and scl-null embryonic stem cells
differentiated in vitro for up to 12 days. In control and scl-null embryoid
bodies the temporal expression pattern of genes associated with the formation of 
ventral mesoderm, such as Brachyury, bone morphogenetic protein-4, and flk-1, was
identical. Similarly, GATA-2, CD34, and c-kit, which are coexpressed in
endothelial and hematopoietic lineages, were expressed normally in scl-null
embryonic stem cell lines. However, hematopoietic-restricted genes, including the
transcription factors GATA-1, EKLF, and PU.1 as well as globin genes and
myeloperoxidase, were only expressed in wild-type and scl-heterozygous embryonic 
stem cells. Indirect immunofluorescence was used to confirm the observations that
GATA-1 and globins were only present in control embryoid bodies but that CD34 was
found on both control and scl-null embryoid bodies. These data extend the
previous gene ablation studies and support a model whereby scl is absolutely
required for commitment of a putative hemangioblast to the hematopoietic lineage 
but that it is dispensable for endothelial differentiation.

PMID: 9269761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Hepatology. 1997 Aug;26(2):323-9.

Cell growth and differentiation of a novel mouse Ito (fat-storing) cell line
transformed by a temperature-sensitive mutant of simian virus 40.

Kitamura Y(1), Tanigawa T, Katsumoto T, Tomita K, Wang HR, Hirai K, Ichihara K,
Terada T.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University,
Yonago, Japan.

A novel mouse Ito (fat-storing) cell line (A640-IS) was established by
transformation with a temperature-sensitive mutant of simian virus 40 (SV40) and 
the relationships between the expression of SV40 large T antigen and the growth, 
differentiation, and functions of A640-IS cells were investigated. A640-IS cells 
expressed large T antigen when cultured at 33 degrees C. At this temperature, the
cells grew actively, assumed a fibroblastic shape, and showed few Ito cell
characteristics. In contrast, when large T-antigen expression was inhibited by
culture at 39 degrees C, the cells did not grow but differentiated into Ito cells
as assessed by both morphological and functional characteristics. Expression of
the transcription factor SCL (stem cell leukemia), which plays a role in the
development and differentiation of blood cells, was observed at both 33 degrees C
and 39 degrees C, although expression was greater at 33 degrees C. Therefore,
opposite patterns of cell growth and the functions of differentiated cells
occurred at 33 degrees C and 39 degrees C in this novel Ito cell line.
Transforming growth factor beta1 stimulated A640-IS cells to produce fibronectin,
collagen type III, and laminin. This unique Ito cell line provides a useful model
to address important questions regarding the nature of these cells.

PMID: 9252141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Bioessays. 1997 Jul;19(7):607-13.

The SCL/TAL1 gene: roles in normal and malignant haematopoiesis.

Robb L(1), Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Victoria, Australia.

SCL (TAL1/TCL5) is a member of the helix-loop-helix family of transcription
factors. Originally identified because of its involvement in a tumour-specific
chromosomal translocation, overexpression of the SCL gene is the most common
molecular abnormality found in human T cell leukaemia. Transgenic models have now
formally demonstrated that overexpression of SCL within the T cell lineage is
capable of causing malignant transformation. Gene targeting experiments have
revealed that the SCL gene is crucial for the development of primitive
haematopoiesis in the mouse and is also required for the generation of all adult 
haematopoietic lineages. Biochemical studies have indicated some of the proteins 
which interact with SCL and this has refined the hypotheses concerning the
mechanisms by which SCL plays a role in leukaemogenesis and haematopoietic
development.

PMID: 9230693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 1997 Jul-Aug;14(4):349-58.

Transcription of tal-1, a putative oncogene playing an important role in
childhood T-ALL, can be shown in normal peripheral blood cells by a highly
sensitive RT-PCR assay.

Anderegg B(1), Horstmann M, Ernst M, Kabisch H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, University of Hamburg,
Germany.

Rearrangement of the tal-1 gene is the most frequent clonal marker in childhood T
cell acute leukemia. Previously, tal-1 mRNA expression has been observed only in 
cells of the erythroid, mast cell, and megakaryocytic lineages and in blastic
lymphoid cells of normal bone marrow, not in normal lymphocytes or monocytes of
the peripheral blood (PB). In this study we addressed the question of tal-1
expression during normal hematopoietic development by performing reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on RNA from PB cells of 12
healthy donors. Ten of 10 unsorted samples were RT-PCR positive for tal-1
expression. Sorted T cells and monocytes from three donors showed tal-1 RT-PCR
products. This is the first direct experimental evidence of tal-1 transcripts in 
these two normal PB cell types.

PMID: 9211539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. EMBO J. 1997 Jun 2;16(11):3145-57.

The LIM-only protein Lmo2 is a bridging molecule assembling an erythroid,
DNA-binding complex which includes the TAL1, E47, GATA-1 and Ldb1/NLI proteins.

Wadman IA(1), Osada H, Grütz GG, Agulnick AD, Westphal H, Forster A, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.

The LIM-only protein Lmo2, activated by chromosomal translocations in T-cell
leukaemias, is normally expressed in haematopoiesis. It interacts with TAL1 and
GATA-1 proteins, but the function of the interaction is unexplained. We now show 
that in erythroid cells Lmo2 forms a novel DNA-binding complex, with GATA-1, TAL1
and E2A, and the recently identified LIM-binding protein Ldb1/NLI. This
oligomeric complex binds to a unique, bipartite DNA motif comprising an E-box,
CAGGTG, followed approximately 9 bp downstream by a GATA site. In vivo assembly
of the DNA-binding complex requires interaction of all five proteins and
establishes a transcriptional transactivating complex. These data demonstrate one
function for the LIM-binding protein Ldb1 and establish a function for the
LIM-only protein Lmo2 as an obligatory component of an oligomeric, DNA-binding
complex which may play a role in haematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC1169933
PMID: 9214632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. EMBO J. 1997 May 1;16(9):2408-19.

An scl gene product lacking the transactivation domain induces bony abnormalities
and cooperates with LMO1 to generate T-cell malignancies in transgenic mice.

Aplan PD(1), Jones CA, Chervinsky DS, Zhao X, Ellsworth M, Wu C, McGuire EA,
Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263,
USA. paplan@sc3101.med.buffalo.edu

The product of the scl (also called tal-1 or TCL5) gene is a basic domain,
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor required for the development of
hematopoietic cells. Additionally, scl gene disruption and dysregulation, by
either chromosomal translocations or a site-specific interstitial deletion
whereby 5' regulatory elements of the sil gene become juxtaposed to the body of
the scl gene, is associated with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and
T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma. Here we show that an inappropriately expressed scl
protein, driven by sil regulatory elements, can cause aggressive T-cell
malignancies in collaboration with a misexpressed LMO1 protein, thus
recapitulating the situation seen in a subset of human T-cell ALL. Moreover, we
show that inappropriately expressed scl can interfere with the development of
other tissues derived from mesoderm. Lastly, we show that an scl construct
lacking the scl transactivation domain collaborates with misexpressed LMO1,
demonstrating that the scl transactivation domain is dispensable for oncogenesis,
and supporting the hypothesis that the scl gene product exerts its oncogenic
action through a dominant-negative mechanism.

PMCID: PMC1169841
PMID: 9171354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 May;17(5):2954-69.

Ectopic TAL-1/SCL expression in phenotypically normal or leukemic myeloid
precursors: proliferative and antiapoptotic effects coupled with a
differentiation blockade.

Condorelli GL(1), Tocci A, Botta R, Facchiano F, Testa U, Vitelli L, Valtieri M, 
Croce CM, Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19107-5541, USA. condore1@jeflin.tju.edu

The TAL-1 gene specifies a basic helix-loop-helix domain (bHLH) transcription
factor, which heterodimerizes with E2A gene family proteins. tal-1 protein is
abnormally expressed in the majority of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias
(T-ALLs). tal-1 is expressed and plays a significant role in normal
erythropoietic differentiation and maturation, while its expression in early
myeloid differentiation is abruptly shut off at the level of late
progenitors/early differentiated precursors (G. L. Condorelli, L. Vitelli, M.
Valtieri, I. Marta, E. Montesoro, V. Lulli, R. Baer, and C. Peschle, Blood
86:164-175, 1995). We show that in late myeloid progenitors (the phenotypically
normal murine 32D cell line) and early leukemic precursors (the human HL-60
promyelocytic leukemia cell line) ectopic tal-1 expression induces (i) a
proliferative effect under suboptimal culture conditions (i.e., low growth factor
and serum concentrations respectively), via an antiapoptotic effect in 32D cells 
or increased DNA synthesis in HL-60 cells, and (ii) a total or marked inhibitory 
effect on differentiation, respectively, on granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor-induced granulopoiesis in 32D cells or retinoic acid- and vitamin
D3-induced granulo- and monocytopoiesis in HL-60 cells. Furthermore, experiments 
with 32D temperature-sensitive p53 cells indicate that aberrant tal-1 expression 
at the permissive temperature does not exert a proliferative effect but causes
p53-mediated apoptosis, i.e., the tal-1 proliferative effect depends on the
integrity of the cell cycle checkpoints of the host cell, as observed for c-myc
and other oncogenes. tal-1 mutant experiments indicate that ectopic tal-1 effects
are mediated by both the DNA-binding and the heterodimerization domains, while
the N-terminally truncated tal-1 variant (M3) expressed in T-ALL malignant cells 
mimics the effects of the wild-type protein. Altogether, our results (i) indicate
proliferative and antidifferentiative effects of ectopic tal-1 expression, (ii)
shed light on the underlying mechanisms (i.e., requirement for the integrity of
the tal-1 bHLH domain and cell cycle checkpoints in the host cell, particularly
p53), and (iii) provide new experimental models to further investigate these
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC232147
PMID: 9111367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 25;272(17):11457-62.

Target-dependent effect of phosphorylation on the DNA binding activity of the
TAL1/SCL oncoprotein.

Prasad KS(1), Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine,Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.

Activation of the TAL1 (or SCL) gene, initially identified through its
involvement by a recurrent chromosomal translocation, is the most frequent
gain-of-function mutation recognized in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The 
translational products of this gene contain the basic domain helix-loop-helix
motif characteristic of a family of transcription factors that bind to a
consensus nucleotide sequence termed the E-box. Previous work established that
the TAL1 proteins are phosphorylated exclusively on serine and identified Ser122 
as a substrate for the mitogen-activated protein kinase ERK-1. We provide
evidence that an additional serine residue, Ser172, located in a conserved region
proximal to the DNA binding domain and sharing homology with a similarly
positioned sequence in the HLH oncoprotein LYL1, can be phosphorylated in vitro
and in vivo by the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase.
Phosphorylation was found to alter TAL1 DNA binding activity in a
target-dependent manner that was influenced by both the specific CANNTG E-box
core motif and its flanking sequences. In contrast, the ability of TAL1 to
interact with the E2A gene product E12 and its subcellular localization in
transfected COS cells were unaffected by Ser172 phosphorylation. These results
suggest this serine residue has a regulatory function and indicate a mechanism by
which phosphorylation could affect DNA binding site discrimination.

PMID: 9111058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:307-12.

LIM-only protein Lmo2 forms a protein complex with erythroid transcription factor
GATA-1.

Osada H(1), Grutz GG, Axelson H, Forster A, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Medical Research Council, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

The LIM-only protein Lmo2, originally identified as an oncogenic protein in human
T cell leukemia, is essential for erythropoiesis. A possible role for Lmo2 in
transcription during erythropoiesis has been investigated. Direct interaction of 
Lmo2 was observed in vitro and in vivo with the zinc finger transcription factor 
GATA-1, as well as with the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
Tall. By using mammalian two-hybrid analysis, E47/Tall/Lmo2/GATA-1 protein
complex could be demonstrated. Thus, a molecular link exists between three
proteins crucial for erythropoiesis. This data suggest that variations in amounts
of complexes involving Lmo2, Tall, and GATA-1 could be important for erythroid
differentiation.

PMID: 9209374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:271-2.

Chromosomal translocations and leukaemia: a role for LMO2 in T cell acute
leukaemia, in transcription and in erythropoiesis.

Rabbitts TH(1), Axelson H, Forster A, Grutz G, Lavenir I, Larson R, Osada H,
Valge-Archer V, Wadman I, Warren A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.

The LMO2 gene associated with T cell acute leukaemia has been used as an example 
of a gene activated by association with the T cell receptor genes after
chromosomal translocations. The gene is shown to encode a LIM protein which is
involved in protein interactions and during normal haematopoiesis is necessary
for erythroid development. LMO2 has been shown to cause tumours when aberrantly
expressed and to be able to heterodimerise with TAL1 to facilitate tumour
development.

PMID: 9209362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Blood. 1997 Apr 1;89(7):2276-82.

Defects of the mismatch repair gene MSH2 are implicated in the development of
murine and human lymphoblastic lymphomas and are associated with the aberrant
expression of rhombotin-2 (Lmo-2) and Tal-1 (SCL).

Lowsky R(1), DeCoteau JF, Reitmair AH, Ichinohasama R, Dong WF, Xu Y, Mak TW,
Kadin ME, Minden MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Mutations in the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) gene hMSH2 underlie a novel pathway of
tumorigenesis for some cancers of epithelial origin. Mice deficient in MSH2 are
susceptible to lymphomas but defects in this gene have not been identified in
human lymphoid tumors. To determine if the lymphomas these mice develop are
related to a particular subtype of human lymphoma we evaluated 20 clinically ill 
homozygous MSH2-/- mice ranging in age from 2 to 13 months. The murine tumors
comprised a single histopathologic entity representing the malignant counterpart 
of precursor thymic T cells and closely resembled human precursor T-cell
lymphoblastic lymphoma (LBL). Evaluation of the expression of three T-cell
malignancy associated genes showed that Rhombotin-2 (RBTN-2 also known as Lmo-2),
TAL-1 (also known as SCL), and HOX-11 were expressed in 100%, 40%, and 0% of the 
murine tumors, respectively. The MSH2-/- murine model of precursor T-cell LBL was
substantiated by the finding of a nearly identical expression profile of RBTN-2, 
TAL-1, and HOX-11 in 10 well-characterized cases of human LBL. Direct evidence
for MSH2 abnormalities in human LBL was established by sequence analysis of exon 
13 of hMSH2, which revealed coding region mutations in 2 of 10 cases. Our
findings implicate defects in the MMR system with the aberrant expression of
T-cell specific proto-oncogenes and define a new pathway of human
lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 9116269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8781-90.

Distinct mechanisms direct SCL/tal-1 expression in erythroid cells and CD34
positive primitive myeloid cells.

Bockamp EO(1), McLaughlin F, Göttgens B, Murrell AM, Elefanty AG, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, Medical Research Council
Centre, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

The SCL/tal-1 gene (hereafter designated SCL) encodes a basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor which is pivotal for the normal development of all
hematopoietic lineages and which is expressed in committed erythroid, mast, and
megakaryocytic cells as well as in hematopoietic stem cells. The molecular basis 
for expression of SCL in stem cells and its subsequent modulation during lineage 
commitment is of fundamental importance for understanding how early "decisions"
are made during hematopoiesis. We now compare the activity of SCL promoters 1a
and 1b in erythroid cells and in CD34 positive primitive myeloid cells. SCL mRNA 
expression in CD34 positive myeloid cells did not require GATA-1. Promoter 1a
activity was weak or absent in CD34 positive myeloid cells and appeared to
correlate with the presence or absence of low levels of GATA-1. However, promoter
1b, which was silent in committed erythroid cells, was strongly active in
transient assays using CD34 positive myeloid cells, and functioned in a
GATA-independent manner. Interestingly, RNase protection assays demonstrated that
endogenous promoter 1b was active in both erythroid and CD34 positive myeloid
cells. These results demonstrate that fundamentally different mechanisms regulate
the SCL promoter region in committed erythroid cells and in CD34 positive myeloid
cells. Moreover these observations suggest that in erythroid, but not in CD34
positive myeloid cells, promoter 1b required integration in chromatin and/or
additional sequences for its activity. Stable transfection experiments showed
that both core promoters were silent following integration in erythroid or CD34
positive myeloid cells. Our data therefore indicate that additional regulatory
elements were necessary for both SCL promoters to overcome chromatin-mediated
repression.

PMID: 9079714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Pathol. 1997 Mar;181(3):311-5.

TAL-1 protein expression in vascular lesions.

Chetty R(1), Dada MA, Boshoff CH, Comley MA, Biddolph SC, Schneider JW, Mason DY,
Pulford KA, Gatter KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Pathology, University of Natal, Durban, South Africa.
chettyr@med.und.ac.za

The distribution of TAL-1 protein, an important vascular promoter in mice, has
been examined immunohistochemically in a range of human vascular lesions and
normal tissues. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded vascular lesions including
granulation tissue, haemangiomas, Kaposi's sarcomas, spindle cell
haemangioendotheliomas, and angiosarcomas, were examined using a monoclonal
antibody to recombinant TAL-1. Endothelial cells in all lesions gave positive
immunostaining of variable intensity. Granulation tissue and spindle cell areas
of the vascular tumours gave the strongest staining (nuclear and cytoplasmic).
The better-differentiated endothelial cells within the tumours and resident
well-formed vessels were less positive and some cells were in fact negative. The 
malignant endothelial cells in angiosarcomas showed less intense positive
staining than KS cells. This study has shown TAL-1 protein expression in a range 
of reactive, benign, and malignant vascular lesions. Protein expression appears
to be stronger in the spindle cell areas, perhaps reflecting greater expression
in less-differentiated endothelial cells.

PMID: 9155718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cancer Gene Ther. 1997 Mar-Apr;4(2):84-90.

Effects of anti-tal-1 oligodeoxynucleotides in T-ALL cell lines.

Anderegg B(1), Horstmann M, Kabisch H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Clinical Center for
the University of Hamburg, Germany. anderegg@uke.uni-hamburg.de

Rearrangement of the gene tal-1 leads to transcriptional dysregulation and
contributes to the formation of childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Therefore, we tried to interfere with the transcription of the SIL/tal-1 fusion
gene, the most common form of aberrant tal-1, by treatment with antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs). The potential of two different strategies was
investigated, one targeting the cell line specific SIL/tal-1 fusion region, the
other using an ODN complementary to tal-1 sequence downstream of the region not
affected by any of the known types of tal-1 rearrangement. With both approaches a
single-dose application of 3 mumol of ODN led to a significant antiproliferative 
effect of a about 25-60% in two T-ALL cell lines characterized by the SIL/tal-1
fusion gene. Investigation of the tal-1 mRNA level by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction was in concordance with these results: In
both cell lines clearly less of the tal-1-specific fragment was generated after
incubation with the antisense ODN tal-1 common than in the control experiments
with a mismatched ODN or no ODN at all. Neither the antiproliferation antisense
effect nor the downregulation of the steady state tal-1 mRNA level was observed
in control cell lines bearing wildtype tal-1.

PMID: 9080116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Leukemia. 1997 Mar;11(3):359-63.

Frequent clonal loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the chromosomal region 1p32
occurs in childhood T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) carrying
rearrangements of the TAL1 gene.

Iolascon A(1), Faienza MF, Coppola B, Moretti A, Basso G, Amaru R, Viganò G,
Biondi A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biomedicina dell'Eta Evolutiva Universita di Bari, Italy.

Deletions and chromosomal translocations involving the 1p32 region, are
frequently observed in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). One of the
most common genetic changes is the breakage of the TAL1 gene, which was
originally described to be involved in the T-ALL carrying the t(1;14)(p32;q11)
translocation. Site-specific deletions in the TAL1 gene are reported to occur in 
12-26% of T-ALL with apparently normal karyotype. In order to investigate the
presence of other subkaryotypic abnormalities involving the 1p32 chromosomal
region, where TAL1 gene is mapped, we assessed losses of heterozygosity (LOH) for
microsatellite markers, in a series of 22 children with T-ALL. Microsatellite
polymorphic markers flanking the TAL1 gene (D1S211, D1S197, D1S200 and D1S220)
were analyzed to detect LOH. Eight patients displayed LOH for at least one of the
markers, suggesting the existence of hot spot regions at the short arm of
chromosome 1. Two out of 11 with no molecular evidences of TAL1 gene involvement,
compared to six out of 11 in the group of TAL1 rearranged gene, showed LOH at
1p32. TAL1 gene rearrangements and clonal LOH may represent two independent
events, but could be related to the same causes. For the first time this study
provides evidences that LOH at 1p32 region, occurs in T-ALL in the same region
known to be involved in chromosomal deletions and translocations. LOH mapping may
help to define the location of a new putative tumor-suppressor gene implicated in
the transformation and progression of children T-ALL.

PMID: 9067574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Blood. 1997 Feb 15;89(4):1154-64.

Initiation of murine embryonic erythropoiesis: a spatial analysis.

Silver L(1), Palis J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics and Cancer
Center, NY 14642, USA.

Hematopoiesis in the mouse conceptus begins in the visceral yolk (VYS), with
primitive erythroblasts first evident in blood islands at the headfold stage
(E8.0). VYS erythropoiesis is decreased or abrogated by targeted disruption of
the hematopoietic transcription factors tal-1, rbtn2, GATA-1, and GATA-2. To
better understand the potential roles of these genes, and to trace the initial
temporal and spatial development of mammalian embryonic hematopoiesis, we
examined their expression patterns, and that of betaH1-globin, in normal mouse
conceptuses by means of in situ hybridization. Attention was focused on the
36-hour period from mid-primitive streak to early somite stages (E7.25 to E8.5), 
when the conceptus undergoes rapid morphologic changes with formation of the yolk
sac and blood islands. Each of these genes was expressed in extraembryonic
mesoderm, from which blood islands are derived. This VYS expression occurred in a
defined temporal sequence: tal-1 and rbtn2 transcripts were detected earlier than
the others, followed by GATA-2 and GATA-1, and then by betaH1-globin. Transcripts
for all of these genes were present in VYS mesoderm cell masses at the neural
plate stage (E7.5), indicating commitment of these cells to the erythroid lineage
before the appearance of morphologically recognizable erythroblasts. By early
somite stages (E8.5), GATA-2 mRNA expression is downregulated in VYS blood
islands as terminal primitive erythroid differentiation proceeds. We conclude
that primitive mammalian erythropoiesis arises during gastrulation through the
ordered temporal expression of tal-1, rbtn2, GATA2, and GATA-1 in a subset of
extraembryonic mesoderm cells. During the stages analyzed, tal-1 and rbtn2
expression was also present in posterior embryonic mesoderm, while GATA-1 and
GATA-2 expression was evident in extraembryonic tissues of ectodermal origin.

PMID: 9028937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 14;272(7):4576-81.

Transcriptional activity of TAL1 in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL)
requires RBTN1 or -2 and induces TALLA1, a highly specific tumor marker of T-ALL.

Ono Y(1), Fukuhara N, Yoshie O.

Author information: 
(1)Shionogi Institute for Medical Science, 2-5-1 Mishima, Settsu-shi, Osaka 566, 
Japan.

TAL1, which is frequently activated in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL), encodes lineage-specific basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins that
bind specifically to E-box DNA motif upon dimerization with ubiquitous basic
helix-loop-helix proteins E47 or E12. RBTN1 and RBTN2, also frequently activated 
in T-ALL, encode proteins only with tandem cysteine-rich LIM domains. We found
that aberrant expression of TAL1 detected in 11 out of 14 T-ALL cell lines was
invariably accompanied by that of either RBTN1 or RBTN2. Forced expression of
TAL1 together with RBTN1 or RBTN2, but not TAL1 alone, strongly induced
artificial reporter genes in a TAL1/RBTN-negative T-ALL cell line, HPB-ALL. Such 
collaborative transcriptional activity of TAL1 and RBTN was not, however,
observed in non-T cell lines, suggesting further involvement of some T
cell-specific cofactors. In this context, we carried out preliminary evaluation
of a potential role of the T cell-specific GATA-binding protein, GATA3, in the
transcriptional activity of TAL1 and RBTN. We also showed that coexpression of
TAL1 and RBTN1 in HPB-ALL strongly induced TALLA1, a highly specific T-ALL marker
whose positivity correlated 100% with ectopic expression of TAL1 among various
T-ALL cell lines. Collectively, ectopic TAL1 and RBTN1 or -2, together with some 
endogenous T cell-specific cofactors like GATA3, constitute a highly
collaborative set of transcription factors whose aberrant activity in T cells may
lead to leukemogenesis by modulating expression of downstream genes such as
TALLA1.

PMID: 9020185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 3;272(1):369-78.

Conserved E boxes function as part of the enhancer in hypersensitive site 2 of
the beta-globin locus control region. Role of basic helix-loop-helix proteins.

Elnitski L(1), Miller W, Hardison R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park
16802, USA.

The human beta-globin gene cluster is regulated in part by a distal locus control
region that is required for opening a chromatin domain in erythroid cells and
enhancing expression of the beta-like globin genes at the correct developmental
stages. One part of the locus control region, called hypersensitive site 2 (HS2),
functions as a strong enhancer. Matches to the consensus binding sites for basic 
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins (E boxes) are well conserved within the HS2
core. We show that mutations of the HS2 core that alter an invariant E box cause 
a 3.5-fold reduction in enhancement of expression of an epsilon-globin reporter
gene in transiently transfected K562 cells, both before and after induction.
Mutations of the HS2 core that alter a less-highly conserved E box cause a more
modest reduction in enhancement. Footprint analysis shows binding of erythroid
nuclear proteins in vitro to the invariant E box as well as an adjacent CAC/GTG
box. Probes containing the E box regions form sequence-specific complexes with
proteins from both K562 and MEL nuclear extracts; these are disrupted by the same
mutations that decrease enhancement. Some of these latter complexes contain known
bHLH proteins, as revealed by specific loss of individual complexes when treated 
with antibodies against TAL1 and USF. Interaction between the E boxes and the
bHLH proteins, as well as other binding proteins, could account for the role of
these sites in enhancement by HS2.

PMID: 8995271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Chin J Biotechnol. 1997;13(4):225-31.

Effect on product formation in recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains
expressing different levels of xylose metabolic genes.

Bao X(1), Gao D, Qu Y, Wang Z, Walfridssion M, Hahn-Hagerbal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology,
Shandong University, Jinan, China.

The XYL1 and XYL2 genes from Pichia stipitis encoding xylose reductase (XR) and
xylilitol dehydrogenase (XDH), respectively, were transformed into Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. These two genes were placed in different directions under the control
of the alcohol dehydrogenase I (ADHI) and phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) promoters
and inserted into the E. coli-yeast shuttle plasmid YEp24. Different recombinant 
S. cerevisiae strains were constructed with different specific activities of XR
and XDH. The highest XR or XDH activities were obtained when the expressed gene
was controlled by the PGK promoter and located downstream after the ADHI
promoter-gene-terminator sequence. The XR/XDH ratio (ratio of specific enzyme
activities of XR and XDH) in these recombinant S. cerevisiae strains varied from 
17.5 to 0.06. In order to enhance xylose utilization, in the XYL1, XYL2
containing S. cerevisiae strains, the native TKL1 gene encoding transketolase and
the TALI gene encoding transaldolase were also overexpressed, which showed
considerably good growth on the xylose plate. Fermentation of the recombinant S. 
cerevisiae strains containing XYL1, XYL2, TKL1, and TAL1 were studied with
mixtures of glucose and xylose. The strain with XR/XDH ratio of 0.06 consumed
3.25 g/L xylose and formed no xylitol and less glycerol and acetic acid, but more
ethanol compared with the strains with a higher XR/XDH ratio.

PMID: 9631257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1997;220:55-65.

Transcription factors of the bHLH and LIM families: synergistic mediators of T
cell acute leukemia?

Baer R(1), Hwang LY, Bash RO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, UT Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas
75235-9140, USA.

PMID: 9103675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Protein Sci. 1997 Jan;6(1):175-84.

Heteronuclear (1H, 13C, 15N) NMR assignments and secondary structure of the basic
region-helix-loop-helix domain of E47.

Fairman R(1), Beran-Steed RK, Handel TM.

Author information: 
(1)DuPont Merck Pharmaceutical Company, Wilmington, Delaware 19880-0500, USA.

E47 is an immunoglobulin enhancer DNA-binding protein that contains a basic
region-helix-loop-helix (b/HLH) domain. This structural motif defines a class of 
transcription factors that are central to the developmental regulation of many
tissues. Its function is to provide a dimerization interface through the
formation of a parallel four-helix bundle, resulting in the juxtaposition of two 
basic DNA-recognition alpha-helices that control sequence-specific DNA-binding.
In order to gain insight into the biophysical nature of b/HLH domains, we have
initiated structural studies of the E47 homodimer by NMR. Sequence-specific
resonance assignments have been obtained using a combination of heteronuclear
double- and triple-resonance NMR experiments. The secondary structure was
deducted from characteristic patterns of NOEs, 13C (alpha)/beta chemical shifts, 
and measurements of 3JHNH alpha scalar couplings. Except for the basic region
recognition helix, the secondary structural elements of the E47 homodimer are
preserved in the absence DNA when compared with the co-crystal structure of E47
bound to DNA (Ellenberger T, Fass D, Arnaud M, Harrison SC, 1994, Genes & Dev
8:970-980). As expected, the DNA-binding helix is largely unstructured, but does 
show evidence of nascent helix formation. The HLH region of E47 is structured,
but highly dynamic as judged by the rapid exchange of backbone hydrogen atoms and
the relatively weak intensities of many of the NOEs defining the dimerization
helices. This dynamic nature may be relevant to the ability of E47 both to
homodimerize and to heterodimerize with MyoD, Id, and Tal1.

PMCID: PMC2143521
PMID: 9007990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):32421-9.

A novel DNA-binding protein, HS2NF5, interacts with a functionally important
sequence of the human beta-globin locus control region.

Lam LT(1), Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA. ehbresni@facstaff.wisc.edu

We have identified a previously unreported DNA-binding protein, HS2NF5, which
interacts with a conserved sequence within hypersensitive site II (HS2) of the
human beta-globin locus control region. A minimal DNA recognition sequence of
TGTTCTCA was defined. The binding site for HS2NF5 overlaps an E box, which is a
preferred recognition site in vitro for the erythroid-specific transcription
factor TAL1 (SCL). No evidence for TAL1 (SCL) binding was found using nuclear
extracts from K562 and MEL erythroleukemia cells. Mutations that prevent HS2NF5
binding reduce the enhancer activity of HS2 by 40 and 38% in transient and stable
transfection assays, respectively. Analytical gel filtration and velocity
centrifugation studies revealed a Stokes' radius of 23.0 A and an s20,w of 3.45
for HS2NF5. Based on these parameters, a native molecular mass of 34,679 Da was
calculated. An ultraviolet light cross-linking assay was used to cross-link
HS2NF5 to a minimal oligonucleotide. The cross-linking results are consistent
with a protein of 33,396-38,309 Da. We propose that HS2NF5 is a novel DNA-binding
protein that modulates the transcriptional activation property of the beta-globin
locus control region.

PMID: 8943307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 6;271(49):31463-9.

E-box sequence and context-dependent TAL1/SCL modulation of basic
helix-loop-helix protein-mediated transcriptional activation.

Nielsen AL(1), Norby PL, Pedersen FS, Jorgensen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Aarhus University, C. F. Mollers Allé 130,
DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark. poul@biobase.dk

TAL1/SCL is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) oncoprotein that is expressed in
several cell lines including many hematolymphoid cells, but not in T- and
B-lineage cells. The TAL1 gene was originally discovered as being
transcriptionally activated by chromosomal rearrangements in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Here we have shown that TAL1 and the ubiquitously
expressed murine bHLH transcription factor ALF1 formed heterodimers that,
compared with ALF1 homodimers, had a more restricted E-box specificity and bound 
preferentially to the glucocorticoid-responsive E-box (Egre) motif (AACAGATGGT). 
Overexpression of the dominant inhibitory HLH protein Id1 in NIH3T3 cells reduced
the transcriptional activity mediated by ALF1 homodimers, whereas the
transcriptional activity mediated by TAL1/ALF1 heterodimers was resistant to Id
overexpression. Our results show that ALF1 may serve as a dimerization partner
for the bHLH oncoprotein TAL1 and form a complex with a distinctive DNA binding
property. These findings support the hypothesis that the leukemic characteristics
of the TAL1 oncoprotein could be mediated by activation of a set of target genes 
as heterodimeric complexes with ubiquitously expressed bHLH transcription factors
such as ALF1 and that a principal role of TAL1 might be to neutralize an
Id-mediated inactivation.

PMID: 8940159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Cancer Res. 1996 Nov 15;56(22):5113-9.

T-cell-directed TAL-1 expression induces T-cell malignancies in transgenic mice.

Condorelli GL(1), Facchiano F, Valtieri M, Proietti E, Vitelli L, Lulli V,
Huebner K, Peschle C, Croce CM.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19107, USA.

The TAL-1 gene specifies for a basic domain-helix-loop-helix protein, which is
involved in the control of normal hematopoiesis. In human pathology, the TAL-1
gene product is expressed in a high percentage of T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemias in the pediatric age range; however, it has not been established
whether the expression has a causal role in oncogenesis. In this report, we
describe the phenotype of mouse transgenic lines obtained by inducing tal-1
protein expression in lymphoid tissues using the LCK promoter. The survival rate 
of tal-1 transgenic animals was much lower as compared with control mice.
Histopathological analysis revealed lymphomas of T-cell type, often comprising a 
minor B-cell component. Some mice showed marked splenic lymphocyte depletion.
Primary lymphocyte cultures showed partial independence from exogenous growth
stimuli and increased resistance to low-serum apoptosis. To further unravel the
tal-1 oncogenic potential, a strain of tal-1 transgenic mice was crossbred with
p53-/- mice; the survival rate in these animals was reduced by more than one-half
when compared with that of tal-1 mice, and histopathological analysis revealed
exclusively T-cell lymphomas. These data indicate that TAL-1, expressed in T
cells, is per se a potent oncogene, which may exert a key leukemogenetic role in 
the majority of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias.

PMID: 8912842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Nature. 1996 Oct 17;383(6601):575, 577.

Haematopoiesis. Master regulator unmasked.

Green T.

PMID: 8857528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. EMBO J. 1996 Oct 1;15(19):5160-6.

Tal-1 induces T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia accelerated by casein kinase
IIalpha.

Kelliher MA(1), Seldin DC, Leder P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Ectopic activation of the TAL-1 gene in T lymphocytes occurs in the majority of
cases of human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), yet experiments to
date have failed to demonstrate a direct transforming capability for tal-1. The
tal-1 gene product is a serine phosphoprotein and basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factor known to regulate embryonic hematopoiesis. We have
established a transgenic mouse model in which tal-1 mis-expression in the thymus 
results in the development of clonal T cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.
Thus, overexpression of tal-1 alone can be transforming, verifying its pathogenic
role in human T-ALL. In addition, leukemogenesis is accelerated dramatically by
transgenic co-expression of tal-1 and the catalytic subunit of casein kinase
IIalpha (CKIIalpha), a serine/threonine protein kinase known to modulate the
activity of other bHLH transcription factors. Although tal-1 is a substrate for
CKII, the synergy of the tal-1 and CKIIalpha transgenes appears to be indirect,
perhaps mediated through the E protein heterodimeric partners of tal-1. These
studies prove that dysregulated tal-1 is oncogenic, providing a direct molecular 
explanation for the malignancies associated with TAL-1 activation in human T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC452259
PMID: 8895560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. EMBO J. 1996 Aug 15;15(16):4123-9.

The scl gene product is required for the generation of all hematopoietic lineages
in the adult mouse.

Robb L(1), Elwood NJ, Elefanty AG, Köntgen F, Li R, Barnett LD, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Homozygosity for a null mutation in the scl gene causes mid-gestational embryonic
lethality in the mouse due to failure of development of primitive hematopoiesis. 
Whilst this observation established the role of the scl gene product in primitive
hematopoiesis, the death of the scl null embryos precluded analysis of the role
of scl in later hematopoietic development. To address this question, we created
embryonic stem cell lines with a homozygous null mutation of the scl gene
(scl-/-) and used these lines to derive chimeric mice. Analysis of the chimeric
mice demonstrates that the scl-/- embryonic stem cells make a substantial
contribution to all non-hematopoietic tissues but do not contribute to any
hematopoietic lineage. These observations reveal a crucial role for the scl gene 
product in definitive hematopoiesis. In addition, in vitro differentiation assays
with scl-/- embryonic stem cells showed that the scl gene product was also
required for formation of hematopoietic cells in this system.

PMCID: PMC452135
PMID: 8861941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Oncogene. 1996 Aug 1;13(3):617-24.

The TAL1/Scl basic helix-loop-helix protein blocks myogenic differentiation and
E-box dependent transactivation.

Hofmann TJ(1), Cole MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, New Jersey 08544-1014, 
USA.

The TAL1 gene is transcriptionally activated by chromosomal translocation in the 
most common genetic lesion associated with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
TAL1 encodes a bHLH protein that exhibits sequence-specific DNA binding activity 
when it forms dimers with another bHLH protein such as E2A. We show that ectopic 
expression of TAL1 blocks the ability of the bHLH gene myogenin to induce myotube
differentiation in C3H10T1/2 cells. Cotransfection of TAL1 with either myogenin
or E2-5 suppresses the transcriptional activation function of each gene on its
respective reporter constructs. TAL1 was as effective as Id in both
transcriptional suppression and inhibition of differentiation. Deletion of the
C-terminal domain of TAL1 reduces or eliminates its ability to suppress
transcription while preserving the bHLH domain that determines the
sequence-specificity of DNA binding. These data suggest that the C-terminal
domain of TAL1 may directly mask the transactivation domain of E2A-related
proteins. Since E2A-related genes are involved in lymphocyte differentiation, the
dominant inhibition of E2A-related proteins may be the primary mechanism by which
the TAL1 oncogene promotes leukemia.

PMID: 8760303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cell. 1996 Jul 12;86(1):47-57.

The T cell leukemia oncoprotein SCL/tal-1 is essential for development of all
hematopoietic lineages.

Porcher C(1), Swat W, Rockwell K, Fujiwara Y, Alt FW, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Childrens Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

The T cell leukemia oncoprotein SCL/tal-1, a basic-helix-loop-helix transcription
factor, is required for production of embryonic red blood cells in the mouse yolk
sac. To define roles in other lineages, we studied the hematopoietic potential of
homozygous mutant SCL/tal-1 -/- embryonic stem cells upon in vitro
differentiation and in vivo in chimeric mice. Here we show that in the absence of
SCL/tal-1, hematopoiesis, Including the generation of red cells, myeloid cells,
megakaryocytes, mast cells, and both T and B lymphoid cells, is undetectable.
These findings suggest that SCL/tal-1 functions very early in hematopoietic
development, either in specification of ventral mesoderm to a blood cell fate, or
in formation or maintenance of immature progenitors.

PMID: 8689686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Oncogene. 1996 Jun 6;12(11):2343-50.

Association of a novel GTP binding protein, DRG, with TAL oncogenic proteins.

Mahajan MA(1), Park ST, Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University Medical Center, New York, NY
10016, USA.

TAL1 is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein involved in hematopoietic
development. In T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemic cells, TAL1 is aberrantly
overexpressed and is thought to contribute to oncogenesis. To identify proteins
that interact with TAL1 in mediating leukemogenesis, we used TAL1 as a bait in a 
two-hybrid interaction screen, and isolated a cDNA clone that encodes a unique
GTP binding protein, DRG. The interaction between DRG and TAL1 was confirmed both
in vitro and in vivo. DRG was also shown to bind in vitro to two TAL1-related
proteins, TAL2 and Lyl1. Mutational analyses showed that the HLH domain of TAL1
was necessary and sufficient for its interaction with the C-terminus of DRG.
Furthermore, while DRG and E47 compete to interact with TAL1, TAL1 binds to DRG
and E47 in a mutually exclusive manner. In rat embryonic fibroblast
transformation assays, DRG stimulated the cotransforming activity of c-myc and
ras. Based on these results, DRG appears to be a potential target for TAL-like
oncoproteins.

PMID: 8649774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1996 Jun;28(6):609-18.

The helix-loop-helix gene SCL: implicated in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
and in normal haematopoietic development.

Robb L(1), Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

The SCL gene encodes a member of the helix-loop-helix family of transcription
factors and was first identified through its involvement in a chromosomal
translocation in a human leukaemic cell line. SCL is now recognized to be
aberrantly expressed in most human T-cell leukaemias. In around 25% of cases SCL 
overexpression is associated with identifiable chromosomal abnormalities but in
other cases the mechanism of ectopic expression has not yet been identified. SCL 
is normally expressed in haematopoietic progenitor cells, erythroid cells, mast
cells and megakaryocytes. Gene delivery experiments using haematopoietic cell
lines and the recent creation of mice with a null mutation of the SCL gene have
demonstrated that SCL plays a crucial role in haematopoietic commitment and
differentiation.

PMID: 8673726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Blood. 1996 Mar 15;87(6):2180-6.

Multiple tumor-suppressor gene 1 inactivation is the most frequent genetic
alteration in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Cayuela JM(1), Madani A, Sanhes L, Stern MH, Sigaux F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Hematology, Centre Hayem, Hopital Saint Louis, Paris, 
France.

No constant genetic alteration has yet been unravelled in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), and, to date, the most frequent alteration, the
SIL-TAL1 deletion, is found in approximately 20% of cases. Recently, two genes
have been identified, the multiple tumor-suppressor gene 1 (MTS1) and multiple
tumor-suppressor gene 2 (MTS2), whose products inhibit cell cycle progression. A 
characterization of the MTS locus organization allowed to determine the incidence
of MTS1 and MTS2 inactivation in T-ALL. MTS1 and MTS2 configurations were
determined by Southern blotting using 8 probes in 59 patients with T-ALL (40
children and 19 adults). Biallelic MTS1 inactivation by deletions and/or
rearrangements was observed in 45 cases (76%). Monoallelic alterations were found
in 6 cases (10%). The second MTS1 allele was studied in the 4 cases with
available material. A point mutation was found in 2 cases. The lack of MTS1 mRNA 
expression was observed by Northern blot analysis in a third case. A normal
single-strand conformation polymorphism pattern of MTS1 exons 1alpha and 2 was
found and MTS1 RNA was detected in the fourth case, but a rearrangement occurring
5' to MTS1 exon 1 alpha deleting MTS1 exon 1Beta was documented. One case
presented a complex rearrangement. Germline configuration for MTS1 and MTS2 was
found in only 7 cases. The localization of the 17 breakpoints occurring in the
MTS locus were determined. Ten of them (59%) are clustered in a 6-kb region
located 5 kb downstream to the newly identified MTS1 exon 1Beta. No rearrangement
disrupting MTS2 was detected and more rearrangements spared MTS2 than MTS1
(P<.01). MTS1 but not MTS2 RNA was detected by Northern blotting in the human
thymus. These data strongly suggest that MTS1 is the functional target of
rearrangements in T-ALL. MTS1 inactivation, observed in at least 80% of T-ALL, is
the most consistent genetic defect found in this disease to date.

PMID: 8630377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Pathol. 1996 Mar;178(3):311-5.

An immunohistochemical study of TAL-1 protein expression in leukaemias and
lymphomas with a novel monoclonal antibody, 2TL 242.

Chetty R(1), Pulford K, Jones M, Mathieu-Mahul D, Close P, Hussein S, Pallesen G,
Ralfkiaer E, Stein H, Gatter K, Mason D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Science, University of Oxford, U.K.

Fifty formalin fixed, paraffin-embedded cases of T-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia 
(T-ALL) from 12 bone marrow trephines and 38 lymph nodes were stained with a new 
monoclonal antibody, 2TL 242, raised against recombinant TAL1 protein. The
antibody recognizes TAL-1 polypeptides of molecular weight 39 and 41 kD (full
length). In addition, a variety of other leukaemias and lymphomas were also
stained with 2TL 242. Twenty-four of the 50 cases of T-ALL showed nuclear
positivity, ranging from 10 to 90 per cent of leukaemic cells. A positive
staining reaction was nuclear and stippled in pattern. Nuclear staining was not
seen in any other type of leukaemia or lymphoma. Five cases of follicular
lymphoma showed diffuse cytoplasmic staining of variable intensity. Although some
background staining is obtained with this antibody, positive nuclear staining is 
easily distinguishable. This monoclonal antibody has a potential role in primary 
diagnosis and in the detection of minimal residual disease in T-ALL.

PMID: 8778337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. EMBO J. 1996 Mar 1;15(5):1021-7.

Protein dimerization between Lmo2 (Rbtn2) and Tal1 alters thymocyte development
and potentiates T cell tumorigenesis in transgenic mice.

Larson RC(1), Lavenir I, Larson TA, Baer R, Warren AJ, Wadman I, Nottage K,
Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.

The LMO2 and TAL1 genes were first identified via chromosomal translocations and 
later found to encode proteins that interact during normal erythroid development.
Some T cell leukaemia patients have chromosomal abnormalities involving both
genes, implying that LMO2 and TAL1 act synergistically to promote tumorigenesis
after their inappropriate co-expression. To test this hypothesis, transgenic mice
were made which co-express Lmo2 and Tal1 genes in T cells. Dimers of Lmo2 and
Tal1 proteins were formed in thymocytes of double but not single transgenic mice.
Furthermore, thymuses of double transgenic mice were almost completely populated 
by immature T cells from birth, and these mice develop T cell tumours
approximately 3 months earlier than those with only the Lmo2 transgene. Thus
interaction between these two proteins can alter T cell development and
potentiate tumorigenesis. The data also provide formal proof that TAL1 is an
oncogene, apparently acting as a tumour promoter in this system.

PMCID: PMC449997
PMID: 8605871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Blood. 1996 Jan 1;87(1):102-11.

Opposing effects of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor SCL on
erythroid and monocytic differentiation.

Hoang T(1), Paradis E, Brady G, Billia F, Nakahara K, Iscove NN, Kirsch IR.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Montreal, Department of Pharmacology,
University of Montreal, Canada.

The SCL gene (also called Tal-1 or TCL5) was identified because of its
association with chromosomal translocations in childhood T-cell lymphoid
leukemias. SCL codes for a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factor that can function
as a transcriptional activator or repressor. In the adult, SCL expression is
restricted to hematopoietic cells and tissues, but its function in the process of
lineage commitment is unknown. The present study was designed to address the role
of SCL in hematopoietic cell differentiation. SCL expression was determined in
primary hematopoietic cells through the screening of cDNA samples obtained by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) from single cells at
different stages of differentiation. SCL RNA expression was highest in
bipotential and committed erythroid precursors and diminished with subsequent
maturation to proerythroblasts and normoblasts. In contrast, SCL mRNA was low to 
undetectable in precursors of granulocytes and monocytes and their maturing
progeny. The same pattern of expression was observed after erythroid or monocytic
differentiation of a bipotent cell line, TF-1, in that SCL mRNA levels remained
elevated during erythroid differentiation and were downregulated with monocytic
differentiation. Accordingly, TF-1 was chosen as a model to investigate the
functional significance of this divergent pattern of SCL expression in the two
lineages. Four independent clones stably transfected with an SCL expression
vector exhibited enhanced spontaneous and delta-aminolevulinic acid-induced
erythroid differentiation as measured by glycophorin expression and
hemoglobinization, consistent with the view that SCL is a positive regulator of
erythroid differentiation. Furthermore, constitutive SCL expression interfered
with monocytic differentiation, as assessed by the generation of adherent cells
and the expression of Fc gamma RII in response to TPA. These results suggest that
the downregulation of SCL may be required for monocytic differentiation.

PMID: 8547631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Biosci Rep. 1995 Dec;15(6):463-8.

Novel leukaemia markers.

Micklem KJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Science, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

Using synthetic peptide or recombinant protein as immunising antigens we have
produced monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal antisera directed against targets
of particular interest in leukaemia diagnosis. In this way we have prepared
reagents which recognise all T or all B lymphocytes in routinely fixed paraffin
sections which are unique in this respect. We have also produced monoclonal
antibodies to molecules potentially involved in specific neoplastic
transformations, implicated by virtue of the involvement of their genes in
chromosomal defects in these neoplasms. In particular, we have produced
antibodies recognising bcl-2, involved in follicular lymphoma, tal-1, involved in
T-cell acute leukaemias and HRX involved in a variety of hematologic disorders.
The application of these reagents to diagnosis has so far proved useful. In
addition their use outside the field of leukaemia diagnosis has proved to be even
more important in some cases.

PMID: 9156576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1995 Dec;85(2):159-60.

SIL/TAL1 recombination in adult T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia and
T-lymphoblastic lymphoma.

Kwong YL, Chan D, Liang R.

PMID: 8548743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1995 Dec;61(12):4184-90.

Xylose-metabolizing Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains overexpressing the TKL1 and 
TAL1 genes encoding the pentose phosphate pathway enzymes transketolase and
transaldolase.

Walfridsson M(1), Hallborn J, Penttilä M, Keränen S, Hahn-Hägerdal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Microbiology, Lund University, Sweden.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae was metabolically engineered for xylose utilization. The
Pichia stipitis CBS 6054 genes XYL1 and XYL2 encoding xylose reductase and
xylitol dehydrogenase were cloned into S. cerevisiae. The gene products catalyze 
the two initial steps in xylose utilization which S. cerevisiae lacks. In order
to increase the flux through the pentose phosphate pathway, the S. cerevisiae
TKL1 and TAL1 genes encoding transketolase and transaldolase were overexpressed. 
A XYL1- and XYL2-containing S. cerevisiae strain overexpressing TAL1 (S104-TAL)
showed considerably enhanced growth on xylose compared with a strain containing
only XYL1 and XYL2. Overexpression of only TKL1 did not influence growth. The
results indicate that the transaldolase level in S. cerevisiae is insufficient
for the efficient utilization of pentose phosphate pathway metabolites. Mixtures 
of xylose and glucose were simultaneously consumed with the recombinant strain
S104-TAL. The rate of xylose consumption was higher in the presence of glucose.
Xylose was used for growth and xylitol formation, but not for ethanol production.
Decreased oxygenation resulted in impaired growth and increased xylitol
formation. Fermentation with strain S103-TAL, having a xylose reductase/xylitol
dehydrogenase ratio of 0.5:30 compared with 4.2:5.8 for S104-TAL, did not prevent
xylitol formation.

PMCID: PMC167730
PMID: 8534086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Blood. 1995 Oct 15;86(8):3173-80.

The expression pattern of erythrocyte/megakaryocyte-related transcription factors
GATA-1 and the stem cell leukemia gene correlates with hematopoietic
differentiation and is associated with outcome of acute myeloid leukemia.

Shimamoto T(1), Ohyashiki K, Ohyashiki JH, Kawakubo K, Fujimura T, Iwama H,
Nakazawa S, Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

To understand the clinical implications of transcription factors and their
biologic roles during cellular differentiation in the hematopoietic system, we
examined the expression of GATA-1, GATA-2, and stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene in
human leukemia cell lines and various leukemia patients using the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. Cell lines exhibiting megakaryocytic or 
erythrocytic phenotypes had GATA-1, GATA-2, and SCL gene transcripts, while
monocytic cell lines had no detectable GATA-1, GATA-2, or SCL gene mRNA. In some 
myeloid cell lines, GATA-1 expression, but not SCL gene expression, was detected;
GATA-1 expression in HL-60 cells was downregulated during the process of
monocytic differentiation. We next examined GATA-1, GATA-2, and SCL gene
expression in 110 leukemia samples obtained from 76 patients with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), 19 with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), and 15 with chronic
myeloid leukemia in blast crisis (CML-BC). SCL gene expression was usually
accompanied by GATA-1 expression and was preferentially detected in patients with
leukemia exhibiting megakaryocytic or erythrocytic phenotypes, while patients
with monocytic leukemia were clustered in the group with no detectable GATA-1
expression. None of the patients with ALL or CML-lymphoid-BC expressed SCL. De
novo AML patients with SCL gene expression had a lower complete remission (CR)
rate and had a significantly poorer prognosis. Among the patients with AML not
expressing SCL, a high percentage of patients with CD7+ AML and CD19+ AML had
detectable GATA-1, while patients with GATA-1-negative AML had the best CR rate
(87.5%). Our results suggest that the expression pattern of transcription factors
reflects the lineage potential of leukemia cells, and GATA-1 and SCL gene
expression may have prognostic value for the outcome of patients with AML.

PMID: 7579412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Oct 10;92(21):9585-9.

Association of erythroid transcription factors: complexes involving the LIM
protein RBTN2 and the zinc-finger protein GATA1.

Osada H(1), Grutz G, Axelson H, Forster A, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Medical Research Council, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

The RBTN2 LIM-domain protein, originally identified as an oncogenic protein in
human T-cell leukemia, is essential for erythropoiesis. A possible role for RBTN2
in transcription during erythropoiesis has been investigated. Direct interaction 
of the RBTN2 protein was observed in vivo and in vitro with the GATA1 or -2
zinc-finger transcription factors, as well as with the basic helix-loop-helix
protein TAL1. By using mammalian two-hybrid analysis, complexes involving RBTN2, 
TAL1, and GATA1, together with E47, the basic helix-loop-helix heterodimerization
partner of TAL1, could be demonstrated. Thus, a molecular link exists between
three proteins crucial for erythropoiesis, and the data suggest that variations
in amounts of complexes involving RBTN2, TAL1, and GATA1 could be important for
erythroid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC40846
PMID: 7568177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Blood. 1995 Sep 15;86(6):2449.

Response to letter to editor by Bernard et al.

Goldfarb A.

Comment on
    Blood. 1995 Jun 1;85(11):3356-7.

PMID: 7662993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Hum Pathol. 1995 Sep;26(9):994-8.

SCL/Tal-1 expression in T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia: an immunohistochemical
and genotypic study.

Chetty R(1), Pulford K, Jones M, Mathieu-Mahul D, Close P, Hussein S, Pallesen G,
Ralfkiaer E, Stein H, Gatter K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Cellular Science, University of Oxford, UK.

A comparative study of the immunohistochemical (Stem cell leukemia/T-cell acute
leukemia [SCL/TAL-1] protein expression) and genotypic (deletions in the
SCL/tal-1 gene) findings in T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is presented. 
Formalin-fixed tissue from 50 cases of T-ALL were stained with a novel monoclonal
antibody, 2TL 242, which recognizes SCL/TAL-1 protein. Twenty-four cases showed
nuclear immunolabeling of leukemic cells. Nuclear positivity was not evident in
any other type of leukemia or lymphoma tested with the antibody. Genotypic
analysis of 25 cases of T-ALL showed a deletion involving the SCL/tal-1 gene in
nine cases. These results suggest that protein expression is not dependent on
derangement of the SCL/tal-1 gene, because immunohistochemical detection of the
protein was noted in the presence and absence of a tal-d1 deletion.

PMID: 7672800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Blood. 1995 Aug 15;86(4):1502-14.

Lineage-restricted regulation of the murine SCL/TAL-1 promoter.

Bockamp EO(1), McLaughlin F, Murrell AM, Göttgens B, Robb L, Begley CG, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, MRC Centre, UK.

The SCL/TAL-1 gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that is 
expressed in multipotent hematopoietic progenitors before lineage commitment. Its
expression is maintained during differentiation along erythroid, mast, and
megakaryocytic lineages, but is repressed after commitment to nonexpressing
lineages. To begin to address the molecular mechanisms underlying this complex
pattern of expression, we have studied the regulation of the murine SCL promoter 
in erythroid and T-cell lines. Analysis of the methylation and chromatin
structure of the SCL promoter region showed that SCL mRNA expression correlated
with DNase hypersensitive sites and methylation status of the promoter. Transient
reporter assays showed that promoter 1a was active in erythroid cells but not in 
T cells. Sequences between -187 and +26 were sufficient for lineage-restricted
activity of promoter 1a. A joint promoter construct containing both promoter 1a
and promoter 1b also exhibited lineage-restricted activity. Conserved GATA (-37),
MAZ (+242), and ETS (+264) motifs were all shown to contribute to SCL promoter
activity in erythroid cells, but several other motifs were not required for full 
promoter activity. The pattern of complexes binding to the +242 MAZ and +264 ETS 
sites were the same in erythroid and T cells. However, GATA-1 bound the -37 GATA 
site in erythroid cells, whereas in T cells GATA-3 was only able to bind weakly, 
if at all. Moreover, GATA-1 but not GATA-2 or GATA-3 was able to transactivate
SCL promoter 1a in a T-cell environment. These results suggest that inactivity of
SCL promoter 1a in T cells reflected the absence of GATA-1 rather than the
presence of trans-dominant negative regulators.

PMID: 7632958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Melanoma Res. 1995 Aug;5(4):251-4.

TAL1 gene deletions and TAL1 protein expression in sporadic melanoma.

Chetty R(1), Cerroni L, Pulford K, Giatromanolaki A, Biddolph S, Kaklamanis L,
Gatter K.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Cellular Science, University of Oxford, UK.

Studies on cytogenetic abnormalities and cell lines have implicated chromosome
1p32 as being important in the pathogenesis of melanoma. Genetic linkage studies 
have also mapped a melanoma-susceptibility locus to chromosome 1p. The gene TAL1 
is present on chromosome 1p32, and deletions within it are the commonest
chromosomal abnormality in T-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL). A melanoma
cell line harbouring a 1p32 deletion involving the TAL1 gene and the presence of 
TAL1 protein in developing mouse melanocytes led us to investigate whether TAL1
deletions and/or TAL1 protein expression occur in sporadic melanomas. DNA
extracted from 32 fresh melanomas was amplified by standard polymerase chain
reaction for the four common deletions of the TAL1 gene that occur in T-ALL. In
addition, frozen and paraffin-embedded sections of these melanomas were stained
with monoclonal antibodies that detect full-length and truncated TAL1 protein.
The results of the study show that deletions of TAL1 do not occur in melanoma.
Indeed, full and truncated TAL1 protein also could not be detected
immunohistochemically in the paraffin-embedded and frozen sections of the
melanomas. We conclude that the TAL1 gene and its protein are probably not
directly involved in the oncogenesis of melanomas.

PMID: 7496160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jul 18;92(15):7075-9.

Absence of yolk sac hematopoiesis from mice with a targeted disruption of the scl
gene.

Robb L(1), Lyons I, Li R, Hartley L, Köntgen F, Harvey RP, Metcalf D, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Victoria, Australia.

The scl gene encodes a basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor which was
identified through its involvement in chromosomal translocations in T-cell
leukemia. To elucidate its physiological role, scl was targeted in embryonic stem
cells. Mice heterozygous for the scl null mutation were intercrossed and their
offspring were genotyped. Homozygous mutant (scl-/-) pups were not detected in
newborn litters, and analysis at earlier time points demonstrated that scl-/-
embryos were dying around embryonic day 9.5. The scl-/- embryos were pale,
edematous, and markedly growth retarded after embryonic day 8.75. Histological
studies showed complete absence of recognizable hematopoiesis in the yolk sac of 
these embryos. Early organogenesis appeared to be otherwise normal. Culture of
yolk sac cells of wild-type, heterozygous, and homozygous littermates confirmed
the absence of hematopoietic cells in scl-/- yolk sacs. Reverse transcription PCR
was used to examine the transcripts of several genes implicated in early
hematopoiesis. Transcripts of GATA-1 and PU.1 transcription factors were absent
from RNA from scl-/- yolk sacs and embryos. These results implicate scl as a
crucial regulator of early hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC41474
PMID: 7624372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Blood. 1995 Jul 15;86(2):666-76.

Does activation of the TAL1 gene occur in a majority of patients with T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia? A pediatric oncology group study.

Bash RO(1), Hall S, Timmons CF, Crist WM, Amylon M, Smith RG, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235-9048, USA.

Almost 25% of patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) have
tumor-specific rearrangements of the TAL1 gene. Although TAL1 expression has not 
been observed in normal lymphocytes, TAL1 gene products are readily detected in
leukemic cells that harbor a rearranged TAL1 allele. Hence, it has been proposed 
that ectopic expression of TAL1 promotes the development of T-ALL. In this
report, we show that TAL1 is expressed in the leukemic cells of most patients
with T-ALL, including many that do not display an apparent TAL1 gene alteration. 
A polymorphic dinucleotide repeat in the transcribed sequences of TAL1 was used
to determine the allele specificity of TAL1 transcription in primary T-ALL cells.
Monoallelic expression of TAL1 was observed in the leukemic cells of all patients
(8 of 8) bearing a TAL1 gene rearrangement. In the leukemic cells of patients
without detectable TAL1 rearrangements, TAL1 transcription occurred in either a
monoallelic (3 of 7 patients) or a biallelic (4 of 7 patients) fashion. Thus,
TAL1 activation in these patients may result from subtle alterations in
cis-acting regulatory sequences (affecting expression of a single TAL1 allele) or
changes in trans-acting factors that control TAL1 transcription (affecting
expression of both TAL1 alleles).

PMID: 7605997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Oncogene. 1995 Jul 6;11(1):131-9.

Discordant regulation of SCL/TAL-1 mRNA and protein during erythroid
differentiation.

Murrell AM(1), Bockamp EO, Göttgens B, Chan YS, Cross MA, Heyworth CM, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, MRC Centre, UK.

The SCL/TAL1 gene was originally identified by virtue of its rearrangement and
transcriptional activation in patients with T cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.
It encodes a helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is not normally expressed in 
T cells, but is expressed in erythroid, mast, megakaryocytic and progenitor
cells. Over-expression of sense and antisense constructs have implicated SCL as a
positive regulator of erythroid differentiation. In addition we have previously
shown that SCL mRNA levels undergo biphasic modulation during induced erythroid
differentiation of murine erythroleukaemia (MEL) cells with a transient early
fall followed by a late rise. In this paper we have studied expression of the SCL
protein during erythroid differentiation and also the molecular basis for the
raised SCL mRNA levels that accompany erythroid differentiation. We have
generated an anti-SCL antiserum and used it to demonstrate that an early
transient fall in SCL protein does not occur during induced differentiation of
MEL cells. Furthermore SCL protein levels underwent a late fall in three
different models of erythroid differentiation and in two models of myeloid
differentiation. The fall in SCL protein levels during induced erythroid
differentiation contrasted with the concomitant marked rise in SCL mRNA levels.
These observations have significant implications for the mechanism by which SCL
may regulate erythropoiesis. In addition we have demonstrated that the stability 
of SCL mRNA was only marginally enhanced during erythroid differentiation of MEL 
cells, whereas the activity of a luciferase reporter construct driven by the SCL 
promoter was increased 11- to 17-fold. Up-regulation of transcription therefore
accounted for most of the increase in SCL mRNA levels during erythroid
differentiation.

PMID: 7624120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Blood. 1995 Jul 1;86(1):164-75.

Coordinate expression and developmental role of Id2 protein and TAL1/E2A
heterodimer in erythroid progenitor differentiation.

Condorelli G(1), Vitelli L, Valtieri M, Marta I, Montesoro E, Lulli V, Baer R,
Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Thomas Jefferson Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
PA 19107-5541, USA.

The Id proteins and basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins play major roles in
specifying cell fate decisions in diverse biologic settings. A potential role for
Id and TAL1/E2A bHLH genes in hematopoiesis has been suggested by studies on
immortalized cell lines. However, it is uncertain whether these observations
reflect normal hematopoiesis. We have investigated the expression pattern of Id2 
and TAL1/E2A genes in liquid suspension culture of purified hematopoietic
progenitor cell (HPCs) undergoing erythroid or granulopoietic differentiation in 
the first culture week and maturation to terminal cells in the second week. In
quiescent, freshly purified HPCs, Id2 mRNA is detected by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), whereas TAL1 and E2A mRNAs are 
not. At the onset of erythroid differentiation, Id2 mRNA is downregulated, while 
E2A and TAL1 mRNAs are concomitantly upregulated: their expression is further
increased at erythroblast level. Conversely, Id2 is not downmodulated in
granulopoietic culture, except for a late decline at day 10 to 12, while TAL1 and
E2A are only transiently induced in the first week of granulopoietic
differentiation. The expression pattern of the TAL1/E2A heterodimer, as evaluated
by mobility shift assay, is consistent with RT-PCR results (except for lower
levels of the heterodimer in late erythroid maturation). TAL1 protein level,
analyzed by Western blot, shows a pattern consistent with gelshift results.
Functional experiments were performed on purified HPCs treated with
phosphorothioate antisense oligodeoxynucleotides to Id2 or TAL1 mRNA. The results
are strictly consistent with the expression studies: anti-Id2 oligomer
(alpha-Id2) causes a significant dose-dependent increase of erythroid colony
formation, whereas alpha-TAL1 induces a selective dose-related inhibitory effect 
on erythroid colonies, as compared with untreated or scrambled oligomer-treated
control HPCs. Finally, murine and human glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-Id2
polypeptides compete the TAL1/E2A-specific DNA binding activity when added to the
nuclear extracts derived from erythroid culture cells, thus indicating
biochemical and suggesting functional interaction of Id2 with the TAL1/E2A
complex. These novel observations indicate a coordinate expression and function
of an inhibitory Id protein (Id2) and a stimulatory bHLH/bHLH heterodimer
(TAL1/E2A) in normal erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 7540882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Blood. 1995 Jun 15;85(12):3713-8.

Ecotropic virus integration site-1 gene preferentially expressed in
post-myelodysplasia acute myeloid leukemia: possible association with GATA-1,
GATA-2, and stem cell leukemia gene expression.

Ohyashiki JH(1), Ohyashiki K, Shimamoto T, Kawakubo K, Fujimura T, Nakazawa S,
Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

We investigated expression of the human ecotropic virus integration site-1 (EVI1)
gene in patients with leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) using the
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method. The EVI1
transcripts were detected in 5 (10.0%) of 50 patients with de novo acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML), including two AML patients with trilineage myelodysplasia, and in
8 (34.8%) of 23 patients with post-myelodysplastic syndrome AML (post-MDS AML).
EVI1 expression was also detected in 6 (35.3%) of 17 MDS patients and three of
six patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) in myelomegakaryoblast crisis.
No EVI1 transcripts were detected in patients with acute lymphoid leukemia (n =
15) or CML in lymphoid blast crisis (n = 4). Chromosomal abnormalities at the
3q26 region, where the EVI1 gene is located, were found in one patient with MDS
and two patients with CML myelomegakaryoblast crisis who had EVI1 expression. Our
results showed that EVI1 expression was frequent in patients with post-MDS AML
and AML with trilineage myelodysplasia, regardless of the presence or absence of 
3q26 abnormalities. EVI1 expression was accompanied by expression of GATA-1 and
GATA-2, and often by stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene expression. In patients with
post-MDS AML, EVI1 expression was not always associated with a 3q26 abnormality, 
whereas EVI1 expression in CML myelomegakaryoblast crisis was often linked to a
3q26 abnormality. Our results suggest that the leukemogenic role of EVI1
expression may differ between post-MDS AML and leukemia, with EVI1 expression
associated with a 3q26 abnormality.

PMID: 7780155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Blood. 1995 Jun 1;85(11):3356-7.

Nuclear localization of the SCL/TAL1 basic helix-loop-helix protein is not
dependent on the presence of the basic domain.

Bernard M, Smit L, Macintyre E, Matthieu-Mahul D, Pulford K.

Comment in
    Blood. 1995 Sep 15;86(6):2449.

PMID: 7756670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Biol Chem. 1995 May 12;270(19):11603-11.

Erythropoietin stimulates transcription of the TAL1/SCL gene and phosphorylation 
of its protein products.

Prasad KS(1), Jordan JE, Koury MJ, Bondurant MC, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.

Activation of the TAL1 (or SCL) gene, originally identified through its
involvement by a recurrent chromosomal translocation, is the most frequent
molecular lesion recognized in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The protein
products of this gene contain the basic-helix-loop-helix motif characteristic of 
a large family of transcription factors that bind to the canonical DNA sequence
CANNTG as protein heterodimers. TAL1 expression by erythroid cells in vivo and in
chemical-induced erythroleukemia cell lines in vivo suggested the gene might
regulate aspects of erythroid differentiation. Since the terminal events of
erythropoiesis are controlled by the glycoprotein hormone erythropoietin (Epo),
we investigated whether the expression or activity of the TAL1 gene and its
protein products were affected by Epo in splenic erythroblasts from mice infected
with an anemia-inducing strain of Friend virus (FVA cells). Epo elicited a rapid,
dose-related increase in TAL1 mRNA by increasing transcription of the gene and
stabilizing one of its mRNAs. An Epo-inducible TAL1 DNA binding activity was
identified in FVA cell nuclear extracts that subsequently decayed despite
accumulating mRNA and protein. Induction of DNA binding activity was associated
temporally with Epo-induced phosphorylation of nuclear TAL1 protein. These
results indicate that Epo acts at both transcriptional and posttranscriptional
levels on the TAL1 locus in Friend virus-induced erythroblasts and establish a
link between Epo signaling mechanisms and a member of a family of transcription
factors involved in the differentiation of diverse cell lineages.

PMID: 7744799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1995 May;81(1):76-82.

RT/PCR detection of SIL-TAL-1 fusion mRNA in Chinese T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL).

Huang W(1), Kuang SQ, Huang QH, Dong S, Zhang T, Gu LJ, Ching LM, Chen SJ, Chang 
LC, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Rui-Jin Hospital, Samuel Waxman Cancer
Research Foundation, China.

The TAL-1 gene is located on chromosome 1p32. In about 20% of T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALL), this gene is disrupted in its 5' portion by a
site-specific 100-kg deletion and is fused with the 5' part of the SIL gene, to
form SIL-TAL-1 chimeric gene. In this study, we established a "nested"
retrotranscriptase/polymerase chain reaction (RT/PCR) technique which allows
detection of the SIL-TAL-1 transcriptional expression. A chimeric mRNA was
observed in four of 17 T-ALL cases and has been shown to result from the fusion
between the exon 1 of SIL and exon 3 of TAL. A sensitivity test showed that this 
RT/PCR procedure could detect one leukemic cell among 10(6) normal cells. A
positive RT/PCR result was obtained in two cases during clinical remission,
suggesting the presence of minimal residual disease (MRD). One patient developed 
clinical relapse 3 months after PCR positivity. Moreover, analysis of the Tald
rearrangement by DNA-based PCR in four patients with SIL-TAL-1 fusion revealed
the type A (Tald1) rearrangement in all cases. Sequence analysis demonstrated the
presence of N region and non-random "P" nucleotide, as well as base deletions at 
the genomic SIL-TAL-1 joining site. These data indicate that detection of TAL-1
gene abnormality is important for diagnosis and monitoring of MRD in a subset of 
T-ALL.

PMID: 7773964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Clin Cancer Res. 1995 Apr;1(4):459-63.

Low incidence of TAL1 gene rearrangements in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia: 
A cancer and leukemia group B study (8762)

Stock W(1), Westbrook CA, Sher DA, Dodge R, Sobol RE, Wurster-Hill D, Davey FR,
Larson RA, LeBeau MM, Aplan PD, Frankel SR, Stewart CC, Bloomfield CD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood,
Illinois 60153, USA.

TAL1 gene rearrangements have been described in approximately 25% of children
with T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Three percent of these
rearrangements are the result of a reciprocal translocation, t(1;14)(p34;q11).
The remainder of these rearrangements are submicroscopic and involve a nearly
precise 90-kilobase pair deletion of the TAL1 gene. Detection of these
submicroscopic rearrangements can be accomplished easily using Southern blot and 
PCR technology and may have potential value for monitoring disease during and
following treatment. The incidence of TAL1 gene rearrangements in adults with ALL
is unknown. In this pilot study, we performed Southern blot and PCR analysis in a
group of newly diagnosed adult ALL patients to determine the incidence of TAL1
rearrangements. Thirty-three adults with T cell ALL were studied; of these, one
patient had a t(1;14)(p34;q11) and molecular rearrangement of TAL1. No
submicroscopic deletions of TAL1 were detected (95% confidence intervals, 0.000
and 0.106). Unlike pediatric T cell ALL, the incidence of TAL1 rearrangements in 
adult ALL appears to be very low.

PMID: 9816004  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


218. Oncogene. 1995 Feb 16;10(4):631-9.

Regulation of lineage restricted haemopoietic transcription factors in cell
hybrids.

Murrell AM(1), Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, MRC Centre, UK.

SCL, GATA-1, GATA-2 and GATA-3 encode lineage restricted haemopoietic
transcription factors. We have previously shown that SCL, GATA-1 and GATA-2 are
expressed in multipotent progenitors prior to lineage commitment, but are
down-regulated during granulocyte/monocyte differentiation. The phenomenon of
gene extinction in cell hybrids may reveal negative regulatory mechanisms
operating during normal differentiation. We have therefore analysed the
regulation of SCL, GATA-1, GATA-2 and GATA-3 in cell hybrids formed by the fusion
of cell lines representing different haemopoietic lineages. Expression of GATA-3 
was extinguished in both human and murine erythroid x T cell hybrids, an
observation which suggests that erythroid cells contain factors capable of
repressing GATA-3 expression. By contrast expression of SCL, GATA-1 and GATA-2
was not extinguished in erythroid x T or in erythroid x B cell hybrids. These
data suggest that T cells and B cells do not contain trans-acting factors capable
of down-regulating expression of SCL, GATA-1 or GATA-2, and therefore raise the
possibility that a 'hit and run' mechanism may repress these genes during normal 
haemopoiesis. HpaII sites within the SCL promoter were unmethylated in erythroid 
cells but methylated in T cells. Erythroid x T and erythroid x B cell hybrids
contained both methylated and unmethylated SCL promoters, thus implicating a
heritable cis-acting mechanism in the regulation of the SCL gene in lymphoid cell
lines. These results provide the first analysis of SCL and GATA gene regulation
in stable cell hybrids.

PMID: 7862440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Nature. 1995 Feb 2;373(6513):432-4.

Absence of blood formation in mice lacking the T-cell leukaemia oncoprotein
tal-1/SCL.

Shivdasani RA(1), Mayer EL, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Chromosomal translocations associated with malignancies often result in
deregulated expression of genes encoding transcription factors. In human T-cell
leukaemias such regulators belong to diverse protein families and may normally be
expressed widely (for example, Ttg-1/rbtn1, Ttg-2/rbtn2), exclusively outside the
haematopoietic system (for example, Hox11), or specifically in haematopoietic
cells and other selected sites (for example, tal-1/SCL, lyl-1). Aberrant
expression within T cells is though to interfere with programmes of normal
maturation. The most frequently activated gene in acute T-cell leukaemias, tal-1 
(also called SCL), encodes a candidate regulator of haematopoietic development, a
basic-helix-loop-helix protein, related to critical myogenic and neurogenic
factors. Here we show by targeted gene disruption in mice that tal-1 is essential
for embryonic blood formation in vivo. With respect to embryonic erythropoiesis, 
tal-1 deficiency resembles loss of the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 or
the LIM protein rbtn2. Profound reduction in myeloid cells cultured in vivo from 
tal-1 null yolk sacs suggests a broader defect manifest at the myelo-erythroid or
multipotential progenitor cell level.

PMID: 7830794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Blood. 1995 Feb 1;85(3):675-84.

Expression of TAL-1 proteins in human tissues.

Pulford K(1), Lecointe N, Leroy-Viard K, Jones M, Mathieu-Mahul D, Mason DY.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Cellular Science, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford,
UK.

Rearrangement of the tal-1 gene (also known as SCL or TCL-5) occurs in at least
25% of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALLs) and results in the aberrant 
expression of tal-1 mRNA in the neoplastic cells. Also, tal-1 mRNA is
constitutively expressed in erythroid precursors and megakaryocytes. This report 
describes a direct immunocytochemical study of the distribution and localization 
of TAL-1 protein in normal human tissues and cell lines using four monoclonal
antibodies raised against recombinant TAL-1 proteins. One of these reagents
recognizes a protein of 41 kD molecular weight in in vitro-translated TAL-1
proteins, two others recognize proteins of 39 and 41 kD molecular weight, and the
fourth antibody also recognizes a TAL-1 protein of 22 kD in addition to the 39-
and 41-kD proteins. These anti-TAL-1 antibodies label the nuclei of erythroid
precursor cells and megakaryocytes in fetal liver and adult bone marrow. The
punctate pattern of nuclear labeling suggests that TAL-1 may comprise part of a
novel nuclear structure, similar to that recently found for the PML protein. The 
nuclei of T cell lines known to express mRNA encoding the full-length TAL-1
protein (eg, CCRF-CEM, RPMI 8402, and Jurkat) are also labeled. A study of normal
human tissues (including thymus) showed labeling of smooth muscle, some tissue
macrophages, and endothelial cells. TAL-1 protein is undetectable in other cell
types. These reagents may play an important role in the diagnosis of T-ALL and
could also be used in the context of lymphoma diagnosis on routinely fixed
material.

PMID: 7833471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Blood. 1995 Jan 15;85(2):465-71.

Inhibition of cellular differentiation by the SCL/tal oncoprotein:
transcriptional repression by an Id-like mechanism.

Goldfarb AN(1), Lewandowska K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
44106-4943.

In cases of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) oncogene SCL/tal undergoes frequent rearrangements
activating ectopic expression. Despite the compelling epidemiological association
of SCL/tal expression with T-ALL, no specific transforming function has been
attributable to the protein product. However, investigators have recently
demonstrated that forced overexpression of SCL/tal can block monocytic
differentiation of M1 murine myeloid leukemia cells. Thus, inappropriate
expression of wild-type SCL/tal protein may in part account for the maturation
arrest phenotype observed in T-ALL cells. In this study, ectopic expression of
the SCL/tal gene blocked the differentiation of C2C12 muscle precursor cells.
Characterization of the mechanism of differentiation blockade showed that the
SCL/tal protein repressed transcriptional activation by the myogenic bHLH factor 
MyoD. Protein interaction analysis showed that SCL/tal and MyoD compete for
common partners (E bHLH proteins) but do not directly bind one other. A model is 
thus proposed in which ectopic SCL/tal protein, by its ability to titrate out E
proteins, prevents the formation of bHLH complexes that drive cellular
differentiation: the "Id-like" mechanism.

PMID: 7812000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Blood. 1995 Jan 15;85(2):379-90.

Differential regulation of macrophage differentiation in response to leukemia
inhibitory factor/oncostatin-M/interleukin-6: the effect of enforced expression
of the SCL transcription factor.

Tanigawa T(1), Nicola N, McArthur GA, Strasser A, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Victoria, Australia.

The physiologic program of macrophage differentiation normally proceeds in a
coordinated manner in response to several different growth factors. Although the 
utilization of common receptor subunits may explain in part overlapping biologic 
functions, mechanisms by which unique actions are mediated remain obscure. We
examined growth factor-induced macrophage differentiation in M1 leukemia cells
that simultaneously display receptors for interleukin-6 (IL-6), leukemia
inhibitory factor (LIF) and Oncostatin-M (OSM). Differentiation induced by all
three factors was associated with decreased expression of transcription factors
myb and SCL, increased expression of macrophage markers, and suppression of
proliferation. Cell lines were established in which SCL expression was enforced. 
In the absence of growth factors, cells were indistinguishable from parental
cells. However, LIF (or OSM)-induced macrophage differentiation was perturbed;
there was failure to undergo morphologic differentiation, disturbed expression of
lysozyme and Mac1 alpha, and failure to suppress proliferation. Surprisingly the 
perturbation of macrophage differentiation did not apply to induced expression of
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) or granulocyte colony stimulating
factor (G-CSF) receptors. This dissociation of elements normally coordinated in a
macrophage differentiation program applied at a clonal level. There was no
disturbance of IL-6-induced macrophage differentiation. These data directly
implicate SCL in components of the macrophage differentiation program (suggesting
that LIF receptor/gp130 heterodimers utilize an SCL-inhibitable pathway while
gp130 homodimers do not) and demonstrate differential-regulation of components of
the mature macrophage phenotype.

PMID: 7811994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Oncogene. 1995 Jan 5;10(1):205-9.

scl, a gene frequently activated in human T cell leukaemia, does not induce
lymphomas in transgenic mice.

Robb L(1), Rasko JE, Bath ML, Strasser A, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, P.O. Royal Melbourne
Hospital, Victoria, Australia.

The scl gene is implicated in human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL) 
through its involvement in the t(1;14)(p32;q11) chromosomal translocation and,
more frequently, as a result of a tumour-specific interstitial deletion on
chromosome 1. The consequence of both these chromosomal alterations is
overexpression of scl in the leukaemic cells. Despite the strong inference of a
role in human T-ALL, scl has not yet been demonstrated to be causally involved in
neoplastic transformation. We attempted to do this by generating transgenic mice 
in which scl expression was directed to the T cell lineage using the CD2 enhancer
and the strong SR alpha viral promoter (CD2-scl mice). Three transgenic lines,
all of which expressed the scl transgene at a high level, were bred and analysed.
No alterations in T cell development were seen in the mice. Unexpectedly CD2-scl 
mice did not develop tumours, nor did the transgene enhance tumourigenesis by
Moloney murine leukaemia virus. These findings throw into question the mechanism 
by which aberrant scl expression contributes to T cell leukaemogenesis.

PMID: 7824274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Cell Growth Differ. 1995 Jan;6(1):19-25.

Reconstitution of mice with bone marrow cells expressing the SCL gene is
insufficient to cause leukemia.

Elwood NJ(1), Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.

Rearrangement or translocation of the SCL gene is the most common genetic
abnormality observed in human T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia and results in
the aberrant expression of SCL. To examine the oncogenic potential of this gene, 
an SCL-retrovirus was used to infect mouse bone marrow cells, which were then
used to reconstitute C57/BL6 mice. Expression of SCL did not perturb the
composition nor number of day 12 or day 13 colony forming unit-spleen. In total, 
141 mice reconstituted with SCL-infected bone marrow and 103 control-mice were
monitored for up to 2 years with no difference in survival, hematocrit, white
cell count, or differential white cell count. As expected, from day 200 onwards, 
mice died due to radiation-induced thymomas; SCL provirus was not detected in
these tumors. Thus, despite SCL being strongly implicated in the development of
human leukemia, its enforced expression in mice using a retrovirus and bone
marrow reconstitution was insufficient to generate leukemia.

PMID: 7718483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Oncogene. 1994 Dec;9(12):3713-6.

The MAP kinase phosphorylation site of TAL1 occurs within a transcriptional
activation domain.

Wadman IA(1), Hsu HL, Cobb MH, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

Alteration of the TAL1 gene is the most common genetic lesion found in patients
with T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. TAL1 encodes a basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor that is phosphorylated on serine residue 122 by the
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase ERK1. Here we show that the amino-terminal
sequences of TAL1 (residues 1-166) function in vivo as a transcriptional
activation domain. Mutation of serine residue 122 reduces the potency of the
transactivation domain by more than half. The data suggest that the
amino-terminal transactivation domain of TAL1 is positively regulated by S122
phosphorylation and that the functional properties of TAL1 can be influenced by
signal transduction pathways that involve the MAP kinases.

PMID: 7970731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Blood. 1994 Dec 1;84(11):3819-27.

Distinct DNase-I hypersensitive sites are associated with TAL-1 transcription in 
erythroid and T-cell lines.

Leroy-Viard K(1), Vinit MA, Lecointe N, Mathieu-Mahul D, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

The tal-1 gene, frequently activated in human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL), is expressed in the erythroid, megakaryocytic, and mast cell lineages
during normal hematopoiesis. To gain further insight into the molecular
mechanisms that control tal-1 expression, we investigated tal-1 chromatin
structure in erythroid/megakaryocytic cell lines and in T-cell lines either with 
or without tal-1 rearrangements. Tal-1 transcription was shown to be monoallelic 
in Jurkat, a T-cell line that expresses tal-1 in the absence of apparent genomic 
alteration of the locus. Methylation studies indicated that the tal-15' GC-rich
region behaves like a CpG island, hypomethylated in normal cells, and methylated 
de novo on transcriptionally inactive alleles in established cell lines. Five
major DNase-I hypersensitive sites (HS) were mapped in the tal-1 locus. HS I, IV,
and V were exclusively observed in the erythroid/megakaryocytic cell lines that
express tal-1 from the promoters 1a and 1b. HS II was weak in hematopoietic cell 
lines, absent in Hela, and greatly enhanced in Jurkat, suggesting that this
region might be implicated in the cis-activation of tal-1 promoter 1b in this
cell line. HS III was weak in HEL and Jurkat, and greatly enhanced in DU528, a
T-cell line that bears a t (1;14) and initiates tal-1 transcription within exon
4. These results suggest that distinct regulatory elements are associated with
the use of the different tal-1 promoters.

PMID: 7949138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Blood. 1994 Nov 1;84(9):2971-6.

Steel factor affects SCL expression during normal erythroid differentiation.

Miller BA(1), Floros J, Cheung JY, Wojchowski DM, Bell L, Begley CG, Elwood NJ,
Kreider J, Christian C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Pennsylvania State
University, Hershey 17033.

Steel factor is one of the growth factors that controls the proliferation and
differentiation of hematopoietic cells and SCL, also known as Tcl-5 or Tal-1, is 
a transcription factor involved in erythropoiesis. In this report, we studied the
role of SCL in the proliferation of human peripheral blood burst-forming
unit-erythroid (BFU-E) and the effects of Steel factor on SCL expression in
proliferating erythroid cells. BFU-E-derived colonies increase progressively in
size, as determined by cell number, from day 7 to day 14 of culture, with the
greatest increase in colony size (10-fold expansion) occurring between day 7 and 
day 10. SCL protein levels in BFU-E-derived cells were highest in day 7 cells and
decreased progressively from day 7 to day 14 of culture, suggesting an
association of SCL with erythroid proliferation. In contrast, SCL mRNA levels did
not decrease significantly between day 7 and day 14 cells, suggesting that
posttranscriptional mechanisms are largely responsible for the decrease in SCL
protein observed. The role of SCL in Steel factor-induced erythroid proliferation
was then examined. In BFU-E-derived colonies cultured with Steel factor, colony
size was significantly increased compared to control. In day 7 and day 10
erythroid precursors cultured with Steel factor, SCL protein was increased
significantly compared to control. The increase in SCL protein levels in early
erythroid precursors stimulated with Steel factor suggests one mechanism through 
which Steel factor may enhance normal erythroid proliferation. SCL mRNA levels
assessed by Northern blot in day 7 cells did not increase significantly in
response to Steel factor stimulation, suggesting that posttranscriptional
mechanisms may also be important in the increase in SCL protein observed in
response to Steel.

PMID: 7524762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. EMBO J. 1994 Oct 17;13(20):4831-9.

Specific in vivo association between the bHLH and LIM proteins implicated in
human T cell leukemia.

Wadman I(1), Li J, Bash RO, Forster A, Osada H, Rabbitts TH, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

The protein products of proto-oncogenes implicated in T cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia include two distinct families of presumptive transcription factors.
RBTN1 and RBTN2 encode highly related proteins that possess cysteine-rich LIM
motifs. TAL1, TAL2 and LYL1 encode a unique subgroup of basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) proteins that share exceptional homology in their bHLH sequences. We have 
found that RBTN1 and RBTN2 have the ability to interact with each of the
leukemogenic bHLH proteins (TAL1, TAL2 and LYL1). These interactions occur in
vivo and appear to be mediated by sequences within the LIM and bHLH domains. The 
LIM-bHLH interactions are highly specific in that RBTN1 and RBTN2 will associate 
with TAL1, TAL2 and LYL1, but not with other bHLH proteins, including E12, E47,
Id1, NHLH1, AP4, MAX, MYC and MyoD1. Moreover, RBTN1 and RBTN2 can interact with 
TAL1 polypeptides that exist in assembled bHLH heterodimers (e.g. TAL1-E47),
suggesting that the RBTN proteins can influence the functional properties of
TAL1. Finally, we have identified a subset of leukemia patients that harbor
tumor-specific rearrangements of both their RBTN2 and TAL1 genes. Thus, the
activated alleles of these genes may promote leukemia cooperatively, perhaps as a
result of bHLH-LIM interactions between their protein products.

PMCID: PMC395422
PMID: 7957052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Oncogene. 1994 Sep;9(9):2623-32.

GATA-and SP1-binding sites are required for the full activity of the
tissue-specific promoter of the tal-1 gene.

Lecointe N(1), Bernard O, Naert K, Joulin V, Larsen CJ, Romeo PH, Mathieu-Mahul
D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 9942, Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, France.

The tal-1 gene, which is frequently activated in human T cell acute leukemias
(T-ALLs), codes for a protein of the basic helix-loop-helix family (b-HLH) and
potentially a transcription factor. In human and murine hematopoiesis tal-1 is
expressed during the differentiation of the erythroid, megakaryocytic and
mastocytic cell lineages. The expression of tal-1 appears to be comodulated with 
that of the transcription factor GATA-1 gene, suggesting that the GATA-1 protein 
may regulate the tal-1 gene activity in these hematopoietic lineages. To get
further insights into the molecular mechanisms that control tal-1 expression, we 
have isolated 5' sequences of the murine gene and compared them to their human
counterparts. The 5' flanking sequences from the two genes show several regions
of high homology. The alignment of both sequences enabled us to predict that
similarly, to the human, the mouse gene contains two alternative first exons (Ia 
and Ib). Remarkably, in both species, the proximal region of the tissue-specific 
exon Ia (i.e. gene segment -122 to +1) contains two GATA-motifs (at -65 and -33) 
and one SP-1 consensus binding site (-59). Mobility shift assays demonstrate that
GATA proteins are able to interact with both GATA-motifs in a sequence specific
fashion, but with different efficiencies. Moreover transfection studies show that
the GATA-1 protein directly mediates tal-1 transcription by interacting with the 
-122/+1 fragment, defined as a minimal promoter in erythroid cells. Mutagenesis
of the promoter establishes that the -33 GATA-binding site present in this
fragment is critical for tal-1 expression in erythroid cells, but by itself does 
not lead to full promoter activity. Indeed, further mutations show that the
second -65 GATA-binding site and the binding motif for SP1 (-59) significantly
contribute to the overall activity of the proximal tal-1 promoter. Altogether,
our data provide evidence that GATA-1 cooperates with the transcription factor
SP1 to mediate the erythroid-specific expression of the tal-1 gene.

PMID: 8058326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Aug 30;91(18):8617-21.

The LIM protein RBTN2 and the basic helix-loop-helix protein TAL1 are present in 
a complex in erythroid cells.

Valge-Archer VE(1), Osada H, Warren AJ, Forster A, Li J, Baer R, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

Chromosomal translocations in T-cell acute leukemias can activate genes encoding 
putative transcription factors such as the LIM proteins RBTN1 and RBTN2 and the
DNA-binding basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor TAL1 associated with
T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia. While not expressed in normal T cells, RBTN2
and TAL1 are coexpressed in erythroid cells and are both important for erythroid 
differentiation. We demonstrate, using anti-RBTN2 and anti-TAL1 antisera, that
the LIM protein RBTN2 is not phosphorylated and is complexed with the TAL1
phosphoprotein in the nucleus of erythroid cells. A complex containing both RBTN1
and TAL1 also occurs in a T-cell acute leukemia cell line. Since both RBTN2 and
TAL1 are crucial for normal erythropoiesis, these data have important
implications for transcription networks therein. Further, since both proteins can
be involved in leukemogenesis, these data provide a direct link between proteins 
activated by chromosomal translocations in T-cell acute leukemia.

PMCID: PMC44657
PMID: 8078932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Aug 16;91(17):7869-73.

Transcriptional activation by TAL1 and FUS-CHOP proteins expressed in acute
malignancies as a result of chromosomal abnormalities.

Sánchez-García I(1), Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

Proteins that appear to participate in transcriptional control of gene expression
are increasingly implicated in leukemias and malignant solid tumors. We report
here that the N-terminal domains of the proteins TAL1 (ectopically activated in
T-cell acute leukemias after chromosomal abnormalities caused by V-D-J
recombinase error) (V, variable; D, diversity; J, joining) and FUS-CHOP (a
liposarcoma tumor-specific fusion protein that is produced as a result of a
chromosomal translocation) can function as transcription activators of specific
responsive reporter genes. The result with TAL1 provides evidence that
transcriptional activation can be mediated by a gene activated by translocation
in T-cell acute leukemias. In the case of the liposarcoma, transactivation by the
FUS-CHOP protein occurs because the FUS transcriptional activation domain is
added to the DNA-binding CHOP protein normally lacking such activity. Therefore, 
the association of transcriptional activation and DNA-binding elements is a
common consequence in proteins activated or newly created as fusion proteins
after chromosomal translocations in acute leukemias and in malignant solid
tumors.

PMCID: PMC44505
PMID: 8058726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jul 19;91(15):7066-70.

Cloning and characterization of a basic helix-loop-helix protein expressed in
early mesoderm and the developing somites.

Quertermous EE(1), Hidai H, Blanar MA, Quertermous T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical School, Nashville, TN
37232.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) heterodimer protein complexes regulate
transcription of genes during the processes of differentiation and development.
To study the molecular basis of early mesodermal differentiation, we sought to
identify bHLH proteins from cells of mesodermal origin. By using an interaction
cloning strategy with a radiolabled recombinant bHLH protein, E12, a clone
encoding a potential heterodimer partner was isolated from an endothelial cell
library. This gene (bHLH-EC2) is most homologous to Twist but shares similarity
within the bHLH domain with TAL1 and other members of this family. bHLH-EC2 is
expressed in cultured endothelial cells and in embryonic stem cell,
erythroleukemia, and muscle cell lines in a differentiation-dependent manner. In 
situ hybridization studies of mouse embryos reveal that bHLH-EC2 is expressed
throughout the primitive mesoderm as early as 7.5 days postcoitum. Expression
then becomes restricted to the paraxial mesoderm and to the dermamyotome of the
developing somite. Expression of bHLH-EC2 in cells destined to become myoblasts
thus predates expression of myogenic bHLH factors. bHLH-EC2 is expressed in early
endothelial and hematopoietic cells in vivo, as shown by RNA studies of embryonic
yolk sac and cultured cells derived from yolk sac explants. These findings
suggest that bHLH-EC2 plays a role in the development of multiple cell types
derived from the primitive mesoderm.

PMCID: PMC44339
PMID: 8041747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Oncogene. 1994 Jul;9(7):1847-53.

Lineage specific demethylation of tal-1 gene breakpoint region determines the
frequency of tal-1 deletions in alpha beta lineage T-cells.

Breit TM(1), Wolvers-Tettero IL, van Dongen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Dijkzigt/Erasmus University,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

tal-1 deletions are caused by a site specific recombination, which exclusively
occurs in 12-26% of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALL). In a previous
study on a large series of T-ALL we demonstrated an apparent preferential
occurrence of tal-1 deletions in CD3- and CD3+ alpha beta lineage T-ALL with
TcR-delta gene deletions on one or both alleles. In the present study we
investigated whether accessibility of the tal-1 deletion breakpoint regions
influences the preferential occurrence in specific T-ALL subgroups. Because DNA
methylation is assumed to determine accessibility of DNA for recombination, the
methylation status of the tal-1 deletion type 1 breakpoint regions (sildb and
taldb1) was studied. Although the sildb were completely demethylated in all
T-ALL, preferential (de)methylation configurations of the taldb1 were observed in
the analysed 119 T-ALL. Most TcR-alpha beta + T-ALL contained completely
demethylated taldb1 (77%), whereas in most TcR-gamma delta + T-ALL partial or
complete methylation occurred (42% and 47%, respectively). In T-ALL subgroups
defined by different TcR-delta gene configurations also preferential taldb1
(de)methylation patterns were seen, which was most prominent in T-ALL with both
TcR-delta genes deleted (84% complete demethylation). The previously observed
preferential occurrence of tal-1 deletion type 1 in TcR-alpha beta + vs CD3-
T-ALL and in T-ALL with both vs one TcR-delta genes deleted, disappeared when we 
retricted to T-ALL with completely demethylated taldb1. Moreover, all T-ALL with 
a tal-1 deletion type 1 (n = 15) contained completely demethylated taldb1. We
therefore conclude that complete demethylation of taldb1 is a prerequisite for
tal-1 deletions type 1 and that the differences in tal-1 deletion frequencies
observed in the various T-ALL subgroups are caused by differences in the
(de)methylation status of taldb1 in these subgroups.

PMID: 8208530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Bioessays. 1994 Jul;16(7):481-8.

Transcription factors and the regulation of haemopoiesis: lessons from GATA and
SCL proteins.

Bockamp EO(1), McLaughlin F, Murrell A, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Department of Haematology, MRC Centre, UK.

One of the central issues of developmental biology concerns the molecular
mechanisms whereby a multipotent cell gives rise to distinct differentiated
progeny. Differences between specialised cell types reflect variations in their
patterns of gene expression. The regulation of transcription initiation is an
important control point for gene expression and it is, therefore, not surprising 
that transcription factors play a pivotal role in mammalian development and
differentiation. Haemopoiesis offers a uniquely tractable system for the study of
lineage commitment and differentiation. The importance of transcription factors
in the normal regulation of haemopoiesis is underlined by the frequency with
which transcription factors are targeted by leukaemogenic mutations. Studies of
the function and regulation of haemopoietic transcription factors, especially
those expressed in lineage-restricted patterns, should greatly increase our
understanding of the molecular control of haemopoiesis. In this review we have
focused on insights provided by recent studies of the GATA and SCL proteins.

PMID: 7945276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jun 21;91(13):5952-6.

The E2A and tal-1 helix-loop-helix proteins associate in vivo and are modulated
by Id proteins during interleukin 6-induced myeloid differentiation.

Voronova AF(1), Lee F.

Author information: 
(1)DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Palo Alto, CA
94304-1104.

The immunoglobulin enhancer-binding proteins, E12 and E47, encoded by the E2A
gene belong to the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of regulatory proteins
and act as transcriptional activators. In addition to their critical role in
B-lymphocyte development, the E12 and E47 proteins have been implicated in the
induction of myogenesis as heterodimeric partners of myogenic bHLH proteins, MyoD
and myogenin. Here we demonstrate that the E2A proteins form heterodimers with
the bHLH oncoprotein tal-1 in myeloid and erythroid cells and that these
heterodimers specifically bind to the CANNTG DNA motif. Heterodimerization with
tal-1 represses transactivation by E47 and could function to prevent the
expression of immunoglobulin genes in cells other than B lymphocytes. DNA binding
by E2A-tal-1 heterodimers in the M1 mouse myeloid cell line is abrogated upon
terminal macrophage differentiation induced by the cytokine interleukin 6. The
loss of E2A-tal-1 DNA binding is correlated with elevated expression of mRNA
encoding the dominant negative HLH proteins, Id1 and particularly Id2. Moreover, 
recombinant Id proteins inhibit the E2A-tal-1-specific DNA binding activity from 
undifferentiated M1 cells. These results suggest that E2A-tal-1 heterodimers may 
play a role in preventing terminal differentiation in the myeloid lineage and
provide a possible explanation for oncogenic transformation induced by ectopic
tal-1 expression in acute T-cell lymphoblastic leukemias.

PMCID: PMC44115
PMID: 8016095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jun 21;91(13):5947-51.

Positive and negative transcriptional control by the TAL1 helix-loop-helix
protein.

Hsu HL(1), Wadman I, Tsan JT, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

Tumor-specific activation of the TAL1 gene is the most common genetic defect
associated with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The TAL1 gene products
possess a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motif, a protein-dimerization and
DNA-binding domain found in several transcription factors. TAL1 polypeptides
interact, in vitro and in vivo, with class A bHLH proteins (e.g., E47) to form
heterodimers with sequence-specific DNA-binding activity. In this study, we show 
that TAL1 can regulate the transcription of an artificial reporter gene that
contains binding sites for bHLH heterodimers involving TAL1. Transcription of the
reporter is strongly induced by E47-E47 homodimers and moderately induced by
TAL1-E47 heterodimers. Thus, in a cellular environment that allows formation of
E47-E47 homodimers (e.g., in the absence of Id regulatory proteins) TAL1 can
repress transcription by recruiting E47 into bHLH complexes with less
transcriptional activity (i.e., TAL1-E47 heterodimers). However, in other
settings TAL1 can activate transcription because TAL1-E47 heterodimers are more
resistant to negative regulation by Id proteins. Hence, TAL1 can potentially
regulate transcription in either a positive or negative fashion.

PMCID: PMC44114
PMID: 8016094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Leukemia. 1994 May;8(5):768-75.

Molecular evidence for minimal residual bone marrow disease in children with
'isolated' extra-medullary relapse of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Neale GA(1), Pui CH, Mahmoud HH, Mirro J Jr, Crist WM, Rivera GK, Goorha RM.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Virology and Molecular Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38101.

Central nervous system (CNS) relapse confers a poor prognosis in children with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). It is uncertain whether morphologically
undetectable leukemia is present in the bone marrow at the time of CNS relapse,
or whether the CNS acts as a 'sanctuary' site to allow reseeding of the marrow at
a later time. We examined DNA from bone marrow samples from six patients with
T-cell ALL with isolated CNS relapse using sensitive polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) assays to detect minimal residual disease. One of these PCR assays was
based on amplification of leukemia-specific TCR-delta gene rearrangements, while 
the other assay relied upon detection of the c-tal deletion. In four patients,
where bone marrow samples were taken at the time of CNS relapse, residual disease
was detectable in every sample at a level below morphological detection. In
addition, three patients had residual disease detected in their subsequent bone
marrow when CNS disease was not evident. Our findings, although preliminary,
suggest that relapse of leukemia in the CNS reflects resurgence of the disease in
the bone marrow that is first detected clinically in the CNS. The concomitant
molecular detection of bone marrow leukemia at time of 'isolated' CNS relapse in 
children with T-cell ALL explains subsequent bone marrow relapse in some of these
children, and argues for intensive systemic therapy of these patients.

PMID: 8182934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Oncogene. 1994 May;9(5):1437-46.

Products of the TAL2 oncogene in leukemic T cells: bHLH phosphoproteins with
DNA-binding activity.

Xia Y(1), Hwang LY, Cobb MH, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

The TAL2 gene is activated as a result of the (7;9) (q34;q32) translocation, a
chromosome defect found in the malignant cells of some patients with T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). TAL2 potentially encodes a basic helix-loop-helix
motif that is highly related to those specified by TAL1 and LYL1, distinct genes 
that have also been implicated in T-ALL. In this report we show that leukemic
cells bearing the (7;9) (q34;q32) translocation express a TAL2 gene product of
108 amino acids. In leukemic cells this product exists in both a phosphorylated
(pp13TAL2) and an unphosphorylated (p12TAL2) form. Serine residue 100 is the
major site of TAL2 phosphorylation in vivo, and it serves as an effective in
vitro substrate for mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases such as ERK1. TAL2
polypeptides interact in vivo with the E2A gene products (E47 and E12) to form
bHLH heterodimers that bind DNA in a sequence-specific manner. The TAL2
polypeptides do not bind DNA by themselves, however, suggesting that their
functional properties may be contingent upon association with other bHLH
proteins. Taken together, the properties of TAL2 evaluated here broadly resemble 
those described previously for TAL1, and therefore support the idea that both
proteins promote T-ALL by a common mechanism.

PMID: 8152805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Biol Chem. 1994 Apr 22;269(16):12099-105.

Distinguishable patterns of protein-DNA interactions involving complexes of basic
helix-loop-helix proteins.

Doyle K(1), Zhang Y, Baer R, Bina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana
47907-1393.

Myogenic factors and TAL1 possess distinguishable DNA binding characteristics
when they form a complex with basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins of class A. 
These characteristics were evident in electrophoretic mobility shift assays
showing that complexes of myogenic factors and HTF4 displayed a relatively high
affinity for the enhancer in the muscle creatine kinase gene, whereas TAL1
appeared to greatly attenuate the interaction of HTF4 with this enhancer. In
addition, by forming a complex with HTF4 in solution, TAL1 could exert a negative
effect on the interactions of HTF4 with elements that include E box motifs of
microE2 (CAGCTG) and kappa E2/microE5 (CACCTG) type. Similarly, heterodimers
containing TAL1 and the DNA binding domain of E47 exhibited a relatively weak
affinity for microE2 and kappa E2/microE5 core motifs. The results of both
studies invoked the hypothesis that in vivo TAL1 might act as a negative
regulator of microE2 and kappa E2/microE5 sequence motifs by forming a complex
with the products of the E2A and HTF4 genes. Support for this hypothesis was
obtained by transient expression analyses where TAL1 was found to inhibit the
activation effects produced by E2-5 and HTF4a on a reporter gene construct
containing repeated microE2 and microE5 motifs, derived from the immunoglobulin
gene enhancer.

PMID: 8163514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Apr 12;91(8):3181-5.

Formation of in vivo complexes between the TAL1 and E2A polypeptides of leukemic 
T cells.

Hsu HL(1), Wadman I, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

Tumor-specific activation of the TAL1 gene occurs in approximately 25% of
patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). The TAL1 gene products
possess a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain that interacts in vitro with the
bHLH proteins (E12 and E47) encoded by the E2A locus. We have now applied two
independent methods, the two-hybrid procedure and co-immunoprecipitation
analysis, to demonstrate that TAL1 and E2A polypeptides also associate in vivo.
These studies show that the bHLH domain of TAL1 selectively interacts with the
bHLH domains of E12 and E47, but not with the Id1 helix-loop-helix protein. TAL1 
does not self-associate to form homodimeric complexes, implying that the in vivo 
functions of TAL1 depend on heterologous interaction with other bHLH proteins
such as E12 and E47. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis revealed the presence of
endogenous TAL1/E2A complexes in Jurkat cells, a leukemic line derived from a
T-ALL patient. Thus, the malignant properties of TAL1 may be due to obligate
interaction with the E2A polypeptides.

PMCID: PMC43539
PMID: 8159721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Blood. 1994 Mar 1;83(5):1200-8.

The SCL/TAL-1 gene is expressed in progenitors of both the hematopoietic and
vascular systems during embryogenesis.

Kallianpur AR(1), Jordan JE, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Hematology), Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN.

Activation of the SCL (or TAL-1) gene as a result of chromosomal translocation or
deletion is a frequent molecular lesion in acute T-cell leukemia. By virtue of
its membership in the basic helix-loop-helix family of transcription factors, the
SCL gene is a candidate to regulate events in hematopoietic differentiation. We
have used polyclonal antibody raised against a bacterial expressed malE-SCL
fusion protein to characterize SCL protein expression in postimplantation embryos
and in neonatal and adult mice. SCL protein was detected at day 7.5 post coitum
at both embryonic and extraembryonic sites, approximately 24 hours before the
formation of recognizable hematopoietic elements. Expression then localized to
blood islands of the yolk sac followed by localization to fetal liver and spleen,
paralleling the hematopoietic activity of these tissues during development. SCL
protein was detected in erythroblasts in fetal and adult spleen, myeloid cells
and megakaryocytes in spleen and bone marrow, mast cells in skin, and in rare
cells in fetal and adult thymus. In addition, SCL protein was noted in
endothelial progenitors in blood islands and in endothelial cells and angioblasts
in a number of organs at times coincident with their vascularization. SCL
expression was also observed in other nonhematopoietic cell types in the
developing skeletal and nervous systems. These results show that SCL expression
is one of the earliest markers of mammalian hematopoietic development and are
compatible with a role for this transcription factor in terminal differentiation 
of the erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages. SCL expression by cells in the
thymus suggests that the gene may be active at some stage of T-cell
differentiation and may be relevant to its involvement by chromosomal
rearrangements in T-lymphoid leukemias. Finally, expression of the gene in
developing brain, cartilage, and vascular endothelium indicates SCL may have
actions in neural development, osteogenesis, and vasculogenesis, as well as in
hematopoietic differentiation.

PMID: 8118024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Oncogene. 1994 Mar;9(3):885-91.

A versatile expression vector for the in vitro study of protein-protein
interactions: characterization of E47 mutant proteins.

Hainzl T(1), Boehm T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, University of Freiburg, Germany.

Several mutants of the E47 protein, a member of the family of
basic/helix-loop-helix (b-HLH) transcriptional regulators, were examined for
their ability to homo- and heterodimerize with the protein product of the T-cell 
oncogene tal-1/SCL. For this purpose, a novel bacterial expression system was
developed in which proteins are expressed as fusions appended to
glutathione-S-transferase via a thrombin cleavage site and either one or four
protein kinase recognition sites embedded in a glycine-rich domain. Since the
interaction domain can be purified away from the glutathione-S-transferase moiety
and the radioactive label is located in a flexible N-terminal tag, protein
folding should occur normally. Our studies with E47 proteins prepared in this
system indicate that the ratio between E47 homodimers and E47/tal-1 heterodimers 
can dramatically shift upon subtle mutations in the loop region and the second
helix of the E47 protein. This unexpected results suggests a novel mechanism to
alter the equilibrium between different transactivating protein complexes of the 
b-HLH class.

PMID: 8108132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Feb;14(2):1256-65.

Preferred sequences for DNA recognition by the TAL1 helix-loop-helix proteins.

Hsu HL(1), Huang L, Tsan JT, Funk W, Wright WE, Hu JS, Kingston RE, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

Tumor-specific activation of the TAL1 gene is the most common genetic alteration 
seen in patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The TAL1 gene products
contain the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain, a protein dimerization and
DNA-binding motif common to several known transcription factors. A binding-site
selection procedure has now been used to evaluate the DNA recognition properties 
of TAL1. These studies demonstrate that TAL1 polypeptides do not have intrinsic
DNA-binding activity, presumably because of their inability to form bHLH
homodimers. However, TAL1 readily interacts with any of the known class A bHLH
proteins (E12, E47, E2-2, and HEB) to form heterodimers that bind DNA in a
sequence-specific manner. The TAL1 heterodimers preferentially recognize a subset
of E-box elements (CANNTG) that can be represented by the consensus sequence
AACAGATGGT. This consensus is composed of half-sites for recognition by the
participating class A bHLH polypeptide (AACAG) and the TAL1 polypeptide (ATGGT). 
TAL1 heterodimers with DNA-binding activity are readily detected in nuclear
extracts of Jurkat, a leukemic cell line derived from a patient with T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Hence, TAL1 is likely to bind and regulate the
transcription of a unique subset of subordinate target genes, some of which may
mediate the malignant function of TAL1 during T-cell leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC358481
PMID: 8289805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Res Immunol. 1994 Feb;145(2):139-43; discussion 155-8.

Phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of human early T-cell differentiation:
the T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia model.

Breit TM(1), Wolvers-Tettero IL, van Dongen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Dijkzigt/Erasmus University,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

PMID: 8079047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Gene. 1994 Jan 28;138(1-2):93-9.

Structure of the gene encoding the murine SCL protein.

Begley CG(1), Robb L, Rockman S, Visvader J, Bockamp EO, Chan YS, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

We have determined the molecular structure of the gene encoding the murine SCL
protein (helix-loop-helix transcription factor). The gene consists of seven exons
spanning approx. 20 kb. The intron/exon structure, coding region sequences and
sequences present at the splice junctions were highly conserved between mouse and
human. The 5' flanking sequence contains CCAAT and TATA consensus motifs with
several putative binding sites for SP-1, AP-1 and GATA-1. Multiple mRNA
transcripts were generated by alternate exon usage. The transcripts differed
primarily in the 5' untranslated region (UTR), but potentially also encode a
smaller SCL protein. Despite the high degree of conservation between species, the
heptamer/nonamer signal sequences in the 5' region of the human SCL gene (the
frequent site of SCL disruption in human leukemia) were poorly represented in the
murine sequence. In keeping with this, structural abnormalities of murine SCL
were uncommon in murine leukemias that express the SCL transcript.

PMID: 8125323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Leukemia. 1994 Jan;8(1):106-14.

The SCL protein displays cell-specific heterogeneity in size.

Elwood NJ(1), Green AR, Melder A, Begley CG, Nicola N.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

SCL protein production was examined in a variety of hemopoietic cell lines by
immunoblotting using specific polyclonal antisera. SCL protein was detected in
erythroid, megakaryocyte, mast and early myeloid cell lines, as well as in
several lymphoid leukemia cell lines which are known to harbor SCL gene
rearrangements. In most cell lines, proteins of molecular weight 49 and 44 kDa
were found, however two myeloid cell lines expressed only lower molecular weight 
species of 24 and 22 kDa. This size discrepancy appeared to be due to
cell-specific translational regulation, since overexpression of a retrovirally
transfected SCL gene yielded the higher molecular weight forms in most cell lines
(GP+E-86, AT2.5, M1) but only the 22 kDa form in the myeloid cell line,
WEHI-3B/D+. Overexpression of full-length SCL protein in the lymphoid cell lines,
SupT1 and Raji, did not alter cell phenotype and there was no evidence for
autoregulation of SCL transcription. The restricted pattern of SCL protein
synthesis is consistent with the restricted expression of SCL mRNA documented
previously. In addition, the present results indicate that SCL protein size was
determined by regulation of translation in a cell-specific manner.

PMID: 8289474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Leuk Lymphoma. 1994 Jan;12(3-4):157-66.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and the associated basic helix-loop-helix
gene SCL/tal.

Goldfarb AN(1), Greenberg JM.

Author information: 
(1)Case Western Reserve University, Institute of Pathology, Cleveland, Ohio
44106-4943.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is a relatively uncommon disease,
constituting only approximately 15% of newly diagnosed acute lymphoblastic
leukemias (ALL) in the United States, or roughly 300 cases per year. Outside of
the United States, in countries such as Egypt and India, T-ALL may represent as
much as 50% of all ALL's but still remains an overall rare disease. The clinical 
importance of T-ALL lies in its poor responsiveness to therapy that has proved
highly effective with standard B-cell precursor ALL (BCP-ALL). The scientific
importance of human T-ALL has resided in its role as a cancer prototype,
permitting the identification of novel genes centrally involved in both
neoplastic change and normal cellular differentiation. One of these genes,
SCL/tal, has received significant attention due to its intimate involvement in
T-ALL, as well as in normal hematopoiesis. Although a tremendous amount has been 
recently discovered about SCL/tal, its exact roles in leukemogenesis and normal
hematopoiesis remain obscure.

PMID: 8167548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Stem Cells. 1994;12 Suppl 1:143-9; discussion 149-51.

The SCL transcription factor and differential regulation of macrophage
differentiation by LIF, OSM and IL-6.

Begley CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Victoria, Australia.

The SCL gene is a member of the helix-loop-helix family of transcription factors.
First identified because of its involvement in a rare chromosome translocation in
human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, it is now recognized to be involved in
up to 25% of T cell leukemias. Normally within the hemopoietic system the gene is
expressed in progenitor cells, erythroid cells, mast cells and megakaryocytes.
During macrophage differentiation the level of SCL mRNA and protein becomes
undetectable. To examine this further, SCL was over expressed in murine M1 cells.
This resulted in perturbation of macrophage differentiation induced by leukemia
inhibitory factor (LIF) and oncostatin-M (OSM) but not interleukin (IL)-6.
Moreover the perturbation of LIF-induced differentiation applied to some
components of macrophage differentiation but not others. This suggests that
signaling through the gp130 homodimer (as occurs with IL-6) does not utilize an
SCL-inhibitable pathway. In contrast the LIF receptor/gp130 heterodimer does
utilize an SCL-inhibitable pathway for some elements of macrophage
differentiation (e.g., lysozyme induction) but not others (e.g., M-CSF receptor
induction).

PMID: 7696958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Dec 15;90(24):11593-7.

Induction of erythroid-specific gene expression in lymphoid cells.

Chiba T(1), Nagata Y, Kishi A, Sakamaki K, Miyajima A, Yamamoto M, Engel JD,
Todokoro K.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), Ibaraki, Japan.

Erythropoietin (Epo) is a cytokine which specifically regulates differentiation
and proliferation of erythroid progenitor cells. We report here that Epo receptor
expressed in interleukin 3-dependent lymphoid Ba/F3 cells transmits both
differentiation and growth signals. Epo stimulation of these cells leads to
activation of transcription and/or translation of the erythroid-specific
transcription factors GATA-1 and SCL, followed by the accumulation of both alpha-
and beta-globin chains. These results suggest that expression and activation of
the Epo receptor regulates erythroid-specific gene expression and might play a
role in determining a cell lineage in vivo and that GATA-1 and SCL may exert
their effects after Epo binds to its receptor. It was further found that chimeric
receptors composed of extracellular domains of Epo receptor and cytoplasmic
domains of interleukin 2 or interleukin 3 receptors could also induce
erythroid-specific gene expression in Ba/F3 cells. Taking these data together
with previous observations, we conclude that interaction of the extracellular
domains of the Epo receptor with other membrane components is essential for
transmission of both the erythroid differentiation and the growth signals.

PMCID: PMC48030
PMID: 8265595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Leukemia. 1993 Dec;7(12):2004-11.

tal-1 deletions in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia as PCR target for
detection of minimal residual disease.

Breit TM(1), Beishuizen A, Ludwig WD, Mol EJ, Adriaansen HJ, van Wering ER, van
Dongen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus University/University Hospital Dijkzigt,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques based on amplification and
identification of leukemia-specific DNA sequences provide a sensitive diagnostic 
method for detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) with a detection limit of 
10(-5) to 10(-6) (1-10 malignant cells in 10(6) normal cells). To date, the main 
leukemia-specific DNA sequences used as PCR targets in detection of MRD are
breakpoint fusion regions of chromosome translocations and junctional regions of 
rearranged immunoglobulin (Ig) or T-cell receptor (TcR) genes. The recently
identified tal-1 deletions involving the sil and tal-1 genes, provide a potential
MRD-PCR target. tal-1 deletions are site-specific because they are mediated via
recombination signal sequences homologous to Ig/TcR genes. In line with this
homology, tal-1 deletions also show random insertion and deletion of nucleotides 
at their breakpoints, resulting in highly variable breakpoint fusion regions. The
fusion region diversity can be applied to design patient-specific oligonucleotide
probes. Our Southern blot analyses of a large series of 313 acute leukemias with 
a specific tal-1 deletion probe (SILDB) demonstrated that tal-1 deletions
exclusively occur in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and not in
precursor B-ALL or acute non-lymphocytic leukemias. In addition, we did not
detect tal-1 deletions in normal blood cells and normal thymocytes by PCR
analysis. The diversity observed in tal-1 deletion fusion regions with an average
insertion and deletion of approximately 7 and approximately 6 nucleotides,
respectively, allowed us to design fusion-region-specific probes. The specificity
of the fusion-region probes was proven and the detection limit of the MRD-PCR
technique was tested in a series of dilution experiments. The observed detection 
limit of 10(-5) indicates that tal-1 deletions in T-ALL represent ideal
leukemia-specific PCR targets for detection of MRD.

PMID: 8255100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Semin Cancer Biol. 1993 Dec;4(6):341-7.

TAL1, TAL2 and LYL1: a family of basic helix-loop-helix proteins implicated in T 
cell acute leukaemia.

Baer R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas, Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas 75235.

TAL1 gene rearrangement is the most common genetic defect associated with T cell 
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL). Tumour-specific rearrangements of TAL1
arise as a result of either chromosome translocation or local DNA recombination. 
TAL1 gene products possess the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motif, a DNA-binding
domain common to several known transcription factors. The bHLH domain of TAL1 is 
especially homologous to those encoded by TAL2 and LYL1, distinct genes that were
also identified on the basis of chromosomal rearrangement in T-ALL. Thus, TAL1,
TAL2 and LYL1 constitute a unique family of bHLH proteins, each of which is a
potential mediator of T cell leukaemogenesis.

PMID: 8142619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Oncogene. 1993 Nov;8(11):3093-101.

SCL, the gene implicated in human T-cell leukaemia, is oncogenic in a murine
T-lymphocyte cell line.

Elwood NJ(1), Cook WD, Metcalf D, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

SCL (TAL-1) is implicated in the generation of human T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia. To directly examine the role of this putative oncogene, an SCL
retrovirus was constructed and used to infect a v-ABL transformed T-lymphocyte
cell line. Thirteen independent SCL-infected and four control cell lines were
established and injected subcutaneously into syngeneic mice. Mice injected with
SCL-infected clonal cell lines died significantly more rapidly than control
animals. By day 200 46% (40/87) of animals injected with SCL-infected cell lines 
had died due to disseminated transplantable lymphoid tumours. In contrast only
22% of control mice were dead by day 200 (P < 0.0015). Of possible relevance to
the enhanced tumourigenesis, some SCL-infected cell lines displayed increased
clonogenicity in agar. Increased cell growth was even more striking when ex-vivo 
tumour-derived cell lines were studied. Thus, SCL can co-operate with v-ABL to
hasten T-cell tumourigenesis. This is the first direct evidence demonstrating
that SCL can behave as an oncogene.

PMID: 8414511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Oncogene. 1993 Nov;8(11):3043-6.

Expression of the TAL1 proto-oncogene in cultured endothelial cells and blood
vessels of the spleen.

Hwang LY(1), Siegelman M, Davis L, Oppenheimer-Marks N, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

The TAL1 proto-oncogene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein that has 
been implicated in the pathogenesis of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Normal expression of TAL1 is observed in erythrocytic, megakaryocytic and
mastocytic cells of the hematopoietic lineage. We now report that both RNA
transcripts and polypeptide products of TAL1 are present in human umbilical vein 
endothelial cells cultured in vitro. Moreover, in situ hybridization revealed a
restricted pattern of TAL1 expression in endothelial cells in vivo, including
vessels within the white pulp and follicles of the spleen. In view of its
presumptive role as a transcriptional factor, the TAL1 gene product may serve
during normal development as a regulator of endothelial cell growth or
differentiation.

PMID: 8414504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Curr Genet. 1993 Nov;24(5):373-6.

Pentose-phosphate pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: analysis of deletion
mutants for transketolase, transaldolase, and glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase.

Schaaff-Gerstenschläger I(1), Zimmermann FK.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, TH Darmstadt, Germany.

Deletion mutants for the yeast transketolase gene TKL1 were constructed by gene
replacement. Transketolase activity was below the level of detection in mutant
crude extracts. Transketolase protein could be detected as a single protein band 
of the expected size by Western-blot analysis in wild-type strains but not in the
deletion mutant. Deletion of TKL1 led to a reduced but distinct growth in
synthetic medium without an aromatic amino-acid supplement. We also isolated
double and triple mutants for transketolase (tkl1), transaldolase (tal1), and
glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (zwf1) by crossing the different mutants. A
tal1 tkl1 double mutant grew nearly like wild-type in rich medium. Only the tkl1 
zwf1 double and the tal1 tkl1 zwf1 triple mutant grew more slowly than the
wild-type in rich medium. This growth defect could be partly alleviated by the
addition of xylulose but not ribose. The triple mutant still grew slowly on a
synthetic mineral salts medium without a supplement of aromatic amino acids. This
suggests the existence of an alternative but limited source of pentose phosphates
and erythrose 4-phosphate in the tkl1 zwf1 double mutants. Hybridization with low
stringency showed the existence of a sequence with homology to transketolase,
possibly a second gene.

PMID: 8299150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Cell Growth Differ. 1993 Nov;4(11):885-9.

Two new Drosophila genes related to human hematopoietic and neurogenic
transcription factors.

Varterasian M(1), Lipkowitz S, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Paterson B, Kirsch I.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute-Navy Medical Oncology Branch, National Naval Medical
Center, Bethesda, Maryland 20889-5105.

We have identified two new basic domain helix-loop-helix (bHLH) genes in
Drosophila melanogaster, DroSCL and DroNHLH. DroSCL was identified because of its
homology to the mammalian hematopoietic transcription factor SCL. DroNHLH was
similarly identified by homology to NHLH1 and NHLH2, two bHLH genes expressed in 
the developing mammalian nervous system. A partial DroSCL complementary DNA clone
was obtained from an early pupal (5.5-7.5-day) Drosophila library. DroSCL is 73% 
identical to SCL within the 55-amino acid region of the bHLH domain. A DroNHLH
complementary DNA clone was obtained from an early instar (I and II) Drosophila
library. Its coding region consists of 162 amino acids and encodes a predicted
protein of 18,312 daltons. DroNHLH is 87% identical to NHLH1 and NHLH2 within the
bHLH domain. DroSCL and DroNHLH are located on the X chromosome. A 1.7-kilobase
DroSCL transcript and a 1.5-kilobase DroNHLH transcript were detected by Northern
analysis of total Drosophila RNA. Examination of Drosophila embryos by tissue in 
situ hybridization reveals restricted expression of both genes in a subset of
cells in the developing central nervous system.

PMID: 8297794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Microbiol. 1993 Nov;10(4):867-76.

Transaldolase mutants in the yeast Kluyveromyces lactis provide evidence that
glucose can be metabolized through the pentose phosphate pathway.

Jacoby J(1), Hollenberg CP, Heinisch JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Düsseldorf, Germany.

We have isolated the gene encoding transaldolase from Kluyveromyces lactis
(KITAL1) by screening a genomic library of this yeast using the TAL1 gene of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a radioactive probe. The clone isolated contained an 
open reading frame of 1002 bp, encoding a protein with 76% identical residues in 
the deduced amino acid sequences as compared to Tal from S. cerevisiae. KITAL1
can complement a tal1 deletion of S. cerevisiae for enzymatic activity. The
transcription start of KITAL1 was located at -69 bp relative to the ATG
translation start codon. Deleting a large part of the open reading frame from the
genome did not lead to any obvious phenotype. Transaldolase was not produced in
such mutants as shown by immunological detection. In combination with a double
null-mutant in the genes encoding the phosphofructokinase subunits in K. lactis
(Klpfk1 Klpfk2 Kltal1), the cells lost their ability to grow on glucose. We take 
this as strong evidence that glucose is metabolized via the pentose phosphate
pathway in this yeast when glycolysis is blocked. In addition, by tetrad analysis
we detected a close linkage to KIPFK1 and inferred that KITAL1 is localized on
chromosome I.

PMID: 7934848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Leukemia. 1993 Oct;7(10):1509-13.

Characterization of translocation t(1;14)(p32;q11) in a T and in a B acute
leukemia.

Bernard O(1), Barin C, Charrin C, Mathieu-Mahul D, Berger R.

Author information: 
(1)U. 301 I.N.S.E.R.M.-I. G.M., Paris, France.

The TAL1 locus on chromosome band 1p32 is rearranged in 15 to 29% of human T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALLs). These alterations consist of either a
tald submicroscopic deletion (12-26% of T-ALL) or a t(1;14)(p32;q11) chromosomal 
translocation (3% of childhood T-ALL). Both types of alterations preferentially
affect the 5' part of the TAL1 locus. Their main consequence appears to be
transcriptional activation of the TAL1 gene. We have characterized two cases of
t(1;14)(p32;q11) in ALL. Both affect the TCR delta gene segments at 14q11 and the
5' part of the TAL1 locus at 1p32. The first case represented a 'classical'
t(1;14), associated with T-ALL. Its analysis indicates the use of a recombination
signal-like sequence localized in the third exon of TAL1 in the translocation
process. In the other case, the rearrangement to the D delta region occurred 5'
to the TAL1 transcription start sites. This case exhibited a B-lymphoid
immunophenotype thus suggesting that the putative oncogenicity of TAL1 activation
is not restricted to T-cell malignancies.

PMID: 8412312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Aug 15;90(16):7864-8.

The SCL gene product is regulated by and differentially regulates cytokine
responses during myeloid leukemic cell differentiation.

Tanigawa T(1), Elwood N, Metcalf D, Cary D, DeLuca E, Nicola NA, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Victoria, Australia.

Differentiation induction in murine M1 leukemia cells by interleukin 6 (IL-6),
leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), and oncostatin M (OSM) is postulated to occur
via a common receptor chain, gp130. In this study, growth factor-induced
differentiation of M1 cells was accompanied by a late and persistent decrease in 
levels of mRNA and protein for a helix-loop-helix transcription factor, the SCL
gene product. To evaluate whether reduced SCL expression was instrumental in
monocyte differentiation, an SCL cDNA expression vector was introduced into M1
cells to obtain cell lines in which overexpression of SCL mRNA and protein was
enforced. This resulted in a reduction in cells differentiating in response to
LIF and OSM but not in response to IL-6. Scatchard analysis indicated that both
parental and SCL-transfected cell lines exhibited similar receptor numbers and
receptor affinities for LIF, OSM, and IL-6, suggesting that the differential
responsiveness was not due to selective receptor down-modulation. Thus, these
data implicate SCL in monocytic differentiation and provide evidence for
differential receptor signaling pathways despite utilization of a common gp130
subunit by all three receptors.

PMCID: PMC47243
PMID: 8356096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Leukemia. 1993 Aug;7(8):1204-10.

SIL-TAL1 deletion in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Janssen JW(1), Ludwig WD, Sterry W, Bartram CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics II, University of Ulm, Germany.

The TAL1 gene on chromosome 1 encodes a hematopoietic transcription factor.
Disruption of TAL1 via chromosomal translocation or a site-specific deletion has 
been reported in up to 30% of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALL). Here 
we used a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay to identify the 90 kb SIL-TAL1
deletion in a group of 19 cutaneous T-cell lymphomas and a series of 142 T-ALL
patients (76 children, 66 adults). While none of the T-cell lymphoma exhibited a 
SIL-TAL1 recombination, seven T-ALL cases showed a type d1 and two patients a
type d2 deletion. Of pediatric T-ALL, 9% (7/76) and of adult patients only 3%
(2/66) were characterized by this genomic lesion. The deletion correlated with
commitment to the T-cell receptor (TCR) alpha beta lineage, but lacked
association with a distinct maturation stage. Sequence analysis of SIL-TAL1
breakpoints revealed marked heterogeneity at the junctional region among the nine
patients due to random deletion and insertion of N-region nucleotides or
templated P-nucleotide addition mediated via illegitimate V(D)J recombinase
action. Clonospecific oligomer probes in conjunction with PCR allowed the
detection of minimal residual disease in one out of four patients monitored
during complete hematologic remission.

PMID: 8350619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Leukemia. 1993 Jul;7(7):933-8.

Clinical significance of TAL1 gene alteration in childhood T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia and lymphoma.

Kikuchi A(1), Hayashi Y, Kobayashi S, Hanada R, Moriwaki K, Yamamoto K, Fujimoto 
J, Kaneko Y, Yamamori S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Saitama Children's Medical Center, Japan.

The TAL1 gene is altered as a consequence of t(1;14)(p32;q11) found in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and shows site specific recombination (tald
rearrangement). We investigated TAL1 gene alterations in 39 children with T-cell 
ALL, in 32 with B-precursor ALL, in three with ALL with myeloid-associated
antigen, and in 18 with T-non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (T-NHL). tald rearrangement was 
found in nine of 39 T-cell ALL patients using Southern blot analysis with a TAL1 
gene probe. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products predicted from the sequences
of the corresponding tald alleles were shown in all of these patients. In
contrast, no rearranged band was observed in other kinds of leukemia or in T-NHL 
patients. All of these patients with tald rearrangement had CD1- CD2+ CD4- CD7+
CD10- pheno-type. Of these, seven were classified as stage I thymic
differentiation, and eight have survived for three to 59 months remission. Four
of seven patients investigated had normal karyotypes, which has been reported to 
be associated with a good prognosis in T-cell ALL. We conclude that tald
rearrangement is restricted to T-cell ALL, for which it provides a useful clonal 
marker. Such patients with this rearrangement may constitute a subgroup of T-cell
ALL with a good prognosis.

PMID: 8321044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Blood. 1993 Apr 15;81(8):2110-7.

Clinical features and outcome of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia in childhood
with respect to alterations at the TAL1 locus: a Pediatric Oncology Group study.

Bash RO(1), Crist WM, Shuster JJ, Link MP, Amylon M, Pullen J, Carroll AJ,
Buchanan GR, Smith RG, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235-9048.

Alteration of the TAL1 locus is the most common nonrandom genetic defect in
childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). To determine if
rearrangements of the TAL1 proto-oncogene confer a distinct leukemic phenotype,
we studied leukemic peripheral blood or bone marrow samples from 182 children
with newly diagnosed T-ALL enrolled on Pediatric Oncology Group treatment
protocols. Forty-eight (26%) of the samples had a local rearrangement of the TAL1
locus. Demographic and clinical features were compared for patient subgroups with
and without TAL1 rearrangements. The only clinical correlates that were
significantly associated with TAL1 gene rearrangements were higher white blood
cell count (P = .017) and higher hemoglobin (P = .007) at diagnosis.
Immunophenotypically, samples with altered TAL1 were more likely to be CD2+ (P = 
.001) and lack CD10 (cALLa) expression (P = .007) than those without the
rearrangement. There was a trend toward improved event-free survival (EFS) in
patients with TAL1 rearrangements (4-year EFS was 44% +/- 7% for patients without
the rearrangements v 59% +/- 11% for those with rearrangements), but the
difference was not significant (P = .34). The role of TAL1 in leukemogenesis has 
yet to be clearly defined, and the prognostic significance of TAL1 gene
rearrangements in T-ALL deserves further study.

PMID: 8471769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Exp Med. 1993 Apr 1;177(4):965-77.

Site-specific deletions involving the tal-1 and sil genes are restricted to cells
of the T cell receptor alpha/beta lineage: T cell receptor delta gene deletion
mechanism affects multiple genes.

Breit TM(1), Mol EJ, Wolvers-Tettero IL, Ludwig WD, van Wering ER, van Dongen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Dijkzigt/Erasmus University,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Site-specific deletions in the tal-1 gene are reported to occur in 12-26% of T
cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALL). So far two main types of tal-1
deletions have been described. Upon analysis of 134 T-ALL we have found two new
types of tal-1 deletions. These four types of deletions juxtapose the 5' part of 
the tal-1 gene to the sil gene promoter, thereby deleting all coding sil exons
but leaving the coding tal-1 exons undamaged. The recombination signal sequences 
(RSS) and fusion regions of the tal-1 deletion breakpoints strongly resemble the 
RSS and junctional regions of immunoglobulin/T cell receptor (TCR) gene
rearrangements, which implies that they are probably caused by the same V(D)J
recombinase complex. Analysis of the 134 T-ALL suggested that the occurrence of
tal-1 deletions is associated with the CD3 phenotype, because no tal-1 deletions 
were found in 25 TCR-gamma/delta + T-ALL, whereas 8 of the 69 CD3- T-ALL and 11
of the 40 TCR-alpha/beta + T-ALL contained such a deletion. Careful examination
of all TCR genes revealed that tal-1 deletions exclusively occurred in CD3- or
CD3+ T-ALL of the alpha/beta lineage with a frequency of 18% in T-ALL with one
deleted TCR-delta allele, and a frequency of 34% in T-ALL with TCR-delta gene
deletions on both alleles. Therefore, we conclude that alpha/beta lineage
commitment of the T-ALL and especially the extent of TCR-delta gene deletions
determines the chance of a tal-1 deletion. This suggests that tal-1 deletions are
mediated via the same deletion mechanism as TCR-delta gene deletions.

PMCID: PMC2190963
PMID: 8459224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Oncogene. 1993 Mar;8(3):677-83.

Products of the TAL1 oncogene: basic helix-loop-helix proteins phosphorylated at 
serine residues.

Cheng JT(1), Hsu HL, Hwang LY, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas, Dallas 75235.

TAL1 gene rearrangement is observed in nearly 30% of patients with T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), and thus it represents the most common genetic
lesion associated with this disease. Nevertheless, the presence of TAL1 gene
products in normal or leukemic cells has not been reported. Therefore,
immunoprecipitation with anti-TAL1 antisera was used to demonstrate the presence 
of TAL1 phosphoproteins, pp42TAL1 and pp22TAL1, in both T-ALL and erythroleukemia
cell lines. The pp42TAL1 and pp22TAL1 proteins appear to be phosphorylated forms 
of full-length and truncated TAL1 gene products respectively. Phosphoamino acid
analysis revealed that pp42TAL1 contains phosphoserine residues. The TAL1
phosphoproteins were detected in all of the T-ALL cell lines that harbor obvious 
TAL1 gene rearrangements. Interestingly, pp42TAL1 and pp22TAL1 were also present 
in some, but not all, of the T-ALL lines without detectable TAL1 gene
alterations. Therefore, TAL1 activation may promote leukemogenesis in a far
greater proportion of T-ALL patients than the 30% that bear gross TAL1 gene
rearrangements.

PMID: 8437851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Feb;13(2):801-8.

Phosphorylation of the TAL1 oncoprotein by the extracellular-signal-regulated
protein kinase ERK1.

Cheng JT(1), Cobb MH, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

Alteration of the TAL1 gene is the most common genetic lesion found in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. TAL1 encodes phosphoproteins, pp42TAL1 and
pp22TAL1, that represent phosphorylated versions of the full-length (residues 1
to 331) and truncated (residues 176 to 331) TAL1 gene products, respectively.
Both proteins contain the basic helix-loop-helix motif, a DNA-binding and protein
dimerization motif common to several known transcriptional regulatory factors. We
now report that serine residue 122 (S122) is a major phosphorylation site of
pp42TAL1 in leukemic cell lines and transfected COS1 cells. In vivo
phosphorylation of S122 is induced by epidermal growth factor with a rapid time
course that parallels activation of the ERK/MAP2 protein kinases. Moreover, S122 
is readily phosphorylated in vitro by the extracellular signal-regulated protein 
kinase ERK1. These data suggest that TAL1 residue S122 serves as an in vivo
substrate for ERK/MAP2 kinases such as ERK1. Therefore, S122 phosphorylation may 
provide a mechanism whereby the properties of TAL1 polypeptides can be modulated 
by extracellular stimuli.

PMCID: PMC358963
PMID: 8423803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Blood. 1993 Feb 1;81(3):647-55.

Expression of tal-1 and GATA-binding proteins during human hematopoiesis.

Mouthon MA(1), Bernard O, Mitjavila MT, Romeo PH, Vainchenker W, Mathieu-Mahul D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM 91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

Tal-1 rearrangements are associated with nearly 30% of human T acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Tal-1 gene encodes a putative transcription factor with a
basic helix-loop-helix domain and is known to be predominantly expressed in
hematopoietic cells. We investigated the pattern of tal-1 expression in purified 
human hematopoietic cells by in situ hybridization and reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction analysis. Both methods demonstrated that the tal-1 gene
is expressed in megakaryocytes and erythroblasts as well as in basophilic
granulocytes. In addition, our results indicate that the tal-1 1A promoter, which
contains two consensus GATA-binding sites, is active mainly in these lineages.
Because the GATA-1 gene is known to transactivate several genes specific for the 
erythroid, megakaryocytic, and mastocytic/basophilic lineages, we studied GATA-1 
expression in these purified hematopoietic cells. We found that GATA-1 and tal-1 
genes are coexpressed in these three lineages. Remarkably, the expression of both
genes is downmodulated during erythroid and megakaryocytic terminal maturation.
In immature hematopoietic cells, tal-1 and GATA-1 genes are coexpressed in
committed progenitors cells (CD34+/CD38(2+)), whereas they are not detectable in 
the most primitive cells (CD34(2+)/CD38-). In contrast, GATA-2 is strongly
expressed in both most primitive and committed progenitors cells, whereas GATA-3 
is mostly detected in most primitive ones. Altogether our results strongly
suggest that GATA-1 modulates the transcription of tal-1 during the
differentiation of the erythroid, megakaryocytic, and basosophilic lineages.

PMID: 7678994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Br J Haematol. 1993 Jan;83(1):39-44.

Quantification of leukaemic cells based on heteroduplex formation of tal-1 gene
sequences after PCR coamplification.

Borkhardt A(1), Repp R, Harbott J, Kreuder J, Lampert F.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Giessen, Germany.

Based on the high sensitivity of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) several
assays have already been described which can be applied to monitor minimal
residual disease in patients with leukaemia. However, most of these approaches
are only qualitative or semiquantitative at best. Moreover, the semiquantitative 
assays require rather large-scale procedures such as oligonucleotide
hybridization or sampling of aliquots during the exponential phase of PCR
amplification, which is time consuming and may be error prone. Using the deletion
in the tal-1 gene as a clonal marker of malignant cells, which can be found in
about 10-25% of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, we have developed a rapid
and simple PCR assay for the quantification of residual leukaemic cells. The
assay is based on heteroduplex formation between standard and template DNA
sequences after coamplification of both DNA sequences in the same PCR reaction.
The sensitivity of this PCR approach allows the detection of neoplastic cells at 
frequency of at least 10(-4). Application of such an assay needs not to be
restricted to patients harbouring a tal-1 gene deletion. It may easily be adapted
to other clonal DNA markers of blast cells and therefore facilitate monitoring of
minimal residual disease in many different kinds of leukaemia.

PMID: 8435335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Blood. 1992 Dec 1;80(11):2858-66.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia--the associated gene SCL/tal codes for a
42-Kd nuclear phosphoprotein.

Goldfarb AN(1), Goueli S, Mickelson D, Greenberg JM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota Hospital Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathology, Minneapolis.

SCL/tal is a putative oncogene originally identified through its involvement in
the translocation t(1;14)(p32;q11) present in the leukemic cell line DU.528.
Subsequent studies have shown an upstream deletion activating expression of
SCL/tal to be one of the most common genetic lesions in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). The cDNA sequence of SCL/tal encodes a basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein with regions of marked homology to lyl-1 and
tal-2, two other bHLH proteins involved in T-ALL chromosomal translocations. The 
bHLH motif suggests that the SCL/tal product localizes to the nucleus, binds to
specific DNA sequences, and regulates transcription of a specific array of target
genes. Our studies directly identify the SCL/tal product as a 42-Kd
phosphoprotein that efficiently localizes to the nucleus. Deletion mutagenesis
has allowed identification of a region critical for nuclear localization, a
region that corresponds to the DNA-binding basic domain within the bHLH motif.
Because this domain is shared by lyl-1 and tal-2, these latter putative T-cell
oncoproteins probably use a nuclear localization mechanism identical to that of
SCL/tal.

PMID: 1450410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Exp Med. 1992 Nov 1;176(5):1303-10.

Disruption of the SCL gene by a t(1;3) translocation in a patient with T cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Aplan PD(1), Raimondi SC, Kirsch IR.

Author information: 
(1)Navy Medical Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20889.

SCL gene disruptions are the most common chromosomal abnormality associated with 
the development of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Such disruptions
can be the result of t(1;14) and t(1;7) translocations, as well as a
cytogenetically undetectable interstitial deletion of chromosome 1. We present
here a case of T cell ALL with a t(1;3)(p34;p21) translocation that also disrupts
the SCL locus and leads to dysregulated SCL gene expression. This translocation, 
similar to previously reported SCL gene disruptions, appears to have been
mediated, at least in part, by the V(D)J recombinase complex, since cryptic
heptamer recognition sequences, as well as nontemplated N region nucleotide
addition, are present at the breakpoints. The t(1;3) also disrupts a region on
chromosome 3 characterized by alternating purine and pyrimidine residues, which
can form a Z-DNA structure, reported to be prone to recombination events. A
previously undescribed, evolutionarily conserved transcript unit is detected
within 8 kb of the breakpoint on chromosome 3. This report extends the spectrum
of recognized SCL translocations associated with T cell ALL, and underscores the 
contention that dysregulated SCL expression may be a causal event in T cell ALL.

PMCID: PMC2119434
PMID: 1402676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. EMBO J. 1992 Nov;11(11):4073-81.

The SCL gene product: a positive regulator of erythroid differentiation.

Aplan PD(1), Nakahara K, Orkin SH, Kirsch IR.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Navy Medical Branch, Bethesda, MD 20889.

The SCL (tal-1, TCL5) gene is a member of the basic domain, helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) class of putative transcription factors. We found that (i) the SCL
promoter for exon Ia contains a potential recognition site for GATA-binding
transcription factors, (ii) SCL mRNA is expressed in all erythroid tissues and
cell lines examined, and (iii) SCL mRNA increases upon induced differentiation of
murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells, and inferred that SCL may play a physiologic 
role in erythroid differentiation. We used gel shift and transfection assays to
demonstrate that the GATA motif in the SCL promoter binds GATA-1 (and GATA-2),
and also mediates transcriptional transactivation. To identify a role for SCL in 
erythroid differentiation, we generated stable transfectants of MEL and K562 (a
human chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line that can differentiate along the
erythroid pathway) cells overexpressing wild-type, antisense or mutant SCL cDNA. 
Increasing the level of SCL expression in two independent MEL lines (F4-6 and
C19, a 745 derivative) and K562 cells increased the rate of spontaneous (i.e. in 
the absence of inducer) erythroid differentiation. Conversely, induced
differentiation was inhibited in MEL transfectants expressing either antisense
SCL cDNA or a mutant SCL lacking the basic domain. Our experiments suggest that
the SCL gene can be a target for the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 and
that the SCL gene product serves as a positive regulator of erythroid
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC556917
PMID: 1396592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Exp Med. 1992 Oct 1;176(4):919-25.

A third tal-1 promoter is specifically used in human T cell leukemias.

Bernard O(1), Azogui O, Lecointe N, Mugneret F, Berger R, Larsen CJ,
Mathieu-Mahul D.

Author information: 
(1)U. 301 Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
(INSERM)-Institut de Génétique Moléculaire (IGM), France.

A common feature of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALLs) is the presence
of structural alteration of the 5' part of the tal-1 locus, localized on
chromosomal band 1p32. These alterations consist of either a t(1;14)(p32;q11)
chromosomal translocation (3% of T-ALLs) or tald submicroscopic deletion (12-25% 
additional T-ALLs). We have characterized a case of T-ALL with t(1;14)(p32;q11)
in which, unlike the majority of t(1;14), the recombination with the T cell
receptor delta elements affected the 3' side of the tal-1 locus. In this case,
tal-1 transcription is initiated from a promoter located within the fourth exon
similarly to the DU 528 cell line. In a T-ALL bearing a t(1;14) affecting the 5' 
part of tal-1, two types of tal-1 transcripts were observed, namely those
probably initiated from the D delta region juxtaposed to tal-1 by the
translocation, and those from the exon 4 promoter. It is interesting that this
exon 4 promotion was also found in leukemic T cell lines and T-ALL samples
without apparent tal-1 genomic alteration. In contrast, no transcript initiated
from the exon 4 promoter was found in T-ALL with tald1 or tald2 deletion. In
these cells, tal-1 is expressed via SIL-tal-1 fused transcripts. Finally, this
exon 4 initiation was detected neither in normal bone marrow, nor in malignant
cells from the erythroid/megakaryocytic lineages. Taken as a whole, these data
suggest that the exon 4 promoter is specifically active in T cell lineage.

PMCID: PMC2119401
PMID: 1402666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Sep 15;89(18):8492-6.

HEN1 and HEN2: a subgroup of basic helix-loop-helix genes that are coexpressed in
a human neuroblastoma.

Brown L(1), Espinosa R 3rd, Le Beau MM, Siciliano MJ, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

An important family of regulatory molecules is made up of proteins that possess
the DNA-binding and dimerization motif known as the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
domain. The bHLH family includes subgroups of closely related proteins that share
common functional properties and overlapping patterns of expression (e.g., the
MyoD1 and achaete-scute subgroups). In this report we describe HEN1 and HEN2,
mammalian genes that encode a distinct subgroup of bHLH proteins. The HEN1 gene
was identified on the basis of cross-hybridization with TAL1, a known bHLH gene
implicated in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. In situ fluorescence
hybridization was used to localize the human HEN1 gene to chromosome band 1q22.
HEN1 and HEN2 are coexpressed in the IMR-32 human neuroblastoma cell line, and
they encode highly related proteins of 133 and 135 residues, respectively, that
share 98% amino acid identity in their hHLH domains. These data imply that the
bHLH protein subgroup encoded by HEN1 and HEN2 may serve important regulatory
functions in the developing nervous system.

PMCID: PMC49946
PMID: 1528853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Int J Cell Cloning. 1992 Sep;10(5):269-76.

SCL and related hemopoietic helix-loop-helix transcription factors.

Green AR(1), Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Victoria, Australia.

The helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins are a family of transcription factors that
include proteins critical to differentiation and development in species ranging
from plants to mammals. Five members of this family (MYC, SCL, TAL-2, LYL-1 and
E2A) are implicated in oncogenic events in human lymphoid tumors because of their
consistent involvement in chromosomal translocations. Although activated in T
cell leukemias, expression of SCL and LYL-1 is low or undetectable in normal T
cell populations. SCL is expressed in erythroid, megakaryocyte and mast cell
populations (the same cell lineages as GATA-1, a zinc-finger transcription
factor). In addition, both SCL and GATA-1 undergo coordinate modulation during
chemically induced erythroid differentiation of mouse erythroleukemia cells and
are down-modulated during myeloid differentiation of human K562 cells, thus
implying a role for SCL in erythroid differentiation events. However, in contrast
to GATA-1, SCL is expressed in the developing brain. Studies of the function of
SCL suggest it is also important in proliferation and self-renewal events in
erythroid cells.

PMID: 1453013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Leukemia. 1992 Jul;6(7):623-5.

SCL gene in human tumors.

Rockman S(1), Begley CG, Kannourakis G, Mann GJ, Dobrovic AN, Kefford RF, McGrath
K.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Victoria, Australia.

The SCL gene encodes a member of the helix-loop-helix (HLH) family of
transcription factors and is reportedly involved in up to 25% of T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). We have surveyed over 120 primary human tumors
including melanomas, myeloid, and lymphoid leukemias, and other solid tumors
without evidence of rearrangements involving SCL. These results are further
supported by low level expression of SCL in these tumors (as assessed by a
polymerase chain-reaction-based method). We conclude that
rearrangement/translocation with subsequent activation of SCL occurs infrequently
in myeloid leukemias and melanomas.

PMID: 1625484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Oncogene. 1992 Apr;7(4):653-60.

SCL is coexpressed with GATA-1 in hemopoietic cells but is also expressed in
developing brain.

Green AR(1), Lints T, Visvader J, Harvey R, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge, UK.

Erratum in
    Oncogene 1992 Jul;7(7):1459.

The SCL gene encodes a putative transcription factor with a basic
helix-loop-helix (B-HLH) motif and is known to be predominantly expressed in
erythroid cells. Here we also demonstrate expression of SCL mRNA in normal mast
cells, mast cell lines and megakaryocytic cell lines. SCL is therefore expressed 
in the same three lineages as GATA-1, a well-recognized hemopoietic transcription
factor. SCL and GATA-1 mRNA were also co-expressed in interleukin 3-dependent
primitive myeloid lines. In murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells SCL and GATA-1
underwent coordinated biphasic modulation during hexamethylene bisacetamide
(HMBA)-induced erythroid differentiation. The kinetics of SCL and GATA-1 mRNA
expression was inversely correlated with changes in ID, a negative regulator of
B-HLH proteins, and was distinct from changes in MYC, MYB and erythropoietin
receptor transcripts. During myeloid differentiation of K562 cells, SCL and
GATA-1 mRNA levels also underwent biphasic modulation. Thus SCL and GATA-1 are
coordinately expressed in multiple hemopoietic lineages and coordinately
regulated during induced erythroid and myeloid differentiation. In nonhemopoietic
tissues SCL was only detected in adult and developing brain where GATA-1 is
reportedly not expressed. In day 14.5 embryos analysed by in situ hybridization, 
SCL transcripts were detected in post-mitotic neurons in the metencephalon and
roof of the mesencephalon. This suggests a previously unexpected role for SCL in 
neural differentiation.

PMID: 1565464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1992 Apr;4(3):211-6.

The translocation (1;14)(p34;q11) in human T-cell leukemia: chromosome breakage
25 kilobase pairs downstream of the TAL1 protooncogene.

Xia Y(1), Brown L, Tsan JT, Yang CY, Siciliano MJ, Crist WM, Carroll AJ, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

Nearly 30 percent of patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL)
exhibit a tumor-specific rearrangement of the TAL1 gene (also called TCL5 or
SCL). These rearrangements are generated by either local DNA deletion or a
(1;14)(p34;q11) chromosome translocation, and they typically result in structural
alterations of the TAL1 transcription unit. In this report we present a molecular
characterization of the t(1;14)(p34;q11) from a T-ALL patient. As a consequence
of the translocation, TAL1 is transposed from its normal position on chromosome 1
into the T-cell receptor alpha/delta chain locus on chromosome 14. Unlike
previous cases, the chromosome 1 breakpoint in this patient did not disrupt the
continuity of the TAL1 transcription unit, but instead occurred approximately 25 
kilobase pairs (kb) downstream of TAL1. This observation suggests that malignant 
alteration of TAL1 can be mediated by long-range cis-activating mechanisms that
are triggered by DNA rearrangement at a distant site. Genes Chrom Cancer
4:211-216 (1992).

PMID: 1382561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Blood. 1992 Mar 1;79(5):1327-33.

Involvement of the putative hematopoietic transcription factor SCL in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Aplan PD(1), Lombardi DP, Reaman GH, Sather HN, Hammond GD, Kirsch IR.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute/Navy Medical Oncology Branch, National Naval Medical
Center, Bethesda, MD 20889.

The SCL gene, initially discovered at the site of a translocation breakpoint
associated with the development of a stem cell leukemia, encodes a protein that
contains the highly conserved basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motif found in a
large array of eukaryotic transcription factors. Recently, we have described a
nonrandom, site-specific SCL rearrangement in several T-cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia (ALL) cell lines that juxtaposes SCL with a distinct transcribed locus, 
SIL. The SIL/SCL rearrangement was found in leukemic blasts from 11 of 70 (16%)
newly diagnosed T-cell ALL patients, a prevalence substantially higher than that 
of the t(11;14) translocation, which has previously been reported as the most
frequent nonrandom chromosomal abnormality in T-cell ALL. We did not detect the
SIL/SCL rearrangement in the leukemic blasts from 30 patients with B-cell
precursor ALL, indicating that the rearrangement was specific for T-cell ALL.
Analysis of RNA from these patients indicated that an SIL/SCL fusion mRNA was
formed, joining SIL and SCL in a head-to-tail fashion. The fusion occurs in the
5' untranslated region (UTR) of both genes, preserving the SCL coding region. The
net result of this rearrangement is that SCL mRNA expression becomes regulated by
the SIL promoter, leading to inappropriate SCL expression. The resultant
inappropriate expression of this putative transcription factor may then
contribute to leukemic transformation in T-cell ALL.

PMID: 1311214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Jan 25;20(2):368.

Molecular cloning of the chicken SCL cDNA.

Goodwin G(1), MacGregor A, Zhu J, Crompton MR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, Chester Beatty Laboratories, London, UK.

PMCID: PMC310382
PMID: 1741264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Dec 15;88(24):11416-20.

TAL2, a helix-loop-helix gene activated by the (7;9)(q34;q32) translocation in
human T-cell leukemia.

Xia Y(1), Brown L, Yang CY, Tsan JT, Siciliano MJ, Espinosa R 3rd, Le Beau MM,
Baer RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

Tumor-specific alteration of the TAL1 gene occurs in almost 25% of patients with 
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). We now report the identification of 
TAL2, a distinct gene that was isolated on the basis of its sequence homology
with TAL1. The TAL2 gene is located 33 kilobase pairs from the chromosome 9
breakpoint of t(7;9)(q34;q32), a recurring translocation specifically associated 
with T-ALL. As a consequence of t(7;9)(q34;q32), TAL2 is juxtaposed with
sequences from the T-cell receptor beta-chain gene on chromosome 7. TAL2
sequences are actively transcribed in SUP-T3, a T-ALL cell line that harbors the 
t(7;9)(q34;q32). The TAL2 gene product includes a helix-loop-helix protein
dimerization and DNA binding domain that is especially homologous to those
encoded by the TAL1 and LYL1 protooncogenes. Hence, TAL2, TAL1, and LYL1
constitute a discrete subgroup of helix-loop-helix proteins, each of which can
potentially contribute to the development of T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC53146
PMID: 1763056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. EMBO J. 1991 Dec;10(13):4153-8.

Antisense SCL suppresses self-renewal and enhances spontaneous erythroid
differentiation of the human leukaemic cell line K562.

Green AR(1), DeLuca E, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne Hospital,
Victoria, Australia.

The SCL gene encodes a member of the helix-loop-helix family of transcription
factors that have been implicated in regulation of differentiation and
development. Although SCL mRNA is not detectable in normal thymocytes or
peripheral T-lymphocytes, transcriptional activation occurs in T-cell tumours. A 
clue to the normal function of SCL has come from demonstration of high levels of 
SCL mRNA in erythroid cells. To illuminate the function of SCL in the erythroid
lineage, an antisense SCL construct was introduced into the human
erythroleukaemia cell line, K562. Cells electroporated with a vector containing
antisense SCL grew more slowly than control cells which had received vector
alone. Non-specific toxicity was excluded by showing that antisense SCL did not
influence growth of Raji cells, a B-cell line that does not express endogenous
SCL mRNA. Suppression of K562 growth was accompanied by increased spontaneous
erythroid differentiation as measured by benzidine staining. K562 cells
containing antisense SCL produced smaller colonies in agar and exhibited reduced 
clonogenicity compared with control cells. In addition, experiments in which K562
colonies were recloned showed that antisense SCL profoundly suppressed
self-renewal of K562 cells. These data provide the first evidence that SCL
promotes self-renewal in an erythroid cell line and raise the possibility that
SCL may function to regulate proliferation of normal erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC453166
PMID: 1756722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Blood. 1991 Nov 15;78(10):2686-95.

c-tal, a helix-loop-helix protein, is juxtaposed to the T-cell receptor-beta
chain gene by a reciprocal chromosomal translocation: t(1;7)(p32;q35).

Fitzgerald TJ(1), Neale GA, Raimondi SC, Goorha RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Molecular Biology, St Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38101.

Studies on nonrandom chromosomal translocations have been important for the
identification of genes potentially involved in the malignant transformation of
cells. The most widely studied translocations, involving members of the Ig
supergene family, have shown juxtapositions of proto-oncogenes with the
rearranging loci. Such translocations can inappropriately activate expression of 
the proto-oncogenes and thereby play a role in tumorigenesis. Because the
cytogenetic analysis of a bone marrow sample from a child with T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia showed a (1;7)(p32;q35) translocation, we sought to
determine if the translocation breakpoint was in the T-cell receptor (TCR)-beta
gene locus on chromosome 7. Analysis of the TCR-beta gene by Southern blotting
showed three rearranged bands. Nucleotide sequencing and Southern blot analysis
of TCR-beta genomic clones, isolated from patient DNA, showed that one contained 
a normal rearrangement of the TCR-beta gene using V beta 12.2, D beta 2.1, and J 
beta 2.5, whereas two other clones contained DNA from derivative chromosomes 1
and 7. Chromosomal mapping showed that the (1;7) translocation breakpoint was 35 
kb 3' to the c-tal gene locus. The juxtaposition of c-tal to the TCR-beta locus
may enhance c-tal expression and contribute to T-cell leukemogenesis.

PMID: 1824262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Jun;11(6):3037-42.

Enhancer-binding activity of the tal-1 oncoprotein in association with the
E47/E12 helix-loop-helix proteins.

Hsu HL(1), Cheng JT, Chen Q, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235-9048.

Almost 30% of patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) bear
structural alterations of tal-1, a presumptive proto-oncogene that encodes
sequences homologous to the helix-loop-helix (HLH) DNA-binding and dimerization
domain. Analysis of the tal-1 gene product reveals that its HLH domain mediates
protein-protein interactions with either of the ubiquitously expressed HLH
proteins E47 and E12. The resultant tal-1/E47 and tal-1/E12 heterodimers
specifically recognize the E-box DNA sequence motif found in eucaryotic
transcriptional enhancers. Hence, the tal-1 protein shares biochemical properties
with other tissue-specific HLH proteins that control cell type determination
during myogenesis (e.g., MyoD1) and neurogenesis (e.g., achaete-scute). The data 
suggest that HLH heterodimers involving tal-1 may function in vivo as
transcriptional regulatory factors that influence cell type determination during 
hematopoietic development.

PMCID: PMC360139
PMID: 2038315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Feb 1;88(3):869-73.

Molecular cloning and chromosomal localization of the murine homolog of the human
helix-loop-helix gene SCL.

Begley CG(1), Visvader J, Green AR, Aplan PD, Metcalf D, Kirsch IR, Gough NM.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Victoria, Australia.

The human SCL gene is a member of the family of genes that encode the
helix-loop-helix (HLH) class of DNA-binding proteins. A murine SCL cDNA was
isolated from a normal macrophage cDNA library by using HLH-specific
oligonucleotides as hybridization probes. The coding region is 987 base pairs and
encodes a predicted protein of 34 kDa. The nucleotide sequence of the coding
region shows 88% identity to the human SCL gene, and the amino acid sequence is
94% identical. The HLH motif and upstream hydrophilic region are entirely
conserved in the murine and human proteins. The identity between the mouse and
human sequences was less marked in the 5' and 3' untranslated regions. Two murine
SCL transcripts that differ in the 3' noncoding region have been detected in
fetal liver and various cell lines. Variation was also observed in the 5'
untranslated region. Interestingly, immediately downstream of the
protein-termination codon, both the human SCL sequence and the murine homolog
share an E-box element--the suggested target site for DNA binding of HLH
proteins. The murine SCL homolog was mapped to the central part of chromosome 4.

PMCID: PMC50915
PMID: 1704135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Science. 1990 Dec 7;250(4986):1426-9.

Disruption of the human SCL locus by "illegitimate" V-(D)-J recombinase activity.

Aplan PD(1), Lombardi DP, Ginsberg AM, Cossman J, Bertness VL, Kirsch IR.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute-Navy Medical Oncology Branch, Naval Hospital,
Bethesda, MD 20889-5105.

A fusion complementary DNA in the T cell line HSB-2 elucidates a provocative
mechanism for the disruption of the putative hematopoietic transcription factor
SCL. The fusion cDNA results from an interstitial deletion between a previously
unknown locus, SIL (SCL interrupting locus), and the 5' untranslated region of
SCL. Similar to 1;14 translocations, this deletion disrupts the SCL 5' regulatory
region. This event is probably mediated by V-(D)-J recombinase activity, although
neither locus is an immunoglobulin or a T cell receptor. Two other T cell lines, 
CEM and RPMI 8402, have essentially identical deletions. Thus, in lymphocytes,
growth-affecting genes other than immune receptors risk rearrangements.

PMID: 2255914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Exp Med. 1990 Nov 1;172(5):1403-8.

Coding sequences of the tal-1 gene are disrupted by chromosome translocation in
human T cell leukemia.

Chen Q(1), Yang CY, Tsan JT, Xia Y, Ragab AH, Peiper SC, Carroll A, Baer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

The tal-1 proto-oncogene encodes a helix-loop-helix DNA-binding protein that has 
been implicated in the formation of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). 
Patients with T-ALL harbor structural rearrangements of tal-1 that result from
either local DNA deletion or t(1;14)(p34;q11) chromosome translocation. By
analyzing t(1;14)(p34;q11) chromosomes from a series of patients, we have now
identified a discrete region of tal-1 wherein most of the translocation
breakpoints occur. Moreover, mapping of tal-1 genomic DNA revealed that coding
exons are situated on both sides of the t(1;14)(p34;q11) major breakpoint region.
Hence, the translocated allele of tal-1 is truncated in a manner that reduces its
amino acid coding potential.

PMCID: PMC2188666
PMID: 2230650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Eur J Biochem. 1990 Mar 30;188(3):597-603.

Molecular analysis of the structural gene for yeast transaldolase.

Schaaff I(1), Hohmann S, Zimmermann FK.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Technische Hochschule Darmstadt, Federal Republic 
of Germany.

We have cloned the structural gene for yeast transaldolase. Transformants
carrying the TAL1 gene on a multicopy plasmid over-produced transaldolase. A
deletion mutant which was constructed using the cloned gene did not show any
detectable transaldolase activity in vitro. Furthermore, both transaldolase
isoenzymes which were detected in wild-type crude extracts by immunoblotting were
missing in the deletion mutants. Thus, TAL1 is the only transaldolase structural 
gene in yeast. TAL1 is not an essential gene. Deletion of the transaldolase gene 
did not affect growth on complete media with different carbon sources or on
synthetic media. However, the transaldolase-deficient strains accumulated
sedoheptulose 7-phosphate, an intermediate of the pentose-phosphate pathway.
Mutants lacking both transaldolase and phosphoglucose isomerase grew more slowly 
than the single mutants. They accumulated more sedoheptulose 7-phosphate on
medium containing fructose than on glucose medium. This shows that fructose
6-phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, metabolites of glycolysis, can enter 
the nonoxidative part of the pentose-phosphate pathway.

PMID: 2185015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1990 Jan;1(3):194-208.

Two distinct mechanisms for the SCL gene activation in the t(1;14) translocation 
of T-cell leukemias.

Bernard O(1), Guglielmi P, Jonveaux P, Cherif D, Gisselbrecht S, Mauchauffe M,
Berger R, Larsen CJ, Mathieu-Mahul D.

Author information: 
(1)U301 INSERM CNRS, Institute de Génétique Moléculaire, France.

Molecular study of a t(1;14)(p32;q11) translocation found in an acute T-cell
leukemia (Kd cells) with a relatively mature phenotype is reported. Complex DNA
rearrangements were characterized in the TCR alpha/delta locus. Besides a
productive V alpha/J alpha assembly found on the normal allele, two deletions
within the J alpha cluster were identified in the translocated allele. The
translocation breakpoints involved the TCR delta gene on chromosome 14 and the
SCL locus on chromosome band Ip32 that was recently shown to be activated by the 
t(1;14) translocation of the DU 528 leukemic cell line. Significantly, both Kd
and DU 528 translocation breakpoints were located at the boundaries of D delta or
J delta segments and were clustered in a 10 kb genomic fragment of the SCL gene. 
The presence of recombination signal motifs (heptamer-12/23 bp spacer-nonamer) on
both normal chromosome partners, and N nucleotide addition on both derivative
chromosomes involved the recombinase system in the translocation event. The SCL
locus was highly expressed as a 5 kb transcript in Kd cells and, as already
reported, as a 2 kb transcript in DU 528 cells. Importantly, a 5 kb SCL
transcript was also detected in immature nonlymphoid hematopoietic cells but not 
in normal mature T cells, suggesting that it might correspond to the normal SCL
transcript. Taken together, our data support the notion that the involvement of
the SCL gene in the leukemogenic process may occur through overexpression of an
apparently normal transcript (Kd cells) or expression of a truncated RNA (DU 528 
cells).

PMID: 1964581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


