
1. Stem Cell Reports. 2016 Mar 9. pii: S2213-6711(16)00058-8. doi:
10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.02.007. [Epub ahead of print]

P2Y4 Nucleotide Receptor in Neuronal Precursors Induces Glutamatergic Subtype
Markers in Their Descendant Neurons.

Uda Y(1), Xu S(1), Matsumura T(1), Takei Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genomic Drug Discovery Science, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Science, Kyoto University, 46-29 Shimo-adachi-cho, Yoshida,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (2)Department of Nanobio Drug Discovery Science,
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Science, Kyoto University, 46-29
Shimo-adachi-cho, Yoshida, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. Electronic address:
ytakei@pharm.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) produce all neuronal subtypes involved in the nervous
system. The mechanism regulating their subtype selection is not fully understood.
We found that the expression of the nucleotide receptor P2Y4 was transiently
augmented in the course of neuronal differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells
(ESCs), which was after loss of pluripotency but prior to terminal
differentiation of neurons. The activation of P2Y4 in the differentiating ESCs
resulted in an increased proportion of neurons expressing vesicular glutamate
transporter (vGluT), a marker of glutamatergic subtype. A subpopulation of type 2
NSCs of the adult mouse hippocampus expressed P2Y4. Its activation induced the
expression of glutamatergic subtype markers, vGluT and TBR1, in their descendant 
neurons. Reciprocally, inhibition of the P2Y4 signaling abolished the effects of 
nucleotides on those expressions. Our results provide evidence that
differentiating NSCs pass through a stage in which nucleotides can affect subtype
marker expression of their descendant neurons.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26972684  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Science. 2016 Mar 25;351(6280):1443-6. doi: 10.1126/science.aad8361. Epub 2016
Mar 3.

Sequential transcriptional waves direct the differentiation of newborn neurons in
the mouse neocortex.

Telley L(1), Govindan S(1), Prados J(1), Stevant I(2), Nef S(2), Dermitzakis
E(3), Dayer A(4), Jabaudon D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Neurosciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland.
Institute for Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (iGE3), University of Geneva,
Switzerland. (2)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of
Geneva, Switzerland. Institute for Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (iGE3),
University of Geneva, Switzerland. (3)Department of Genetic Medicine and
Development, University of Geneva, Switzerland. Biomedical Research Foundation
Academy of Athens, Greece. Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research,
King Abdulaziz University, Saudi Arabia. Institute for Genetics and Genomics in
Geneva (iGE3), University of Geneva, Switzerland. (4)Department of Basic
Neurosciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland. Department of Psychiatry,
Geneva University Hospital, Switzerland. Institute for Genetics and Genomics in
Geneva (iGE3), University of Geneva, Switzerland. (5)Department of Basic
Neurosciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland. Clinic of Neurology, Geneva
University Hospital, Switzerland. Institute for Genetics and Genomics in Geneva
(iGE3), University of Geneva, Switzerland. denis.jabaudon@unige.ch.

During corticogenesis, excitatory neurons are born from progenitors located in
the ventricular zone (VZ), from where they migrate to assemble into circuits. How
neuronal identity is dynamically specified upon progenitor division is unknown.
Here, we study this process using a high-temporal-resolution technology allowing 
fluorescent tagging of isochronic cohorts of newborn VZ cells. By combining this 
in vivo approach with single-cell transcriptomics in mice, we identify and
functionally characterize neuron-specific primordial transcriptional programs as 
they dynamically unfold. Our results reveal early transcriptional waves that
instruct the sequence and pace of neuronal differentiation events, guiding
newborn neurons toward their final fate, and contribute to a road map for the
reverse engineering of specific classes of cortical neurons from undifferentiated
cells.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26940868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Anat. 2016 Mar;228(3):452-63. doi: 10.1111/joa.12416. Epub 2015 Nov 27.

Distinct expression patterns for type II topoisomerases IIA and IIB in the early 
foetal human telencephalon.

Harkin LF(1,)(2), Gerrelli D(3), Gold Diaz DC(3), Santos C(3), Alzu'bi A(1,)(2), 
Austin CA(4), Clowry GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(2)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 
(3)HDBR Resource, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK. (4)Institute for
Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

TOP2A and TOP2B are type II topoisomerase enzymes that have important but
distinct roles in DNA replication and RNA transcription. Recently, TOP2B has been
implicated in the transcription of long genes in particular that play crucial
roles in neural development and are susceptible to mutations contributing to
neurodevelopmental conditions such as autism and schizophrenia. This study maps
their expression in the early foetal human telencephalon between 9 and 12
post-conceptional weeks. TOP2A immunoreactivity was restricted to cell nuclei of 
the proliferative layers of the cortex and ganglionic eminences (GE), including
the ventricular zone and subventricular zone (SVZ) closely matching expression of
the proliferation marker KI67. Comparison with sections immunolabelled for
NKX2.1, a medial GE (MGE) marker, and PAX6, a cortical progenitor cell and
lateral GE (LGE) marker, revealed that TOP2A-expressing cells were more abundant 
in MGE than the LGE. In the cortex, TOP2B is expressed in cell nuclei in both
proliferative (SVZ) and post-mitotic compartments (intermediate zone and cortical
plate) as revealed by comparison with immunostaining for PAX6 and the
post-mitotic neuron marker TBR1. However, co-expression with KI67 was rare. In
the GE, TOP2B was also expressed by proliferative and post-mitotic compartments. 
In situ hybridisation studies confirmed these patterns of expression, except that
TOP2A mRNA is restricted to cells in the G2/M phase of division. Thus, during
early development, TOP2A is likely to have a role in cell proliferation, whereas 
TOP2B is expressed in post-mitotic cells and may be important in controlling
expression of long genes even at this early stage.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Anatomy published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on
behalf of Anatomical Society.

PMID: 26612825  [PubMed - in process]


4. Front Neurosci. 2015 Nov 3;9:406. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00406. eCollection
2015.

Brain-specific transcriptional regulator T-brain-1 controls brain wiring and
neuronal activity in autism spectrum disorders.

Huang TN(1), Hsueh YP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica Taipei, Taiwan.

T-brain-1 (TBR1) is a brain-specific T-box transcription factor. In 1995, Tbr1
was first identified from a subtractive hybridization that compared mouse
embryonic and adult telencephalons. Previous studies of Tbr1 (-/-) mice have
indicated critical roles for TBR1 in the development of the cerebral cortex,
amygdala, and olfactory bulb. Neuronal migration and axonal projection are two
important developmental features controlled by TBR1. Recently, recurrent de novo 
disruptive mutations in the TBR1 gene have been found in patients with autism
spectrum disorders (ASDs). Human genetic studies have identified TBR1 as a
high-confidence risk factor for ASDs. Because only one allele of the TBR1 gene is
mutated in these patients, Tbr1 (+/-) mice serve as a good genetic mouse model to
explore the mechanism by which de novo TBR1 mutation leads to ASDs. Although
neuronal migration and axonal projection defects of cerebral cortex are the most 
prominent phenotypes in Tbr1 (-/-) mice, these features are not found in Tbr1
(+/-) mice. Instead, inter- and intra-amygdalar axonal projections and NMDAR
expression and activity in amygdala are particularly susceptible to Tbr1
haploinsufficiency. The studies indicated that both abnormal brain wiring
(abnormal amygdalar connections) and excitation/inhibition imbalance (NMDAR
hypoactivity), two prominent models for ASD etiology, are present in Tbr1 (+/-)
mice. Moreover, calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine protein kinase (CASK) was
found to interact with TBR1. The CASK-TBR1 complex had been shown to directly
bind the promoter of the Grin2b gene, which is also known as Nmdar2b, and
upregulate Grin2b expression. This molecular function of TBR1 provides an
explanation for NMDAR hypoactivity in Tbr1 (+/-) mice. In addition to Grin2b,
cell adhesion molecules-including Ntng1, Cdh8, and Cntn2-are also regulated by
TBR1 to control axonal projections of amygdala. Taken together, the studies of
Tbr1 provide an integrated picture of ASD etiology at the cellular and circuit
levels.

PMCID: PMC4630302
PMID: 26578866  [PubMed]


5. Gene. 2016 Feb 1;576(2 Pt 1):593-602. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.10.014. Epub 2015 
Oct 28.

Speciation of two gobioid species, Pterogobius elapoides and Pterogobius
zonoleucus revealed by multi-locus nuclear and mitochondrial DNA analyses.

Akihito(1), Akishinonomiya F(2), Ikeda Y(3), Aizawa M(3), Nakagawa S(4), Umehara 
Y(5), Yonezawa T(6), Mano S(7), Hasegawa M(6), Nakabo T(8), Gojobori T(9).

Author information: 
(1)The Imperial Residence, 1-1 Chiyoda, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100-0001, Japan. (2)The
University Museum, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0033, Japan; Tokyo University of Agriculture, 1737 Funako, Atsugi-shi,
Kanagawa 243-0034, Japan. (3)Imperial Household Agency, 1-1 Chiyoda, Chiyoda-ku, 
Tokyo 100-8111, Japan. (4)Center for Information Biology, National Institute of
Genetics, 1111 Yata, Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan; Department of Molecular
Life Science, Tokai University School of Medicine, 143 Shimokasuya, Isehara,
Kanagawa 259-1193, Japan. (5)Center for Information Biology, National Institute
of Genetics, 1111 Yata, Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan. (6)School of Life
Sciences, Fudan University, SongHu Rd. 2005, Shanghai 200438, China; The
Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 10-3 Midori-cho, Tachikawa, Tokyo 190-8562,
Japan. (7)The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 10-3 Midori-cho, Tachikawa,
Tokyo 190-8562, Japan. (8)The Kyoto University Museum, Kyoto University, Yoshida 
Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (9)Center for Information Biology,
National Institute of Genetics, 1111 Yata, Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan;
Computational Bioscience Research Center, Biological and Environmental Science
and Engineering, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST),
Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: tgojobor@nig.ac.jp.

To understand how geographical differentiation of gobioid fish species led to
speciation, two populations of the Pacific Ocean and the Sea of Japan for each of
the two gobioid species, Pterogobius elapoides and Pterogobius zonoleucus, were
studied in both morphological and molecular features. Analyzing mitochondrial
genes, Akihito et al. (2008) suggested that P. zonoleucus does not form a
monophyletic clade relative to P. elapoides, indicating that "Sea of Japan P.
zonoleucus" and P. elapoides form a clade excluding "Pacific P. zonoleucus" as an
outgroup. Because morphological classification clearly distinguish these two
species and a gene tree may differ from a population tree, we examined three
nuclear genes, S7RP, RAG1, and TBR1, in this work, in order to determine whether 
nuclear and mitochondrial trees are concordant, thus shedding light on the
evolutionary history of this group of fishes. Importantly, nuclear trees were
based on exactly the same individuals that were used for the previously published
mtDNA trees. The tree based on RAG1 exon sequences suggested a closer
relationship of P. elapoides with "Sea of Japan P. zonoleucus", which was in
agreement with the mitochondrial tree. In contrast, S7RP and TBR1 introns
recovered a monophyletic P. zonoleucus. If the mitochondrial tree represents the 
population tree in which P. elapoides evolved from "Sea of Japan P. zonoleucus", 
the population size of P. elapoides is expected to be smaller than that of "Sea
of Japan P. zonoleucus". This is because a smaller population of the new species 
is usually differentiated from a larger population of the ancestral species when 
the speciation occurred. However, we found no evidence of such a small population
size during the evolution of P. elapoides. Therefore, we conclude that the
monophyletic P. zonoleucus as suggested by S7RP and TBR1 most likely represents
the population tree, which is consistent with the morphological classification.
In this case, it is possible that the incongruent mitochondrial and RAG1 trees
are either due to incomplete lineage sorting of ancestral polymorphisms or to
introgression by hybridization. Because of a smaller effective population size of
mitochondria compared with nuclear genes, the introgression might be a more
likely scenario in explaining the incongruent mitochondrial tree than the
incomplete lineage sorting. Because of smaller effective population size of "Sea 
of Japan P. zonoleucus" than that of P. elapoides, the direction of the
introgression was likely to be from the latter to the former. This evolutionary
work of the two gobioid species highlights the need of analyzing multiple gene
trees for both nuclear and mitochondrial genes as well as scrutinization of
morphological characteristics to obtain a population tree representing the
organismal evolutionary history.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26475939  [PubMed - in process]


6. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Oct 16. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22354. [Epub ahead of print]

Distinct calcium signals in developing cortical interneurons persist despite
disorganization of cortex by Tbr1 KO.

Easton CR(1,)(2), Dickey CW(1), Moen SP(1), Neuzil KE(1), Barger Z(1), Anderson
TM(1), Moody WJ(1), Hevner RF(1,)(3,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195.
(2)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, Washington, 98101. (3)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195.

Cortical development involves the structuring of network features by genetically 
programmed molecular signaling pathways. Additionally, spontaneous ion channel
activity refines neuronal connections. We examine Ca(2+) fluctuations in the
first postnatal week of normal mouse neocortex and that expressing knockout of
the transcription factor T-brain-1 (Tbr1): a signaling molecule in cortical
patterning and differentiation of excitatory neurons. In cortex, glutamatergic
neurons express Tbr1 just before the onset of population electrical activity that
is accompanied by intracellular Ca(2+) increases. It is known that glutamatergic 
cells are disordered with Tbr1 KO such that normal laying of the cortex, with
newer born cells residing in superficial layers, does not occur. However, the
fate of cortical interneurons is not well studied, nor is the ability of Tbr1
deficient cortex to express normal physiological activity. Using fluorescent
proteins targeted to interneurons, we find that cortical interneurons are also
disordered in the Tbr1 knockout. Using Ca(2+) imaging we find that population
activity in mutant cortex occurs at normal frequencies with similar sensitivity
to GABAA receptor blockade as in nonmutant cortex. Finally, using multichannel
fluorescence imaging of Ca(2+) indicator dye and interneurons labeled with red
fluorescent protein, we identify an additional Ca(2+) signal in interneurons
distinct from population activity and with different pharmacological
sensitivities. Our results show the population activity described here is a
robust property of the developing network that continues in the absence of an
important signaling molecule, Tbr1, and that cortical interneurons generate
distinct forms of activity that may serve different developmental functions. ©
2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Develop Neurobiol, 2015.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26473411  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Parasit Vectors. 2015 Aug 12;8:415. doi: 10.1186/s13071-015-1002-3.

Parasitological, serological and molecular survey of Trypanosoma evansi infection
in dromedary camels from Cholistan Desert, Pakistan.

Tehseen S(1), Jahan N(2), Qamar MF(3), Desquesnes M(4), Shahzad MI(5),
Deborggraeve S(6), Büscher P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Government College University Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan.
soniaasghar@live.com. (2)Department of Zoology, Government College University
Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan. dr.nusratjahan@gcu.edu.pk. (3)Department of Zoology,
Government College University Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan. fiaz.qamar@uvas.edu.pk.
(4)CIRAD-Bios, UMR17 Inter Tryp, Montpellier, France. marc.desquesnes@cirad.fr.
(5)University College of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Islamia University
Bahawalpur, Bahawalpur, Pakistan. mirza.imran@iub.edu.pk. (6)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium.
sdeborggraeve@itg.be. (7)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Tropical
Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium. pbuscher@itg.be.

BACKGROUND: Surra, a vector borne disease caused by Trypanosoma (T.) evansi,
affects the health, productivity and working capacity of camels. Since clinical
signs are not pathognomonic, diagnosis must be confirmed by laboratory methods.
This is a first study on the prevalence of surra in Cholistan Desert, Pakistan
using a broad variety of diagnostic tests thereby emphasizing it as a risk for
the dromedaries of Pakistan.
METHODS: In a cross sectional study, 1005 dromedary camels from three districts
in the Cholistan Desert were sampled to assess the prevalence of trypanosomosis
due to T. evansi by means of parasitological (Giemsa stained thin smear),
serological (formol gel test, CATT/T. evansi, ELISA/VSG RoTat 1.2, immune
trypanolysis) and molecular tests (TBR1/2 PCR and RoTat 1.2 PCR). Kappa was
calculated to assess the degree of agreement between different tests whereas
chi-square test along with odds ratios and their 95% confidence intervals were
used to study influence of breed, gender, age and locality on disease prevalence.
RESULTS: Overall prevalence was 0.7% with Giemsa stained thin smears (GST), 40.1%
with formol gel test (FGT), 47.7% with CATT/T. evansi, 44.2% with ELISA/VSG RoTat
1.2, 39.9 % with immune trypanolysis (TL), 31.9 % with TBR1/2 PCR and 30.5% with 
RoTat1.2 PCR. Based on these results, the Cholistan Desert appears to be a high
risk area for surra. According to TL and TBR1/2 PCR, camels at Bahawalpur are
approximately two times more likely to be infected than those in Bahawalnagar
(OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.8; 95% CI: 1.38-2.42) and Rahim Yar Khan (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.9; 95% CI: 1.30-2.75).
Test agreement of TL was moderate with CATT/T. evansi (k<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.43; 95% CI:
0.378-0.489) and ELISA/VSG RoTat 1.2 (k<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.54; 95% CI: 0.489-0.594) and poor
with the other tests. Test agreement between TBR1/2 PCR and RoTat1.2 PCR was
almost perfect (k<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.96; 95% CI: 0.950-0.984). We didn't find evidence for the
presence of T. evansi type B in the studied population.
CONCLUSION: Our study supports using antibody detection tests, rather than
parasitological and molecular examination, to assess surra prevalence in camels. 
It also calls for implementation of measures to control surra in the Cholistan
Desert.

PMCID: PMC4532143
PMID: 26259616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Front Neurosci. 2015 May 12;9:162. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00162. eCollection
2015.

A hypothesis for the evolution of the upper layers of the neocortex through
co-option of the olfactory cortex developmental program.

Luzzati F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology (DBIOS), University of Turin
Turin, Italy ; Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri Ottolenghi Orbassano, Truin,
Italy.

The neocortex is unique to mammals and its evolutionary origin is still highly
debated. The neocortex is generated by the dorsal pallium ventricular zone, a
germinative domain that in reptiles give rise to the dorsal cortex. Whether this 
latter allocortical structure contains homologs of all neocortical cell types it 
is unclear. Recently we described a population of DCX+/Tbr1+ cells that is
specifically associated with the layer II of higher order areas of both the
neocortex and of the more evolutionary conserved piriform cortex. In a reptile
similar cells are present in the layer II of the olfactory cortex and the DVR but
not in the dorsal cortex. These data are consistent with the proposal that the
reptilian dorsal cortex is homologous only to the deep layers of the neocortex
while the upper layers are a mammalian innovation. Based on our observations we
extended these ideas by hypothesizing that this innovation was obtained by
co-opting a lateral and/or ventral pallium developmental program. Interestingly, 
an analysis in the Allen brain atlas revealed a striking similarity in gene
expression between neocortical layers II/III and piriform cortex. We thus propose
a model in which the early neocortical column originated by the superposition of 
the lateral olfactory and dorsal cortex. This model is consistent with the fossil
record and may account not only for the topological position of the neocortex,
but also for its basic cytoarchitectural and hodological features. This idea is
also consistent with previous hypotheses that the peri-allocortex represents the 
more ancient neocortical part. The great advances in deciphering the molecular
logic of the amniote pallium developmental programs will hopefully enable to
directly test our hypotheses in the next future.

PMCID: PMC4429232
PMID: 26029038  [PubMed]


9. Nat Commun. 2015 May 18;6:7168. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8168.

Trans-synaptic zinc mobilization improves social interaction in two mouse models 
of autism through NMDAR activation.

Lee EJ(1), Lee H(2), Huang TN(3), Chung C(2), Shin W(2), Kim K(2), Koh JY(4),
Hsueh YP(3), Kim E(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced
Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Korea [2] Center for
Synaptic Brain Dysfunctions, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Daejeon 305-701, 
Korea. (2)1] Center for Synaptic Brain Dysfunctions, Institute for Basic Science 
(IBS), Daejeon 305-701, Korea [2] Department of Biological Sciences, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Korea.
(3)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan. (4)1]
Neural Injury Research Lab, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul
138-736, Korea [2] Asan Institute for Life Science, University of Ulsan College
of Medicine, Seoul 138-736, Korea [3] Department of Neurology, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul 138-736, Korea.

Genetic aspects of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) have recently been
extensively explored, but environmental influences that affect ASDs have received
considerably less attention. Zinc (Zn) is a nutritional factor implicated in
ASDs, but evidence for a strong association and linking mechanism is largely
lacking. Here we report that trans-synaptic Zn mobilization rapidly rescues
social interaction in two independent mouse models of ASD. In mice lacking
Shank2, an excitatory postsynaptic scaffolding protein, postsynaptic Zn elevation
induced by clioquinol (a Zn chelator and ionophore) improves social interaction. 
Postsynaptic Zn is mainly derived from presynaptic pools and activates NMDA
receptors (NMDARs) through postsynaptic activation of the tyrosine kinase Src.
Clioquinol also improves social interaction in mice haploinsufficient for the
transcription factor Tbr1, which accompanies NMDAR activation in the amygdala.
These results suggest that trans-synaptic Zn mobilization induced by clioquinol
rescues social deficits in mouse models of ASD through postsynaptic Src and NMDAR
activation.

PMCID: PMC4479043
PMID: 25981743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Neurosci. 2015 May 13;35(19):7552-64. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0169-15.2015.

The Specification of Cortical Subcerebral Projection Neurons Depends on the
Direct Repression of TBR1 by CTIP1/BCL11a.

Cánovas J(1), Berndt FA(1), Sepúlveda H(2), Aguilar R(2), Veloso FA(2), Montecino
M(2), Oliva C(1), Maass JC(3), Sierralta J(4), Kukuljan M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute and Program of Physiology and Biophysics,
Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile, Santiago 8380453, Chile. (2)Center for
Biomedical Research and FONDAP Center for Genome Regulation, Universidad Andrés
Bello, Santiago 8370146, Chile, and. (3)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute and
Program of Physiology and Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile, 
Santiago 8380453, Chile, Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital Clínico,
Universidad de Chile, Santiago 8380456, Chile. (4)Biomedical Neuroscience
Institute and Program of Physiology and Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine,
Universidad de Chile, Santiago 8380453, Chile, kukuljan@med.uchile.cl
jimena@neuro.med.uchile.cl.

The acquisition of distinct neuronal fates is fundamental for the function of the
cerebral cortex. We find that the development of subcerebral projections from
layer 5 neurons in the mouse neocortex depends on the high levels of expression
of the transcription factor CTIP1; CTIP1 is coexpressed with CTIP2 in neurons
that project to subcerebral targets and with SATB2 in those that project to the
contralateral cortex. CTIP1 directly represses Tbr1 in layer 5, which appears as 
a critical step for the acquisition of the subcerebral fate. In contrast, lower
levels of CTIP1 in layer 6 are required for TBR1 expression, which directs the
corticothalamic fate. CTIP1 does not appear to play a critical role in the
acquisition of the callosal projection fate in layer 5. These findings unravel a 
key step in the acquisition of cell fate for closely related corticofugal neurons
and indicate that differential dosages of transcriptions factors are critical to 
specify different neuronal identities.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/357552-13$15.00/0.

PMID: 25972180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cereb Cortex. 2016 Mar;26(3):1255-71. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhv079. Epub 2015 Apr
16.

Dynamic Expression Patterns of Progenitor and Pyramidal Neuron Layer Markers in
the Developing Human Hippocampus.

Cipriani S(1), Nardelli J(1), Verney C(1), Delezoide AL(2), Guimiot F(2),
Gressens P(1), Adle-Biassette H(3).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR 1141, Hôpital Robert-Debré, Paris, France Faculté de Médecine Denis
Diderot, Université Paris 7, Paris, France. (2)INSERM UMR 1141, Hôpital
Robert-Debré, Paris, France Faculté de Médecine Denis Diderot, Université Paris
7, Paris, France Service de Biologie du Développement, Hôpital Robert-Debré,
APHP, Paris, France. (3)INSERM UMR 1141, Hôpital Robert-Debré, Paris, France
Faculté de Médecine Denis Diderot, Université Paris 7, Paris, France Service
d'Anatomie et de Cytologie Pathologique, Hôpital Lariboisère, APHP, Paris,
France.

The molecular mechanisms underlying the formation of hippocampus are unknown in
humans. To improve our knowledge of molecules that potentially regulate pyramidal
neurogenesis and layering in various hippocampal fields, we investigated the
expression of progenitor markers and cell fate molecules from gestational week
(GW) 9 to GW 20. At GW 9, the progenitor cell compartment of the hippocampal
formation mainly consisted of PAX6(+) cells in the ventricular zone. Between GW 9
and 11, a second germinal area, the subventricular zone (SVZ), was formed, as
shown by TBR2 labeling. Postmitotic markers (TBR1, CTIP2, SATB2, and CUX1) might 
reflect the inside-out layering of the plate from GW 11 onwards. TBR1(+) neurons 
appeared in the deep plate, whereas CTIP2(+), SATB2(+), and CUX1(+) neurons
occupied the upper layers. From GW 16, differences in layer segregation were
observed between the ammonic and subicular plates. Moreover, an
ammonic-to-subicular maturation gradient was observed in germinal/postmitotic
areas. Taken together, these findings demonstrate for the first time the presence
of an SVZ in the hippocampus of human fetuses and laminar differences in
transcription factor expression in the pyramidal layer of the human ammonic and
subicular plate, and provide new information to further investigate the
connectivity of the hippocampal formation.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25882041  [PubMed - in process]


12. Autism Res. 2015 Aug;8(4):412-26. doi: 10.1002/aur.1456. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

T-Brain-1--A Potential Master Regulator in Autism Spectrum Disorders.

Chuang HC(1,)(2), Huang TN(2), Hsueh YP(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

T-Brain-1 (TBR1), a causative gene in autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), encodes a
brain-specific T-box transcription factor. It is therefore possible that TBR1
controls the expression of other autism risk factors. The downstream genes of
TBR1 have been identified using microarray and promoter analyses. In this study, 
we annotated individual genes downstream of TBR1 and investigated any
associations with ASDs through extensive literature searches. Of 124 TBR1 target 
genes, 23 were reported to be associated with ASDs. In addition, one gene,
Kiaa0319, is a known causative gene for dyslexia, a disorder frequently
associated with autism. A change in expression level in 10 of these 24 genes has 
been previously confirmed. We further validated the alteration of RNA expression 
levels of Kiaa0319, Baiap2, and Gad1 in Tbr1 deficient mice. Among these 24
genes, four transcription factors Auts2, Nfia, Nr4a2, and Sox5 were found,
suggesting that TBR1 controls a transcriptional cascade relevant to autism
pathogenesis. A further five of the 24 genes (Cd44, Cdh8, Cntn6, Gpc6, and Ntng1)
encode membrane proteins that regulate cell adhesion and axonal outgrowth. These 
genes likely contribute to the role of TBR1 in regulation of neuronal migration
and axonal extension. Besides, decreases in Grin2b expression and increases in
Gad1 expression imply that neuronal activity may be aberrant in Tbr1 deficient
mice. These analyses provide direction for future experiments to reveal the
pathogenic mechanism of autism.

© 2015 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25600067  [PubMed - in process]


13. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Jan 13;4(1):16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.12.001.
Epub 2014 Dec 31.

Restoration of progranulin expression rescues cortical neuron generation in an
induced pluripotent stem cell model of frontotemporal dementia.

Raitano S(1), Ordovàs L(1), De Muynck L(2), Guo W(2), Espuny-Camacho I(3),
Geraerts M(1), Khurana S(1), Vanuytsel K(1), Tóth BI(4), Voets T(4), Vandenberghe
R(5), Cathomen T(6), Van Den Bosch L(2), Vanderhaeghen P(7), Van Damme P(8),
Verfaillie CM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Institute, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Stem Cell Biology and
Embryology Unit, Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, 3000
Leuven, Belgium. (2)Leuven Research Institute for Neuroscience and Disease
(LIND), KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Research Group Experimental Neurology,
Department of Neurosciences, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Laboratory of
Neurobiology, VIB Vesalius Research Center, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (3)Institute
for Interdisciplinary Research (IRIBHM), Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB),
1070 Brussels, Belgium; Institute of Neuroscience (UNI), ULB, 1070 Brussels,
Belgium; VIB Center for the Biology of Disease, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Center of
Human Genetics, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (4)Laboratory of Ion Channel
Research, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (5)Leuven Research Institute for
Neuroscience and Disease (LIND), KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Research Group 
Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurosciences, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium; Department of Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium. (6)Institute for Cell and Gene Therapy, University Medical Center, 79108
Freiburg, Germany; Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical
Center, 79108 Freiburg, Germany. (7)Institute for Interdisciplinary Research
(IRIBHM), Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), 1070 Brussels, Belgium; Institute 
of Neuroscience (UNI), ULB, 1070 Brussels, Belgium; VIB Center for the Biology of
Disease, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Center of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, 
Belgium; Walloon Excellence in Life Sciences and Biotechnology (WELBIO), 1070
Brussels, Belgium. (8)Leuven Research Institute for Neuroscience and Disease
(LIND), KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Research Group Experimental Neurology,
Department of Neurosciences, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Laboratory of
Neurobiology, VIB Vesalius Research Center, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Department of
Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (9)Stem Cell
Institute, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Stem Cell Biology and Embryology
Unit, Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium. Electronic address: catherine.verfaillie@med.kuleuven.be.

To understand how haploinsufficiency of progranulin (PGRN) causes frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD), we created induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from patients
carrying the GRN(IVS1+5G > C) mutation (FTD-iPSCs). FTD-iPSCs were fated to
cortical neurons, the cells most affected in FTD. Although generation of
neuroprogenitors was unaffected, their further differentiation into CTIP2-,
FOXP2-, or TBR1-TUJ1 double-positive cortical neurons, but not motorneurons, was 
significantly decreased in FTD-neural progeny. Zinc finger nuclease-mediated
introduction of GRN cDNA into the AAVS1 locus corrected defects in cortical
neurogenesis, demonstrating that PGRN haploinsufficiency causes inefficient
cortical neuron generation. RNA sequencing analysis confirmed reversal of the
altered gene expression profile following genetic correction. We identified the
Wnt signaling pathway as one of the top defective pathways in FTD-iPSC-derived
neurons, which was reversed following genetic correction. Differentiation of
FTD-iPSCs in the presence of a WNT inhibitor mitigated defective corticogenesis. 
Therefore, we demonstrate that PGRN haploinsufficiency hampers corticogenesis in 
vitro.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4297877
PMID: 25556567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS Genet. 2014 Oct 30;10(10):e1004772. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004772.
eCollection 2014.

De novo mutations in moderate or severe intellectual disability.

Hamdan FF(1), Srour M(2), Capo-Chichi JM(1), Daoud H(3), Nassif C(1), Patry L(1),
Massicotte C(1), Ambalavanan A(3), Spiegelman D(3), Diallo O(3), Henrion E(3),
Dionne-Laporte A(3), Fougerat A(1), Pshezhetsky AV(1), Venkateswaran S(4),
Rouleau GA(3), Michaud JL(5).

Author information: 
(1)CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montreal, Canada. (2)CHU Sainte-Justine
Research Center, Montreal, Canada; Division of Pediatric Neurology, Montreal
Children's Hospital, Montreal, Canada. (3)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada. (4)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of
Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Canada. (5)CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montreal,
Canada; Department of Pediatrics and Department of Neurosciences, University of
Montreal, Montreal, Canada.

Genetics is believed to have an important role in intellectual disability (ID).
Recent studies have emphasized the involvement of de novo mutations (DNMs) in ID 
but the extent to which they contribute to its pathogenesis and the identity of
the corresponding genes remain largely unknown. Here, we report a screen for DNMs
in subjects with moderate or severe ID. We sequenced the exomes of 41 probands
and their parents, and confirmed 81 DNMs affecting the coding sequence or
consensus splice sites (1.98 DNMs/proband). We observed a significant excess of
de novo single nucleotide substitutions and loss-of-function mutations in these
cases compared to control subjects, suggesting that at least a subset of these
variations are pathogenic. A total of 12 likely pathogenic DNMs were identified
in genes previously associated with ID (ARID1B, CHD2, FOXG1, GABRB3, GATAD2B,
GRIN2B, MBD5, MED13L, SETBP1, TBR1, TCF4, WDR45), resulting in a diagnostic yield
of ~29%. We also identified 12 possibly pathogenic DNMs in genes (HNRNPU, WAC,
RYR2, SET, EGR1, MYH10, EIF2C1, COL4A3BP, CHMP2A, PPP1CB, VPS4A, PPP2R2B) that
have not previously been causally linked to ID. Interestingly, no case was
explained by inherited mutations. Protein network analysis indicated that the
products of many of these known and candidate genes interact with each other or
with products of other ID-associated genes further supporting their involvement
in ID. We conclude that DNMs represent a major cause of moderate or severe ID.

PMCID: PMC4214635
PMID: 25356899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Sep 10;8:280. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00280.
eCollection 2014.

Neuronal excitation upregulates Tbr1, a high-confidence risk gene of autism,
mediating Grin2b expression in the adult brain.

Chuang HC(1), Huang TN(2), Hsueh YP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei
Taiwan ; Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei Taiwan.

The activity-regulated gene expression of transcription factors is required for
neural plasticity and function in response to neuronal stimulation. T-brain-1
(TBR1), a critical neuron-specific transcription factor for forebrain
development, has been recognized as a high-confidence risk gene for autism
spectrum disorders. Here, we show that in addition to its role in brain
development, Tbr1 responds to neuronal activation and further modulates the
Grin2b expression in adult brains and mature neurons. The expression levels of
Tbr1 were investigated using both immunostaining and quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analyses. We found that the mRNA
and protein expression levels of Tbr1 are induced by excitatory synaptic
transmission driven by bicuculline or glutamate treatment in cultured mature
neurons. The upregulation of Tbr1 expression requires the activation of both
a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid (AMPA) and
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Furthermore, behavioral training triggers 
Tbr1 induction in the adult mouse brain. The elevation of Tbr1 expression is
associated with Grin2b upregulation in both mature neurons and adult brains.
Using Tbr1-deficient neurons, we further demonstrated that TBR1 is required for
the induction of Grin2b upon neuronal activation. Taken together with the
previous studies showing that TBR1 binds the Grin2b promoter and controls
expression of luciferase reporter driven by Grin2b promoter, the evidence
suggests that TBR1 directly controls Grin2b expression in mature neurons. We also
found that the addition of the calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II
(CaMKII) antagonist KN-93, but not the calcium-dependent phosphatase calcineurin 
antagonist cyclosporin A, to cultured mature neurons noticeably inhibited Tbr1
induction, indicating that neuronal activation upregulates Tbr1 expression in a
CaMKII-dependent manner. In conclusion, our study suggests that Tbr1 plays an
important role in adult mouse brains in response to neuronal activation to
modulate the activity-regulated gene transcription required for neural
plasticity.

PMCID: PMC4159980
PMID: 25309323  [PubMed]


16. Nat Commun. 2014 Sep 18;5:4954. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5954.

De novo TBR1 mutations in sporadic autism disrupt protein functions.

Deriziotis P(1), O'Roak BJ(2), Graham SA(1), Estruch SB(1), Dimitropoulou D(1),
Bernier RA(3), Gerdts J(3), Shendure J(4), Eichler EE(5), Fisher SE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen 6525XD, The Netherlands. (2)1] Department of Genome Sciences, University
of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA [2] Department
of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health &Science University, Portland,
Oregon 97239, USA. (3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Sciences,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. (4)Department of Genome
Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195,
USA. (5)1] Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. (6)1] Language and Genetics Department, Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen 6525XD, The Netherlands [2]
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen 6525EN, The
Netherlands.

Next-generation sequencing recently revealed that recurrent disruptive mutations 
in a few genes may account for 1% of sporadic autism cases. Coupling these novel 
genetic data to empirical assays of protein function can illuminate crucial
molecular networks. Here we demonstrate the power of the approach, performing the
first functional analyses of TBR1 variants identified in sporadic autism. De novo
truncating and missense mutations disrupt multiple aspects of TBR1 function,
including subcellular localization, interactions with co-regulators and
transcriptional repression. Missense mutations inherited from unaffected parents 
did not disturb function in our assays. We show that TBR1 homodimerizes, that it 
interacts with FOXP2, a transcription factor implicated in speech/language
disorders, and that this interaction is disrupted by pathogenic mutations
affecting either protein. These findings support the hypothesis that de novo
mutations in sporadic autism have severe functional consequences. Moreover, they 
uncover neurogenetic mechanisms that bridge different neurodevelopmental
disorders involving language deficits.

PMCID: PMC4212638
PMID: 25232744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2014 Sep;144(3):146.

[Haploinsufficiency of the T-box transcription factor Tbr1].

[Article in Japanese]

Ago Y.

PMID: 25213616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Brain Res. 2014 Aug 12;1576:27-34. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.06.015. Epub 2014
Jun 19.

Transgenic increase of Wnt7b in neural progenitor cells decreases expression of
T-domain transcription factors and impairs neuronal differentiation.

Papachristou P(1), Dyberg C(2), Lindqvist M(2), Horn Z(2), Ringstedt T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Research Unit, Astrid Lindgren Children<U+05F3>s Hospital, Q2:07, Karolinska
Institutet, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address:
panos.papachristou@ki.se. (2)Neonatal Research Unit, Astrid Lindgren Children<U+05F3>s
Hospital, Q2:07, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling plays an important role in neural development,
instructing both progenitor cell division and differentiation. During early
corticogenesis, Wnt7b is expressed in a restricted expression pattern in the
ventricular zone progenitor cells. However, its influence on progenitor cell
behavior has not been fully studied. We report that transgenic overexpression of 
Wnt7b in neural progenitor cells impairs neuronal differentiation and the
development of forebrain structures at embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5). This was
accompanied by a decreased expression of T-domain transcription factors Tbr1 and 
Tbr2, in both progenitor cells and post-mitotic neurons. However, proliferation, 
apoptosis and the overall proportion of pax6(+) neural progenitor cells were
similar to wild-type litter mates. These results suggest that Wnt signaling may
affect early neural progenitor differentiation by regulating the expression of
pro-neural transcription factors.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24953933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Front Neuroanat. 2014 Jun 3;8:41. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2014.00041. eCollection
2014.

Dynamic expression of calretinin in embryonic and early fetal human cortex.

González-Gómez M(1), Meyer G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de La Laguna
Tenerife, Spain.

Calretinin (CR) is one of the earliest neurochemical markers in human
corticogenesis. In embryos from Carnegie stages (CS) 17 to 23, calbindin (CB) and
CR stain opposite poles of the incipient cortex suggesting early regionalization:
CB marks the neuroepithelium of the medial boundary of the cortex with the
choroid plexus (cortical hem). By contrast, CR is confined to the subventricular 
zone (SVZ) of the lateral and caudal ganglionic eminences at the
pallial-subpallial boundary (PSB, or antihem), from where CR+/Tbr1- neurons
migrate toward piriform cortex and amygdala as a component of the lateral
cortical stream. At CS 19, columns of CR+ cells arise in the rostral cortex, and 
contribute at CS 20 to the "monolayer" of horizontal Tbr1+/CR+ and GAD+ cells in 
the preplate. At CS 21, the "pioneer cortical plate" appears as a radial
aggregation of CR+/Tbr1+ neurons, which cover the entire future neocortex and
extend the first corticofugal axons. CR expression in early human corticogenesis 
is thus not restricted to interneurons, but is also present in the first
excitatory projection neurons of the cortex. At CS 21/22, the cortical plate is
established following a lateral to medial gradient, when Tbr1+/CR- neurons settle
within the pioneer cortical plate, and thus separate superficial and deep pioneer
neurons. CR+ pioneer neurons disappear shortly after the formation of the
cortical plate. Reelin+ Cajal-Retzius cells begin to express CR around CS21 (7/8 
PCW). At CS 21-23, the CR+ SVZ at the PSB is the source of CR+ interneurons
migrating into the cortical SVZ. In turn, CB+ interneurons migrate from the
subpallium into the intermediate zone following the fibers of the internal
capsule. Early CR+ and CB+ interneurons thus have different origins and migratory
routes. CR+ cell populations in the embryonic telencephalon take part in a
complex sequence of events not analyzed so far in other mammalian species, which 
may represent a distinctive trait of the initial steps of human corticogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4042362
PMID: 24917793  [PubMed]


20. Orthop Surg. 2014 May;6(2):145-53. doi: 10.1111/os.12102.

Tumor-to-background ratio to predict response to chemotherapy of osteosarcoma
better than standard uptake values.

He JP(1), Hao Y, Li M, Wang J, Guo FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 
China.

OBJECTIVE: According to the current treatment protocol of the Cooperative
Osteosarcoma Study, it is mandatory to determine the histological response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy treatment before surgical removal of the tumor,
particularly if a limb salvage procedure is planned. The aim of this systematic, 
retrospective study was to evaluate the ability of 2-((18) F)
fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron-emission tomography/computed tomography to
predict chemotherapy response of osteosarcoma and to identify a simple promising 
method for noninvasive evaluation of neoadjuvant chemotherapy response in
osteosarcoma.
METHODS: The PubMed database was searched to identify and analyze relevant
published reports. In particular, correlations between tumor-to-background ratio 
(TBR), standard uptake value (SUV) and histological response to chemotherapy were
assessed.
RESULTS: It was found that good responses are achieved in patients with TBR after
chemotherapy (TBR2)/TBR before chemotherapy (TBR1) < 0.470 (positive predictive
value [PPV] = 92.31%, negative predictive value [NPV] = 82.76%, sensitivity [S] =
87.80%, specificity [SP] = 88.89%), whereas poor responses occur in patients with
SUV after chemotherapy/before chemotherapy (SUV2/SUV1) > 0.396 (PPV = 73.68%, NPV
= 73.33%, S = 63.64%, SP = 81.48%).
CONCLUSION: Changes in TBR are better predictors of chemotherapy response than
SUV in osteosarcoma patients. Therefore, we believe that choice of surgical
strategy is optimally based on changes in TBR.

© 2014 Chinese Orthopaedic Association and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24890297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Brain Behav Evol. 2014;83(2):93-103. doi: 10.1159/000357754. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Identification of striatal and pallidal regions in the subpallium of anamniotes.

González A(1), Morona R, Moreno N, Bandín S, López JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Biology, University Complutense,
Madrid, Spain.

The telencephalic basal ganglia (BG) of amniotes consist of two subdivisions,
striatum and pallidum, which share many features, including development, cell
types, neurotransmitter organization and hodology. In particular, these two
subdivisions during development are defined on the basis of discrete gene
expression patterns (genoarchitecture or genoarchitectonics). The
characterization of the BG in the subpallium of representatives of the different 
classes of anamniote vertebrates was first approached in studies dealing with
their localization, hodology and main neurochemical characteristics. Thus, it was
proposed that an impressive degree of conservation exists across species. New
insights can be gained by the comparative analysis of the expression of conserved
transcription factors that distinctly define the striatal and pallidal components
of the BG in all vertebrates. In addition, the expression of other genes that
characterize neighboring regions of the BG is also useful to define the
boundaries of each subdivision. Following this approach, we have analyzed the BG 
in the brain of juvenile representatives of amphibians, lungfishes, holosteans,
Polypteriformes and Chondrichthyes. In addition, we briefly review previous data 
in teleosts and agnathans. The markers used include islet 1 and Dlx as striatal
markers, whereas Nkx2.1 is essential for the identification of the pallidum. In
turn, Pax6 and in particular Tbr1 are expressed in the pallium. These markers
have been systematically analyzed in combination with neuronal markers of
specific subpallial territories and cell populations, such as tyrosine
hydroxylase, <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid, nitric oxide synthase, substance P and
enkephalin. The results highlight that many genes share common distribution
patterns and are arranged in conserved combinations whose identification has
served to define homologies between components of the BG in distant species.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24776990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Feb 27;2(3):295-310. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.01.009.
eCollection 2014.

Modeling hippocampal neurogenesis using human pluripotent stem cells.

Yu DX(1), Di Giorgio FP(2), Yao J(1), Marchetto MC(1), Brennand K(3), Wright
R(1), Mei A(1), McHenry L(1), Lisuk D(1), Grasmick JM(1), Silberman P(1),
Silberman G(1), Jappelli R(1), Gage FH(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (2)Neuroscience Discovery, Novartis Pharma AG, Novartis
Institute for Biomedical Research, Postfach, Basel CH-4002, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Neuroscience/Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1425
Madison Ave, New York, NY 10059, USA.

Erratum in
    Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Jul 8;3(1):217.

The availability of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) offers the opportunity
to generate lineage-specific cells to investigate mechanisms of human diseases
specific to brain regions. Here, we report a differentiation paradigm for hPSCs
that enriches for hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) granule neurons. This
differentiation paradigm recapitulates the expression patterns of key
developmental genes during hippocampal neurogenesis, exhibits characteristics of 
neuronal network maturation, and produces PROX1+ neurons that functionally
integrate into the DG. Because hippocampal neurogenesis has been implicated in
schizophrenia (SCZD), we applied our protocol to SCZD patient-derived human
induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs). We found deficits in the generation of
DG granule neurons from SCZD hiPSC-derived hippocampal NPCs with lowered levels
of NEUROD1, PROX1, and TBR1, reduced neuronal activity, and reduced levels of
spontaneous neurotransmitter release. Our approach offers important insights into
the neurodevelopmental aspects of SCZD and may be a promising tool for drug
screening and personalized medicine.

PMCID: PMC3964286
PMID: 24672753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 May;25(10):1586-93. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-01-0697. Epub 2014
Mar 12.

Leader cell positioning drives wound-directed collective migration in
TGFß-stimulated epithelial sheets.

Chapnick DA(1), Liu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 
80309. (2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 80309 xuedong.liu@colorado.edu.

During wound healing and cancer metastasis, cells are frequently observed to
migrate in collective groups. This mode of migration relies on the cooperative
guidance of leader and follower cells throughout the collective group. The
upstream determinants and molecular mechanisms behind such cellular guidance
remain poorly understood. We use live-cell imaging to track the behavior of
epithelial sheets of keratinocytes in response to transforming growth factor ß
(TGFß), which stimulates collective migration primarily through extracellular
regulated kinase 1/2 (Erk1/2) activation. TGFß-treated sheets display a spatial
pattern of Erk1/2 activation in which the highest levels of Erk1/2 activity are
concentrated toward the leading edge of a sheet. We show that Erk1/2 activity is 
modulated by cellular density and that this functional relationship drives the
formation of patterns of Erk1/2 activity throughout sheets. In addition, we
determine that a spatially constrained pattern of Erk1/2 activity results in
collective migration that is primarily wound directed. Conversely, global
elevation of Erk1/2 throughout sheets leads to stochastically directed collective
migration throughout sheets. Our study highlights how the spatial patterning of
leader cells (cells with elevated Erk1/2 activity) can influence the guidance of 
a collective group of cells during wound healing.

© 2014 Chapnick and Liu. This article is distributed by The American Society for 
Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4019490
PMID: 24623725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Gene. 2014 Apr 10;539(1):168-72. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.01.060. Epub 2014 Feb
4.

A de novo 2.3 Mb deletion in 2q24.2q24.3 in a 20-month-old developmentally
delayed girl.

Belengeanu V(1), Gamage TH(2), Farcas S(3), Stoian M(4), Andreescu N(5),
Belengeanu A(6), Frengen E(7), Misceo D(8).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Timisoara, Romania. Electronic address: belvtim@yahoo.com. (2)Department of
Medical Genetics, University of Oslo, Norway; Department of Medical Genetics,
Oslo University Hospital, Norway. Electronic address: t.y.gamage@studmed.uio.no. 
(3)Discipline of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Timisoara, Romania. Electronic address: sfarcas2004@yahoo.com. (4)Discipline of
Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Electronic address: monistoian_dr@yahoo.com. (5)Discipline of Medical Genetics,
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. Electronic address:
nicollandreescu@yahoo.com. (6)Discipline of Cellular and Molecular Biology,
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. Electronic address:
alinabele@yahoo.com. (7)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo,
Norway; Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Norway.
Electronic address: eirik.frengen@medisin.uio.no. (8)Department of Medical
Genetics, University of Oslo, Norway; Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo
University Hospital, Norway. Electronic address: doriana.misceo@medisin.uio.no.

We report a 20-month-old girl ascertained at the age of 11 months for
developmental delay. She presented with hypotonia and delayed motor development. 
The patient had severe language impairment and showed behaviour consistent with
autism spectrum disorder. She was microcephalic with mild dysmorphic features and
had joint hyperlaxity. We detected a 2.3 Mb de novo deletion in 2q24.2q24.3 on
her paternal chromosome. We compare the clinical features of our patient to six
previously published patients with a deletion in 2q24.2q24.3, and one patient
reported in the ECARUCA database. Although the clinical presentation of these
patients is not highly consistent, likely due to the different deletion size and 
gene content, the following features seem to be recurrent: disturbance in the
central nervous system, poor growth, hypotonia, and joint hyperlaxity. The region
deleted in our patient contains 13 genes including PSMD14, TBR1, SLC4A10, DPP4,
KCNH7, and FIGN. We briefly review the knowledge of these genes and their
possible involvement in the aetiology of this developmental delay syndrome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24508274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Mar;164A(3):828-33. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36363. Epub 2014
Jan 23.

TBR1 is the candidate gene for intellectual disability in patients with a 2q24.2 
interstitial deletion.

Palumbo O(1), Fichera M, Palumbo P, Rizzo R, Mazzolla E, Cocuzza DM, Carella M,
Mattina T.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni
Rotondo, (FG), Italy.

Interstitial deletion of 2q24.2 is a rarely described cytogenetic aberration in
patients with intellectual disability (ID). Previously reported
genotype-phenotype correlation identified a minimum deleted region of 2.65<U+2009>Mb
including 15 genes. Recently, a patient with a de novo 2q24.2 microdeletion of
0.4 Mb encompassing only three genes was described. However, the precise
relationship between most deleted genes and the clinical features remains
unclear. Here we describe a 12-year-old male patient diagnosed with growth
retardation and ID. He also showed microcephaly, right palpebral ptosis, scapular
winging, and pectus excavatum. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) array
analysis showed a de novo interstitial deletion of 0.122<U+2009>Mb at 2q24.2 region
harboring only TBR1 (T-box, brain, 1; OMIM: 604616), which encodes a T-box family
transcription factor expressed in post-mitotic projection neurons and
functionally significant in embryologic corticogenesis. This is the first case of
a deletion at 2q24.2 involving only TBR1. This finding narrows the smallest
region of overlap (SRO) for deletions in this region and strengthens the
previously suggested hypothesis that this gene is a strong candidate for the ID
phenotype. The identification of TBR1 as candidate for ID encourages further
molecular studies to identify novel mutations to understand the pathogenic
effects of its haploinsufficiency. Finally, this report provides a review on 10
2q24.2 microdeletion patients.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24458984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Nat Neurosci. 2014 Feb;17(2):240-7. doi: 10.1038/nn.3626. Epub 2014 Jan 19.

Tbr1 haploinsufficiency impairs amygdalar axonal projections and results in
cognitive abnormality.

Huang TN(1), Chuang HC(2), Chou WH(3), Chen CY(3), Wang HF(3), Chou SJ(4), Hsueh 
YP(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. [2]. (2)1]
Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. [2] Graduate
Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. [3].
(3)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Institute 
of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)1]
Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. [2] Graduate
Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.

The neuron-specific transcription factor T-box brain 1 (TBR1) regulates brain
development. Disruptive mutations in the TBR1 gene have been repeatedly
identified in patients with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Here, we show that 
Tbr1 haploinsufficiency results in defective axonal projections of amygdalar
neurons and the impairment of social interaction, ultrasonic vocalization,
associative memory and cognitive flexibility in mice. Loss of a copy of the Tbr1 
gene altered the expression of Ntng1, Cntn2 and Cdh8 and reduced both inter- and 
intra-amygdalar connections. These developmental defects likely impair neuronal
activation upon behavioral stimulation, which is indicated by fewer
c-FOS-positive neurons and lack of GRIN2B induction in Tbr1(+/-) amygdalae. We
also show that upregulation of amygdalar neuronal activity by local infusion of a
partial NMDA receptor agonist, d-cycloserine, ameliorates the behavioral defects 
of Tbr1(+/-) mice. Our study suggests that TBR1 is important in the regulation of
amygdalar axonal connections and cognition.

PMID: 24441682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Neural Dev. 2014 Jan 9;9:1. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-9-1.

Developmental origins of diversity in cerebellar output nuclei.

Green MJ, Wingate RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, 4th floor
New Hunt's House, London SE1 1UL UK. richard.wingate@kcl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The functional integration of the cerebellum into a number of
different neural systems is governed by the connection of its output axons. In
amniotes, the majority of this output is mediated by an evolutionarily diverse
array of cerebellar nuclei that, in mice, are derived from the embryonic rhombic 
lip. To understand the origins of cerebellar nucleus diversity, we have explored 
how nucleus development is patterned in birds, which notably lack a dentate-like 
nucleus output to the dorsal thalamus.
RESULTS: Using targeted in ovo electoroporation of green fluorescent protein
(GFP) and red fluorescent protein (RFP) in a variety of combinations and with
different conditional enhancers, we show that cerebellar nuclei in chicks are
produced, as in the mouse, at the rhombic lip. Furthermore, the comparison of
fate-mapped neurons with molecular markers reveals a strict temporal sequence of 
cell fate allocation in establishing the avian lateral and medial cerebellar
nuclei. In contrast to the mouse cerebellum, Lhx9 expression is confined to
extracerebellar thalamic afferent nuclei corresponding to the absence, in chicks,
of a dentate nucleus. Spatiotemporally targeted over-expression of Lhx9 in chick 
cerebellar nuclei (recapitulating in part the mammalian expression pattern)
results in a loss of distinct nuclear boundaries and a change in axon initial
trajectories consistent with a role for Lhx9 specifying targeting.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirm the relationship between cell fate and a fine
grain temporal patterning at the rhombic lip. This suggests that the lack of a
cerebellar output to the dorsal thalamus of birds corresponds with a restricted
expression of the LIM-homeodomain gene Lhx9 to earlier born rhombic lip cohorts
when compared to mice. The evolution of cerebellar nucleus diversity in amniotes 
may hence reflect a heterochronic adaptation of gene expression with respect to
the sequential production of rhombic lip derivatives resulting in altered axonal 
targeting.

PMCID: PMC3929244
PMID: 24405572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Neurochem. 2014 May;129(4):637-48. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12636. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Prenatal exposure to the CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptor agonist WIN 55,212-2
alters migration of early-born glutamatergic neurons and GABAergic interneurons
in the rat cerebral cortex.

Saez TM(1), Aronne MP, Caltana L, Brusco AH.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Celular y Neurociencia "Prof. E. De Robertis" (IBCN),
UBA-CONICET, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma
de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The endocannabinoid system, composed of cannabinoid receptors, endocannabinoids, 
and synthesis and degradation enzymes, is present since early stages of brain
development. During this period, the endocannabinoid system is involved in the
regulation of neural progenitor proliferation and specification as well as the
migration and differentiation of pyramidal neurons and interneurons. Marijuana
consumption during pregnancy represents a serious risk in relation to the fetal
brain development since <U+0394>(9) -tetrahidrocannabinol, the main active compound of
cannabis, can reach the fetus through placenta and hemato-encephalic barrier.
Cohort studies performed on children and adolescents of mothers who consumed
marijuana during pregnancy reported cognitive and comportamental abnormalities.
In the present study, we examined the expression of the cannabinoid receptor CB1 
R during corticogenesis in radially and tangentially migrating post-mitotic
neurons. We found that prenatal exposure to WIN impaired tangential and radial
migration of post-mitotic neurons in the dorsal pallium. In addition, we
described alterations of two transcription factors associated with proliferating 
and newly post-mitotic glutamatergic cells in the dorsal pallium, Tbr1 and Tbr2, 
and disruption in the number of Cajal-Retzius cells. The present results
contribute to the knowledge of neurobiological substrates that determine
neuro-comportamental changes that will persist through post-natal life.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 24329778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2013;113:167-205. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-418700-9.00006-X.

Transcriptional dysregulation of neocortical circuit assembly in ASD.

Kwan KY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Molecular & Behavioral Neuroscience Institute
(MBNI), University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. Electronic address:
kykwan@umich.edu.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) impair social cognition and communication, key
higher-order functions centered in the human neocortex. The assembly of
neocortical circuitry is a precisely regulated developmental process susceptible 
to genetic alterations that can ultimately affect cognitive abilities. Because
ASD is an early onset neurodevelopmental disorder that disrupts functions
executed by the neocortex, miswiring of neocortical circuits has been
hypothesized to be an underlying mechanism of ASD. This possibility is supported 
by emerging genetic findings and data from imaging studies. Recent research on
neocortical development has identified transcription factors as key determinants 
of neocortical circuit assembly, mediating diverse processes including neuronal
specification, migration, and wiring. Many of these TFs (TBR1, SOX5, FEZF2, and
SATB2) have been implicated in ASD. Here, I will discuss the functional roles of 
these transcriptional programs in neocortical circuit development and their
neurobiological implications for the emerging etiology of ASD.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4106301
PMID: 24290386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Dev Neurosci. 2013;35(6):516-26. doi: 10.1159/000355392. Epub 2013 Nov 14.

Genesis of heterotopia in BCNU model of cortical dysplasia, detected by means of 
in utero electroporation.

Moroni RF(1), Inverardi F, Regondi MC, Pennacchio P, Spreafico R, Frassoni C.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Clinical Epileptology and Experimental Neurophysiology, Fondazione
IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.

Derangements of cortical development can cause a wide spectrum of malformations, 
generally termed 'cortical dysplasia' (CD), which are frequently associated with 
drug-resistant epilepsy and other neurological and mental disorders.
1,3-Bis-chloroethyl-nitrosurea (BCNU)-treated rats represent a model of CD due to
the presence of histological alterations similar to those observed in human CD.
BCNU is an alkylating agent that, administered at embryonic day 15 (E15), causes 
the loss of many cells destined to cortical layers; this results in cortical
thinning but also in histological alterations imputable to migration defects,
such as laminar disorganization and cortical and periventricular heterotopia. In 
the present study we investigated the genesis of heterotopia in BCNU-treated rats
by labeling cortical ventricular zone (VZ) cells with a green fluorescent protein
(GFP) expression vector by means of in utero electroporation. Here, we compared
the migratory pattern and subsequent distribution of the GFP-labeled cells in the
developing somatosensory cortex of control and BCNU-treated animals. To this aim,
we investigated the expression of a panel of developmental marker genes which
identified radial glia cells (Pax6), intermediate precursors cells (Tbr2), and
postmitotic neurons destined to infragranular (Tbr1) or supragranular layers
(Satb2). The VZ of BCNU-treated rats appeared disorganized since E18 and at E21
the embryos showed an altered migratory pattern: migration of superficial layers 
appeared delayed, with a number of migrating cells in the intermediate zone and
some neurons destined to superficial layers arrested in the VZ, thus forming
periventricular heterotopia. Moreover, neurons that reached their correct
position did not extend their axons through the corpus callosum in the
contralateral hemisphere as in the control, but toward the ipsilateral cingulated
cortex. Our analysis sheds light on how a malformed cortex develops after a
temporally discrete environmental insult.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24246662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Brain Dev. 2014 Sep;36(8):661-9. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2013.10.006. Epub 2013
Nov 9.

Disruption of Aspm causes microcephaly with abnormal neuronal differentiation.

Fujimori A(1), Itoh K(2), Goto S(3), Hirakawa H(1), Wang B(1), Kokubo T(1), Kito 
S(1), Tsukamoto S(1), Fushiki S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Heavy-Ion Radiobiology Research Group, Center for Charged Particle Therapy,
National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba, Japan. (2)Department of
Pathology and Applied Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address:
kxi14@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp. (3)Department of Pathology and Applied Neurobiology,
Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Kyoto, Japan.

AIMS: A number of ASPM mutations have been detected in primary microcephaly
patients. In order to evaluate the function of ASPM in brain development, we
generated model animals of human autosomal recessive primary microcephaly-5
(MCPH5).
METHODS: In the Aspm knock-out mice, the exon 2-3 of the Aspm gene was
encompassed by a pair of loxP signals so that cre-recombinase activity switched
the allele from wild-type to null zygotes as frequently, as expected from the
Mendelian inheritance. We precisely analyzed the brains of adults and fetuses
using immunohistochemistry and morphometry.
RESULTS: The adult brains of the Aspm(-/-) mice were smaller, especially in the
cerebrum. In the barrel field of the somatosensory cortex, layer I was
significantly thicker, whereas layer VI was significantly thinner in Aspm(-/-)
mice, compared with Aspm(+/+) mice. The total number of cells and the thickness
of the cortical plate at embryonic day 16.5 was significantly decreased in
Aspm(-/-) mice, compared with Aspm(+/+) mice. Furthermore, the expression of
transcription factors, such as Tbr1 and Satb2, was significantly increased in the
subplate of the Aspm(-/-) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggested that Aspm is essential to the proliferation
and differentiation of neural stem/progenitor cells. The Aspm gene loss model
provided a novel pathogenetic insight into acquired microcephaly, which can be
caused by in utero exposure to both known and unknown teratogens.

Copyright © 2013 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24220505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Neurosci. 2013 Oct 23;33(43):16874-88. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4654-12.2013.

Stereotypical alterations in cortical patterning are associated with maternal
illness-induced placental dysfunction.

Carpentier PA(1), Haditsch U, Braun AE, Cantu AV, Moon HM, Price RO, Anderson MP,
Saravanapandian V, Ismail K, Rivera M, Weimann JM, Palmer TD.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University, Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Stanford, California 94305-5454.

We have previously shown in mice that cytokine-mediated damage to the placenta
can temporarily limit the flow of nutrients and oxygen to the fetus. The
placental vulnerability is pronounced before embryonic day 11, when even mild
immune challenge results in fetal loss. As gestation progresses, the placenta
becomes increasingly resilient to maternal inflammation, but there is a narrow
window in gestation when the placenta is still vulnerable to immune challenge yet
resistant enough to allow for fetal survival. This gestational window correlates 
with early cortical neurogenesis in the fetal brain. Here, we show that maternal 
illness during this period selectively alters the abundance and laminar
positioning of neuronal subtypes influenced by the Tbr1, Satb2, and Ctip2/Fezf2
patterning axis. The disturbances also lead to a laminar imbalance in the
proportions of projection neurons and interneurons in the adult and are
sufficient to cause changes in social behavior and cognition. These data
illustrate how the timing of an illness-related placental vulnerability causes
developmental alterations in neuroanatomical systems and behaviors that are
relevant to autism spectrum disorders.

PMCID: PMC3807021
PMID: 24155294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Brain. 2013 Dec;136(Pt 12):3561-77. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt278. Epub 2013 Oct 21.

Human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cortical neurons integrate in
stroke-injured cortex and improve functional recovery.

Tornero D(1), Wattananit S, Grønning Madsen M, Koch P, Wood J, Tatarishvili J,
Mine Y, Ge R, Monni E, Devaraju K, Hevner RF, Brüstle O, Lindvall O, Kokaia Z.

Author information: 
(1)1 Laboratory of Stem Cells and Restorative Neurology, Lund Stem Cell Centre,
University Hospital, SE-221 84 Lund, Sweden.

Comment in
    Brain. 2013 Dec;136(Pt 12):3525-7.

Stem cell-based approaches to restore function after stroke through replacement
of dead neurons require the generation of specific neuronal subtypes. Loss of
neurons in the cerebral cortex is a major cause of stroke-induced neurological
deficits in adult humans. Reprogramming of adult human somatic cells to induced
pluripotent stem cells is a novel approach to produce patient-specific cells for 
autologous transplantation. Whether such cells can be converted to functional
cortical neurons that survive and give rise to behavioural recovery after
transplantation in the stroke-injured cerebral cortex is not known. We have
generated progenitors in vitro, expressing specific cortical markers and giving
rise to functional neurons, from long-term self-renewing neuroepithelial-like
stem cells, produced from adult human fibroblast-derived induced pluripotent stem
cells. At 2 months after transplantation into the stroke-damaged rat cortex, the 
cortically fated cells showed less proliferation and more efficient conversion to
mature neurons with morphological and immunohistochemical characteristics of a
cortical phenotype and higher axonal projection density as compared with
non-fated cells. Pyramidal morphology and localization of the cells expressing
the cortex-specific marker TBR1 in a certain layered pattern provided further
evidence supporting the cortical phenotype of the fated, grafted cells, and
electrophysiological recordings demonstrated their functionality. Both fated and 
non-fated cell-transplanted groups showed bilateral recovery of the impaired
function in the stepping test compared with vehicle-injected animals. The
behavioural improvement at this early time point was most likely not due to
neuronal replacement and reconstruction of circuitry. At 5 months after stroke in
immunocompromised rats, there was no tumour formation and the grafted cells
exhibited electrophysiological properties of mature neurons with evidence of
integration in host circuitry. Our findings show, for the first time, that human 
skin-derived induced pluripotent stem cells can be differentiated to cortical
neuronal progenitors, which survive, differentiate to functional neurons and
improve neurological outcome after intracortical implantation in a rat stroke
model.

PMID: 24148272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Feb;67:221-34. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.09.026. Epub 2013 Oct 12.

Caffeine protects neuronal cells against injury caused by hyperoxia in the
immature brain.

Endesfelder S(1), Zaak I(2), Weichelt U(2), Bührer C(2), Schmitz T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Charité University Medical Center, D-13353 Berlin, 
Germany. Electronic address: stefanie.endesfelder@charite.de. (2)Department of
Neonatology, Charité University Medical Center, D-13353 Berlin, Germany.

Caffeine administered to preterm infants has been shown to reduce rates of
cerebral palsy and cognitive delay, compared to placebo. We investigated the
neuroprotective potential of caffeine for the developing brain in a neonatal rat 
model featuring transient systemic hyperoxia. Using 6-day-old rat pups, we found 
that after 24 and 48h of 80% oxygen exposure, apoptotic (TUNEL(+)) cell numbers
increased in the cortex, hippocampus, and central gray matter, but not in the
hippocampus or dentate gyrus. In the dentate gyrus, high oxygen exposure led to a
decrease in the number of proliferating (Ki67(+)) cells and the number of Ki67(+)
cells double staining for nestin (immature neurons), doublecortin (progenitors), 
and NeuN (mature neurons). Absolute numbers of nestin(+), doublecortin(+), and
NeuN(+) cells also decreased after hyperoxia. This was mirrored in a decline of
transcription factors expressed in immature neurons (Pax6, Sox2), progenitors
(Tbr2), and mature neurons (Prox1, Tbr1). Administration of a single dose of
caffeine (10mg/kg) before high oxygen exposure almost completely prevented these 
effects. Our findings suggest that caffeine exerts protection for neonatal
neurons exposed to high oxygen, possibly via its antioxidant capacity.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24129198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2014 Jan;70:47-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ympev.2013.09.001. Epub
2013 Sep 14.

A multilocus molecular phylogeny of combtooth blennies (Percomorpha: Blennioidei:
Blenniidae): multiple invasions of intertidal habitats.

Hundt PJ(1), Iglésias SP, Hoey AS, Simons AM.

Author information: 
(1)Conservation Biology Graduate Program, University of Minnesota, 1987 Upper
Buford Circle, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA; Bell Museum of Natural History,
University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA. Electronic address:
hundt002@umn.edu.

The combtooth blennies (f. Blenniidae) is a diverse family of primarily marine
fishes with approximately 387 species that inhabit subtidal, intertidal,
supralittoral habitats in tropical and warm temperate regions throughout the
world. The Blenniidae has typically been divided into six groups based on
morphological characters: Blenniini, Nemophini, Omobranchini, Phenablenniini,
Parablenniini, and Salariini. There is, however, considerable debate over the
validity of these groups and their relationships. Since little is known about the
relationships in this group, other aspects of their evolutionary history, such as
habitat evolution and remain unexplored. Herein, we use Bayesian and maximum
likelihood analyses of four nuclear loci (ENC1, myh6, ptr, and tbr1) from 102
species, representing 41 genera, to resolve the phylogeny of the Blenniidae,
determine the validity of the previously recognized groupings, and explore the
evolution of habitat association using ancestral state reconstruction. Bayesian
and maximum likelihood analyses of the resulting 3100bp of DNA sequence produced 
nearly identical topologies, and identified many well-supported clades. Of these 
clades, Nemophini was the only traditionally recognized group strongly supported 
as monophyletic. This highly resolved and thoroughly sampled blenniid phylogeny
provides strong evidence that the traditional rank-based classification does not 
adequately delimit monophyletic groups with the Blenniidae. This phylogeny
redefines the taxonomy of the group and supports the use of 13 unranked clades
for the classification of blenniids. Ancestral state reconstructions identified
four independent invasions of intertidal habitats within the Blenniidae, and
subsequent invasions into supralittoral and freshwater habitats from these
groups. The independent invasions of intertidal habitats are likely to have
played an important role in the evolutionary history of blennies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24045103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Vet Parasitol. 2013 Nov 15;198(1-2):214-8. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2013.08.003.
Epub 2013 Aug 14.

Molecular and parasitological detection of Trypanosoma evansi in Camels in
Ismailia, Egypt.

Elhaig MM(1), Youssef AI, El-Gayar AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Medicine (Infectious Diseases), Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Suez Canal University, Ismailia 41522, Egypt. Electronic address:
mahmoud_mohyeldeen@vet.suez.edu.eg.

Trypanosoma evansi (T. evansi) is an endemic disease of camels and other domestic
animals in Egypt. This study aimed to determine the prevalence of clinical and
sub-clinical T. evansi infection among camels in Ismailia, Egypt, as well as
survey their owners for T. evansi infection. The diagnostic sensitivity of three 
different PCR assays for detection of T. evansi in blood samples was evaluated.
Blood samples were collected from 100 camels and 20 of their owners in the
Ismailia governorate. Results revealed that the percentage of infected of camels 
with T. evansi vary with the detection method, ranging from 10% to 46% by PCR
compared to 12% by microscopic examination of stained blood smears. Targeting the
highly repeated sequence of mini-chromosome satellite DNA (TBR1/2 primer set) was
more often seen in the PCR method (46% positive) compared to targeting ITS 1 (16%
positive) or RoTat 1.2 VSG (10% positive) sequences. A partial sequence of RoTat 
1.2 VSG gene was identical to the T. evansi sequences reported from India and
Kenya, but varied similarity was seen when aligned with Egyptian T. evansi
sequences. None of the camel owners were positive for T. evansi by microscopic
examination of stained blood smears or PCR assays. PCR assay based on TBR sets is
useful in the diagnosis and control disease and reducing economic losses.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24029715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Jan;25(1):213-20. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht219. Epub 2013 Aug
19.

Human von Economo neurons express transcription factors associated with Layer V
subcerebral projection neurons.

Cobos I(1), Seeley WW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, University of California,
San Francisco, CA 94158, USA Current address: Department of Pathology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (2)Memory
and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

The von Economo neurons (VENs) are large bipolar Layer V projection neurons found
chiefly in the anterior cingulate and frontoinsular cortices. Although VENs have 
been linked to prevalent illnesses such as frontotemporal dementia, autism, and
schizophrenia, little is known about VEN identity, including their major
projection targets. Here, we undertook a developmental transcription factor
expression study, focusing on markers associated with specific classes of Layer V
projection neurons. Using mRNA in situ hybridization, we found that VENs
prominently express FEZF2 and CTIP2, transcription factors that regulate the fate
and differentiation of subcerebral projection neurons, in humans aged 3 months to
65 years. In contrast, few VENs expressed markers associated with callosal or
corticothalamic projections. These findings suggest that VENs may represent a
specialized Layer V projection neuron for linking cortical autonomic control
sites to brainstem or spinal cord regions.

© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4318933
PMID: 23960210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2013 Sep;296(9):1317-32. doi: 10.1002/ar.22744. Epub 2013 Jul
31.

The olfactory amygdala in amniotes: an evo-devo approach.

Abellán A(1), Desfilis E, Medina L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Brain Development and Evolution, Department of Experimental
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lleida, Institute of Biomedical
Research of Lleida, Lleida, Spain.

In tetrapods, the medial amygdala is a forebrain center that integrates olfactory
and/or vomeronasal signals with the endocrine and autonomic systems, playing a
key role in different social behaviors. The vomeronasal system has undergone
important changes during evolution, which may be behind some interspecies
differences in chemosensory-mediated social behavior. These evolutionary changes 
are associated with variations in vomeronasal-recipient brain structures,
including the medial amygdala. Herein, we employed an evolutionary developmental 
biology approach for trying to understand the function and evolution of the
medial amygdala. For that purpose, we reviewed published data on fate mapping in 
mouse, and the expression of orthologous developmental regulatory genes (Nkx2.1, 
Lhx6, Shh, Tbr1, Lhx9, Lhx5, Otp, and Pax6) in embryos of mouse, chicken, emydid 
turtles, and a pipid frog. We also analyzed novel data on Lhx9 and Otp in a
lacertid lizard. Based on distinct embryonic origin and genetic profile, at least
five neuronal subpopulations exist in the medial amygdala of rodents, expressing 
either Nkx2.1/Lhx6, Shh, Lhx9, Otp/Lhx5, or Pax6. Each neuronal subpopulation
appears involved in different functional pathways. For example, Lhx6 cells are
specifically activated by sex pheromones and project to preoptic and hypothalamic
centers involved in reproduction. Based on data in nonmammals, at least three of 
these neuronal subtypes might have been present in the medial amygdala of the
amniote common ancestor. During mammalian evolution, the downregulation of Nkx2.1
in the alar hypothalamus may have been a driving force for an increment of the
Otp/Lhx5 subpopulation.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23904411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2013 Sep;296(9):1364-82. doi: 10.1002/ar.22733. Epub 2013 Jul
31.

Transcriptional regulation of olfactory bulb neurogenesis.

Díaz-Guerra E(1), Pignatelli J, Nieto-Estévez V, Vicario-Abejón C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid,
Spain.

The neurons in the olfactory bulb originate from molecularly defined and
spatially distinct proliferative regions. Glutamatergic projection neurons are
generated during the embryonic period in the local ventricular zone of the
olfactory bulb, a territory in the dorsal telencephalon in which the
transcription factor Pax6 is expressed. Some cells in this zone also express
Tbr1, a marker of glutamatergic neurons. By contrast, embryonic olfactory bulb
interneurons are derived from Gsx2 expressing cells in the dorsal lateral
ganglionic eminence of the ventral telencephalon, and from progenitors outside
the dorsal lateral ganglionic eminence, including the olfactory bulb
neuroepithelium. Postnatally, interneurons arise from the subventricular zone of 
the lateral ventricle, although the rostral migratory stream and the olfactory
bulb also appear to serve as a source of neurons. Transcription factors are
crucial to generate all classes of neurons and glia in the olfactory bulb, both
during development and adulthood. In this article, we discuss and propose models 
on how the spatial and temporal regulation of transcription factor expression
controls the self-renewal, proliferation and cell fate of neural stem cells and
progenitors, which finally leads to the generation of distinct functional
subtypes of neurons in the developing and adult olfactory bulb.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23904336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Development. 2013 Aug;140(15):3118-27. doi: 10.1242/dev.090910. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Mcl1 regulates the terminal mitosis of neural precursor cells in the mammalian
brain through p27Kip1.

Hasan SM(1), Sheen AD, Power AM, Langevin LM, Xiong J, Furlong M, Day K,
Schuurmans C, Opferman JT, Vanderluit JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of BioMedical Sciences, Memorial University, 300 Prince Philip Drive,
St John's, NL A1B 3V6, Canada.

Cortical development requires the precise timing of neural precursor cell (NPC)
terminal mitosis. Although cell cycle proteins regulate terminal mitosis, the
factors that influence the cell cycle machinery are incompletely understood. Here
we show in mice that myeloid cell leukemia 1 (Mcl1), an anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
protein required for the survival of NPCs, also regulates their terminal
differentiation through the cell cycle regulator p27(Kip1). A BrdU-Ki67 cell
profiling assay revealed that in utero electroporation of Mcl1 into NPCs in the
embryonic neocortex increased NPC cell cycle exit (the leaving fraction). This
was further supported by a decrease in proliferating NPCs (Pax6(+) radial glial
cells and Tbr2(+) neural progenitors) and an increase in differentiating cells
(Dcx(+) neuroblasts and Tbr1(+) neurons). Similarly, BrdU birth dating
demonstrated that Mcl1 promotes premature NPC terminal mitosis giving rise to
neurons of the deeper cortical layers, confirming their earlier birthdate.
Changes in Mcl1 expression within NPCs caused concomitant changes in the levels
of p27(Kip1) protein, a key regulator of NPC differentiation. Furthermore, in the
absence of p27(Kip1), Mcl1 failed to induce NPC cell cycle exit, demonstrating
that p27(Kip1) is required for Mcl1-mediated NPC terminal mitosis. In summary, we
have identified a novel physiological role for anti-apoptotic Mcl1 in regulating 
NPC terminal differentiation.

PMID: 23824576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Neurosci. 2013 Jun 26;33(26):10802-14. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3621-12.2013.

Cortical gyrification induced by fibroblast growth factor 2 in the mouse brain.

Rash BG(1), Tomasi S, Lim HD, Suh CY, Vaccarino FM.

Author information: 
(1)Child Study Center, Department of Neurobiology, and Kavli Institute for
Neuroscience, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Gyrification allows an expanded cortex with greater functionality to fit into a
smaller cranium. However, the mechanisms of gyrus formation have been elusive. We
show that ventricular injection of FGF2 protein at embryonic day 11.5-before
neurogenesis and before the formation of intrahemispheric axonal
connections-altered the overall size and shape of the cortex and induced the
formation of prominent, bilateral gyri and sulci in the rostrolateral neocortex. 
We show increased tangential growth of the rostral ventricular zone (VZ) but
decreased Wnt3a and Lef1 expression in the cortical hem and adjacent hippocampal 
promordium and consequent impaired growth of the caudal cortical primordium,
including the hippocampus. At the same time, we observed ectopic Er81 expression,
increased proliferation of Tbr2-expressing (Tbr2(+)) intermediate neuronal
progenitors (INPs), and elevated Tbr1(+) neurogenesis in the regions that undergo
gyrification, indicating region-specific actions of FGF2 on the VZ and
subventricular zone (SVZ). However, the relative number of basal radial
glia-recently proposed to be important in gyrification-appeared to be unchanged. 
These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that increased radial unit
production together with rapid SVZ growth and heightened localized neurogenesis
can cause cortical gyrification in lissencephalic species. These data also
suggest that the position of cortical gyri can be molecularly specified in mice. 
In contrast, a different ligand, FGF8b, elicited surface area expansion
throughout the cortical primordium but no gyrification. Our findings demonstrate 
that individual members of the diverse Fgf gene family differentially regulate
global as well as regional cortical growth rates while maintaining cortical layer
structure.

PMCID: PMC3693057
PMID: 23804101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Oct;31(6):424-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.02.006.
Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Epigenetic regulation of neural stem cell fate during corticogenesis.

MuhChyi C(1), Juliandi B, Matsuda T, Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Biological Sciences, 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Takayama 8916-5, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, 
Japan.

The cerebral cortex comprises over three quarters of the brain, and serves as
structural basis for the sophisticated perceptual and cognitive functions. It
develops from common multipotent neural stem cells (NSCs) that line the neural
tube. Development of the NSCs encompasses sequential phases of progenitor
expansion, neurogenesis, and gliogenesis along with the progression of
developmental stages. Interestingly, NSCs steadfastly march through all of these 
phases and give rise to specific neural cell types in a temporally defined and
highly predictable manner. Herein, we delineate the intrinsic and extrinsic
factors that dictate the progression and tempo of NSC differentiation during
cerebral cortex development, and how epigenetic modifications contribute to the
dynamic properties of NSCs.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23466416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Apr;161A(4):841-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35751. Epub 2013
Feb 26.

A mosaic 2q24.2 deletion narrows the critical region to a 0.4 Mb interval that
includes TBR1, TANK, and PSMD14.

Burrage LC(1), Eble TN, Hixson PM, Roney EK, Cheung SW, Franco LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Interstitial deletions involving 2q24 have been associated with a wide range of
phenotypes including intellectual disability and short stature. To date, the
smallest common region among reported cases of deletions in this region is
approximately 2.65 Mb and contains 15 genes. In the present case report, we
describe an 18-year-old male with mild intellectual disability, short stature,
and mosaicism for a 0.422 Mb deletion on 2q24.2 that was diagnosed by comparative
genomic hybridization and confirmed with fluorescent in situ hybridization
(FISH). This deletion, which is present in approximately 61% of cells, includes
three genes: TBR1, TANK, and PSMD14. The findings suggest that the critical
region for intellectual disability and short stature in 2q24.2 can be narrowed to
a 0.422 Mb segment. TBR1, a transcription factor involved in early cortical
development, is a strong candidate for the intellectual disability phenotype seen
in our patient and in patients with larger deletions in this region of the
genome.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23444363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 5;110(10):4081-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1209076110. Epub 2013 Feb 19.

The protomap is propagated to cortical plate neurons through an Eomes-dependent
intermediate map.

Elsen GE(1), Hodge RD, Bedogni F, Daza RA, Nelson BR, Shiba N, Reiner SL, Hevner 
RF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, WA 98101, USA.

The cortical area map is initially patterned by transcription factor (TF)
gradients in the neocortical primordium, which define a "protomap" in the
embryonic ventricular zone (VZ). However, mechanisms that propagate regional
identity from VZ progenitors to cortical plate (CP) neurons are unknown. Here we 
show that the VZ, subventricular zone (SVZ), and CP contain distinct molecular
maps of regional identity, reflecting different gene expression gradients in
radial glia progenitors, intermediate progenitors, and projection neurons,
respectively. The "intermediate map" in the SVZ is modulated by Eomes (also known
as Tbr2), a T-box TF. Eomes inactivation caused rostrocaudal shifts in SVZ and CP
gene expression, with loss of corticospinal axons and gain of corticotectal
projections. These findings suggest that cortical areas and connections are
shaped by sequential maps of regional identity, propagated by the Pax6 <U+2192> Eomes <U+2192> 
Tbr1 TF cascade. In humans, PAX6, EOMES, and TBR1 have been linked to
intellectual disability and autism.

PMCID: PMC3593833
PMID: 23431145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Stem Cells. 2013 Jun;31(6):1193-201. doi: 10.1002/stem.1363.

A subpopulation of individual neural progenitors in the mammalian dorsal pallium 
generates both projection neurons and interneurons in vitro.

Cai Y(1), Zhang Y, Shen Q, Rubenstein JL, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Brain Science and State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

There are two major classes of neurons in nervous systems: projection neurons and
interneurons. During Drosophila nervous system development, a subpopulation of
individual stem/progenitor cells gives rise to both motor neurons and
interneurons. However, it remains unknown whether individual stem/progenitor
cells in the mammalian brain also have the potential to give rise to both
projection neurons and interneurons. Here we present evidence that single mouse
neocortical progenitors generated both projection neurons and GABAergic
interneurons based on studies using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (to
obtain individual progenitors) and in vitro clonal analysis using time-lapse
video microscopy and immunostaining. We determined that a subpopulation of
individual dorsal pallial progenitors from E11.5 Dlx5/6-cre-IRES-EGFP and
GAD67-GFP mice can generate both GFP-negative/Tbr1-positive (GFP(-) /Tbr1+)/Tuj1+
cells and GFP+/Sp8+/calretinin+/Tuj1+ cells. The GFP(-) /Tbr1+/Tuj1+ cells had
morphological features of cultured projection neurons. Quantitative analysis of
the reconstructed lineage trees derived from single progenitors showed that the
projection neuron lineage appeared earlier than the interneuron lineage; however,
more interneuron-like cells were produced than projection neuron-like cells.
Thus, our results provide direct in vitro evidence that individual progenitors of
the mammalian dorsal pallium can generate both projection neurons and
interneurons.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23417928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Neuron. 2013 Feb 6;77(3):472-84. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.11.031.

Pathfinding of corticothalamic axons relies on a rendezvous with thalamic
projections.

Deck M(1), Lokmane L, Chauvet S, Mailhes C, Keita M, Niquille M, Yoshida M,
Yoshida Y, Lebrand C, Mann F, Grove EA, Garel S.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Normale Supérieure, Institut de Biologie de l'ENS, IBENS, F-75005 Paris,
France.

Major outputs of the neocortex are conveyed by corticothalamic axons (CTAs),
which form reciprocal connections with thalamocortical axons, and
corticosubcerebral axons (CSAs) headed to more caudal parts of the nervous
system. Previous findings establish that transcriptional programs define cortical
neuron identity and suggest that CTAs and thalamic axons may guide each other,
but the mechanisms governing CTA versus CSA pathfinding remain elusive. Here, we 
show that thalamocortical axons are required to guide pioneer CTAs away from a
default CSA-like trajectory. This process relies on a hold in the progression of 
cortical axons, or waiting period, during which thalamic projections navigate
toward cortical axons. At the molecular level, Sema3E/PlexinD1 signaling in
pioneer cortical neurons mediates a "waiting signal" required to orchestrate the 
mandatory meeting with reciprocal thalamic axons. Our study reveals that temporal
control of axonal progression contributes to spatial pathfinding of cortical
projections and opens perspectives on brain wiring.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3756696
PMID: 23395374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Neurogenetics. 2013 May;14(2):99-111. doi: 10.1007/s10048-013-0356-y. Epub 2013
Feb 7.

MEF2C Haploinsufficiency features consistent hyperkinesis, variable epilepsy, and
has a role in dorsal and ventral neuronal developmental pathways.

Paciorkowski AR(1), Traylor RN, Rosenfeld JA, Hoover JM, Harris CJ, Winter S,
Lacassie Y, Bialer M, Lamb AN, Schultz RA, Berry-Kravis E, Porter BE, Falk M,
Venkat A, Vanzo RJ, Cohen JS, Fatemi A, Dobyns WB, Shaffer LG, Ballif BC, Marsh
ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Pediatrics, and Biomedical Genetics, Center for
Neural Development & Disease, University of Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood
Ave, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. Alex_Paciorkowski@urmc.rochester.edu

MEF2C haploinsufficiency syndrome is an emerging neurodevelopmental disorder
associated with intellectual disability, autistic features, epilepsy, and
abnormal movements. We report 16 new patients with MEF2C haploinsufficiency,
including the oldest reported patient with MEF2C deletion at 5q14.3. We detail
the neurobehavioral phenotype, epilepsy, and abnormal movements, and compare our 
subjects with those previously reported in the literature. We also investigate
Mef2c expression in the developing mouse forebrain. A spectrum of neurofunctional
deficits emerges, with hyperkinesis a consistent finding. Epilepsy varied from
absent to severe, and included intractable myoclonic seizures and infantile
spasms. Subjects with partial MEF2C deletion were statistically less likely to
have epilepsy. Finally, we confirm that Mef2c is present both in dorsal primary
neuroblasts and ventral gamma-aminobutyric acid(GABA)ergic interneurons in the
forebrain of the developing mouse. Given interactions with several key
neurodevelopmental genes such as ARX, FMR1, MECP2, and TBR1, it appears that
MEF2C plays a role in several developmental stages of both dorsal and ventral
neuronal cell types.

PMCID: PMC3773516
PMID: 23389741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2013 May;54:58-70. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2013.01.002. Epub 2013
Jan 22.

Pax6 regulates Tbr1 and Tbr2 expressions in olfactory bulb mitral cells.

Imamura F(1), Greer CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06520, USA.

Tracking olfactory bulb mitral cell development with BrdU labeling, we find that 
mitral cells are generated from Pax6+ radial glial cells in the ventricular zone 
of the embryonic olfactory bulb. Unlike cortical projection neurons, postmitotic 
mitral cell precursors express both Tbr1 and Tbr2. Our tracking experiments
revealed that down-regulation of Pax6 preceded up-regulation of Tbrs, and that
Tbr1 emerged earlier than Tbr2. Using in utero electroporation, we also show that
Pax6 negatively regulates the expression of Tbr1 and Tbr2 in postmitotic mitral
cell precursors. Exogenous expression of Pax6 in embryonic olfactory bulb
postmitotic precursors decreased the number of cells that progressed to a mitral 
cell fate. In contrast, exogenous expression of Pax6 resulted in an increase of
GABAergic and/or dopaminergic interneurons. These results indicate that Pax6 is a
regulator of fate determination of precursor cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3622182
PMID: 23353076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Dev Dyn. 2013 May;242(5):550-9. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23928. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

Tbx1 is required for second heart field proliferation in zebrafish.

Nevis K(1), Obregon P, Walsh C, Guner-Ataman B, Burns CG, Burns CE.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

BACKGROUND: The mammalian outflow tract (OFT) and primitive right ventricle arise
by accretion of newly differentiated cells to the arterial pole of the heart tube
from multi-potent progenitor cells of the second heart field (SHF). While
mounting evidence suggests that the genetic pathways regulating SHF development
are highly conserved in zebrafish, this topic remains an active area of
investigation.
RESULTS: Here, we extend previous observations demonstrating that zebrafish tbx1 
(van gogh, vgo) mutants show ventricular and OFT defects consistent with a
conserved role in SHF-mediated cardiogenesis. Surprisingly, we reveal through
double in situ analyses that tbx1 transcripts are excluded from cardiac
progenitor cells and differentiated cardiomyocytes, suggesting a non-autonomous
role in SHF development. Further, we find that the diminutive ventricle in vgo
animals results from a 25% decrease in cardiomyocyte number that occurs
subsequent to heart tube stages. Lastly, we report that although SHF progenitors 
are specified in the absence of Tbx1, they fail to be maintained due to
compromised SHF progenitor cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies highlight conservation of Tbx1 function in zebrafish
SHF biology.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3676967
PMID: 23335360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cereb Cortex. 2014 May;24(5):1216-29. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs400. Epub 2013 Jan
2.

Zbtb20 defines a hippocampal neuronal identity through direct repression of genes
that control projection neuron development in the isocortex.

Nielsen JV(1), Thomassen M, Møllgård K, Noraberg J, Jensen NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Southern Denmark, DK-5000 Odense C, Denmark.

Hippocampal pyramidal neurons are important for encoding and retrieval of spatial
maps and episodic memories. While previous work has shown that Zbtb20 is a cell
fate determinant for CA1 pyramidal neurons, the regulatory mechanisms governing
this process are not known. In this study, we demonstrate that Zbtb20 binds to
genes that control neuronal subtype specification in the developing isocortex,
including Cux1, Cux2, Fezf2, Foxp2, Mef2c, Rorb, Satb2, Sox5, Tbr1, Tle4, and
Zfpm2. We show that Zbtb20 represses these genes during ectopic CA1 pyramidal
neuron development in transgenic mice. These data reveal a novel regulatory
mechanism by which Zbtb20 suppresses the acquisition of an isocortical fate
during archicortical neurogenesis to ensure commitment to a CA1 pyramidal neuron 
fate. We further show that the expression pattern of Zbtb20 is evolutionary
conserved in the fetal human hippocampus, where it is complementary to the
expression pattern of the Zbtb20 target gene Tbr1. Therefore, the disclosed
Zbtb20-mediated transcriptional repressor mechanism may be involved in
development of the human archicortex.

PMID: 23283686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Science. 2012 Dec 21;338(6114):1619-22. doi: 10.1126/science.1227764. Epub 2012
Nov 15.

Multiplex targeted sequencing identifies recurrently mutated genes in autism
spectrum disorders.

O'Roak BJ(1), Vives L, Fu W, Egertson JD, Stanaway IB, Phelps IG, Carvill G,
Kumar A, Lee C, Ankenman K, Munson J, Hiatt JB, Turner EH, Levy R, O'Day DR,
Krumm N, Coe BP, Martin BK, Borenstein E, Nickerson DA, Mefford HC, Doherty D,
Akey JM, Bernier R, Eichler EE, Shendure J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2013 Jan;14(1):3.

Exome sequencing studies of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) have identified many
de novo mutations but few recurrently disrupted genes. We therefore developed a
modified molecular inversion probe method enabling ultra-low-cost candidate gene 
resequencing in very large cohorts. To demonstrate the power of this approach, we
captured and sequenced 44 candidate genes in 2446 ASD probands. We discovered 27 
de novo events in 16 genes, 59% of which are predicted to truncate proteins or
disrupt splicing. We estimate that recurrent disruptive mutations in six
genes-CHD8, DYRK1A, GRIN2B, TBR1, PTEN, and TBL1XR1-may contribute to 1% of
sporadic ASDs. Our data support associations between specific genes and
reciprocal subphenotypes (CHD8-macrocephaly and DYRK1A-microcephaly) and
replicate the importance of a ß-catenin-chromatin-remodeling network to ASD
etiology.

PMCID: PMC3528801
PMID: 23160955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 20;109(47):19071-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1216793109. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

A network of genetic repression and derepression specifies projection fates in
the developing neocortex.

Srinivasan K(1), Leone DP, Bateson RK, Dobreva G, Kohwi Y, Kohwi-Shigematsu T,
Grosschedl R, McConnell SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Neurons within each layer in the mammalian cortex have stereotypic projections.
Four genes-Fezf2, Ctip2, Tbr1, and Satb2-regulate these projection identities.
These genes also interact with each other, and it is unclear how these
interactions shape the final projection identity. Here we show, by generating
double mutants of Fezf2, Ctip2, and Satb2, that cortical neurons deploy a complex
genetic switch that uses mutual repression to produce subcortical or callosal
projections. We discovered that Tbr1, EphA4, and Unc5H3 are critical downstream
targets of Satb2 in callosal fate specification. This represents a unique role
for Tbr1, implicated previously in specifying corticothalamic projections. We
further show that Tbr1 expression is dually regulated by Satb2 and Ctip2 in
layers 2-5. Finally, we show that Satb2 and Fezf2 regulate two disease-related
genes, Auts2 (Autistic Susceptibility Gene2) and Bhlhb5 (mutated in Hereditary
Spastic Paraplegia), providing a molecular handle to investigate circuit
disorders in neurodevelopmental diseases.

PMCID: PMC3511157
PMID: 23144223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Sep;3(3):102-112. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Investigation of TBR1 Hemizygosity: Four Individuals with 2q24 Microdeletions.

Traylor RN(1), Dobyns WB, Rosenfeld JA, Wheeler P, Spence JE, Bandholz AM, Bawle 
EV, Carmany EP, Powell CM, Hudson B, Schultz RA, Shaffer LG, Ballif BC.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, PerkinElmer Inc., Spokane, Wash., USA.

TBR1 encodes a transcription factor with critical roles in corticogenesis,
including cortical neuron migration and axon pathfinding, establishment of
regional and laminar identity of cortical neurons, and control of glutamatergic
neuronal cell fate. Based upon TBR1's role in cortical development, we sought to 
investigate TBR1 hemizygosity in individuals referred for genetic evaluation of
intellectual disability and developmental delay. We describe 4 patients with
microdeletions identified by molecular cytogenetic techniques, encompassing TBR1 
and spanning 2q24.1q31.1, ranging in size from 2.17 to 12.34 Mb. Only the patient
with the largest deletion had a possible cortical malformation. Mild
ventriculomegaly is the only common brain anomaly, present in all patients; a
Chiari I malformation is seen in 2 patients, and mega cisterna magna is seen in a
third. Our findings are consistent with Tbr1 mouse models showing that
hemizygosity of the gene requires additional genetic factors for the
manifestation of severe structural brain malformations. Other syndromic features 
are present in these patients, including autism spectrum disorders, ocular
colobomas, and craniosynostosis, features that are likely affected by the
deletion of genes other than TBR1.

PMCID: PMC3473348
PMID: 23112752  [PubMed]


54. J Neurosci Res. 2013 Jan;91(1):42-50. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23141. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Downregulation of L1 perturbs neuronal migration and alters the expression of
transcription factors in murine neocortex.

Kishimoto T(1), Itoh K, Umekage M, Tonosaki M, Yaoi T, Fukui K, Lemmon VP,
Fushiki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Applied Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

L1 is a cell adhesion molecule associated with a spectrum of human neurological
diseases, the most well-known being X-linked hydrocephalus. L1 knockout (L1-KO)
mice have revealed a variety of functions of L1 that were crucial in brain
development in different brain regions. However; the function of L1 in neuronal
migration during cortical histogenesis remains to be clarified. We therefore
investigated the corticogenesis of mouse embryos in which L1 molecules were
knocked down in selected neurons, by employing in utero electroporation with
shRNAs targeting L1 (L1 shRNA). Although more than 50% of the cells transfected
with no small hairpin RNA (shRNA; monster green fluorescent protein: MGFP only)
vector at embryonic day 13 (E13) reached the cortical plate at E16, significantly
fewer (27%) cells transfected with L1 shRNA migrated to the same extent. At E17, 
22% of cells transfected with the MGFP-only vector were found in the intermediate
zone, and significantly more (34%) cells transfected with L1 shRNA remained in
the same zone. Furthermore, the directions of the leading process of neurons
transfected with L1 shRNA became more dispersed compared with cells with the
MGFP-only vector. In addition, two transcription factors expressed in the
neurons, Satb2 and Tbr1, were shown to be reduced or aberrantly expressed in
neurons transfected with L1 shRNA. These observations suggest that L1 plays an
important role in regulating the locomotion and orientation of migrating neurons 
and the expression of transcription factors during neocortical development that
might partially be responsible for the abnormal tract formation seen in L1-KO
mice.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3533181
PMID: 23073969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Gene. 2012 Dec 15;511(2):427-36. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.09.038. Epub 2012 Sep
18.

Neurogenic differentiation of human adipose-derived stem cells: relevance of
different signaling molecules, transcription factors, and key marker genes.

Cardozo AJ(1), Gómez DE, Argibay PF.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ciencias Básicas y Medicina Experimental, Hospital Italiano de
Buenos Aires, Potosí 4240, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires (1199), Argentina.

Since numerous diseases affect the central nervous system and it has limited
self-repair capability, a great interest in using stem cells as an alternative
cell source is generated. Previous reports have shown the differentiation of
adipose-derived stem cells in neuron-like cells and it has also been proved that 
the expression pattern of patterning, proneural, and neural factors, such as
Pax6, Mash1, Ngn2, NeuroD1, Tbr2 and Tbr1, regulates and defines adult
neurogenesis. Regarding this, we hypothesize that a functional parallelism
between adult neurogenesis and neuronal differentiation of human adipose-derived 
stem cells exists. In this study we differentiate human adipose-derived stem
cells into neuron-like cells and analyze the expression pattern of different
patterning, proneural, neural and neurotransmitter genes, before and after
neuronal differentiation. The neuron-like cells expressed neuronal markers,
patterning and proneural factors characteristics of intermediate stages of
neuronal differentiation. Thus we demonstrated that it is possible to
differentiate adipose-derived stem cells in vitro into immature neuron-like cells
and that this process is regulated in a similar way to adult neurogenesis. This
may contribute to elucidate molecular mechanisms involved in neuronal
differentiation of adult human non-neural cells, in aid of the development of
potential therapeutic tools for diseases of the nervous system.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23000064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44716. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044716. Epub 2012 Sep 11.

The embryonic septum and ventral pallium, new sources of olfactory cortex cells.

Ceci ML(1), Pedraza M, de Carlos JA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Chile, Las Encinas, Santiago, Chile.

The mammalian olfactory cortex is a complex structure located along the
rostro-caudal extension of the ventrolateral prosencephalon, which is divided
into several anatomically and functionally distinct areas: the anterior olfactory
nucleus, piriform cortex, olfactory tubercle, amygdaloid olfactory nuclei, and
the more caudal entorhinal cortex. Multiple forebrain progenitor domains
contribute to the cellular diversity of the olfactory cortex, which is invaded
simultaneously by cells originating in distinct germinal areas in the dorsal and 
ventral forebrain. Using a combination of dye labeling techniques, we identified 
two novel areas that contribute cells to the developing olfactory cortices, the
septum and the ventral pallium, from which cells migrate along a radial and then 
a tangential path. We characterized these cell populations by comparing their
expression of calretinin, calbindin, reelin and Tbr1 with that of other olfactory
cell populations.

PMCID: PMC3439381
PMID: 22984546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Front Neuroanat. 2012 Aug 30;6:35. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2012.00035. eCollection
2012.

A further analysis of olfactory cortex development.

Pedraza M(1), De Carlos JA.

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Telencephalic Development (A-21), Department of Molecular, Cellular and
Developmental Neuroscience, Instituto Cajal (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas) Madrid, Spain.

The olfactory cortex (OC) is a complex yet evolutionarily well-conserved brain
region, made up of heterogeneous cell populations that originate in different
areas of the developing telencephalon. Indeed, these cells are among the first
cortical neurons to differentiate. To date, the development of the OC has been
analyzed using birthdating techniques along with molecular markers and in vivo or
in vitro tracking methods. In the present study, we sought to determine the
origin and adult fate of these cell populations using ultrasound-guided in utero 
injections and electroporation of different genomic plasmids into the lateral
walls of the ventricles. Our results provide direct evidence that in the mouse
OC, cell fate is determined by the moment and place of origin of each specific
cell populations. Moreover, by combining these approaches with the analysis of
specific cell markers, we show that the presence of pallial and subpallial
markers in these areas is independent of cell origin.

PMCID: PMC3430874
PMID: 22969708  [PubMed]


58. Cereb Cortex. 2013 Nov;23(11):2632-43. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs252. Epub 2012 Aug 
14.

POU-III transcription factors (Brn1, Brn2, and Oct6) influence neurogenesis,
molecular identity, and migratory destination of upper-layer cells of the
cerebral cortex.

Dominguez MH(1), Ayoub AE, Rakic P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Yale University School of Medicine and Kavli
Institute for Neuroscience, 06510 New Haven, CT, USA.

The upper layers (II-IV) are the most prominent distinguishing feature of
mammalian neocortex compared with avian or reptilian dorsal cortex, and are
vastly expanded in primates. Although the time-dependent embryonic generation of 
upper-layer cells is genetically instructed within their parental progenitors,
mechanisms governing cell-intrinsic fate transitions remain obscure.
POU-homeodomain transcription factors Pou3f3 and Pou3f2 (Brn1 and Brn2) are known
to label postmitotic upper-layer cells, and are redundantly required for their
production. We find that the onset of Pou3f3/2 expression actually occurs in
ventricular zone (VZ) progenitors, and that Pou3f3/2 subsequently label neural
progeny switching from deep-layer Ctip2(+) identity to Satb2(+) upper-layer fate 
as they migrate to proper superficial positions. By using an Engrailed
dominant-negative repressor, we show that sustained neurogenesis after the deep- 
to upper-layer transition requires the proneual action of Pou3fs in VZ
progenitors. Conversely, single-gene overexpression of any Pou3f in early neural 
progenitors is sufficient to specify the precocious birth of Satb2(+) daughter
neurons that extend axons to the contralateral hemisphere, as well as exhibit
robust pia-directed migration that is characteristic of upper-layer cells.
Finally, we demonstrate that Pou3fs influence multiple stages of neurogenesis by 
suppressing Notch effector Hes5, and promoting the expression of proneural
transcription factors Tbr2 and Tbr1.

PMCID: PMC3792741
PMID: 22892427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nature. 2012 Aug 2;488(7409):100-5. doi: 10.1038/nature11284.

Dissecting the genomic complexity underlying medulloblastoma.

Jones DT(1), Jäger N, Kool M, Zichner T, Hutter B, Sultan M, Cho YJ, Pugh TJ,
Hovestadt V, Stütz AM, Rausch T, Warnatz HJ, Ryzhova M, Bender S, Sturm D, Pleier
S, Cin H, Pfaff E, Sieber L, Wittmann A, Remke M, Witt H, Hutter S, Tzaridis T,
Weischenfeldt J, Raeder B, Avci M, Amstislavskiy V, Zapatka M, Weber UD, Wang Q, 
Lasitschka B, Bartholomae CC, Schmidt M, von Kalle C, Ast V, Lawerenz C, Eils J, 
Kabbe R, Benes V, van Sluis P, Koster J, Volckmann R, Shih D, Betts MJ, Russell
RB, Coco S, Tonini GP, Schüller U, Hans V, Graf N, Kim YJ, Monoranu C, Roggendorf
W, Unterberg A, Herold-Mende C, Milde T, Kulozik AE, von Deimling A, Witt O,
Maass E, Rössler J, Ebinger M, Schuhmann MU, Frühwald MC, Hasselblatt M, Jabado
N, Rutkowski S, von Bueren AO, Williamson D, Clifford SC, McCabe MG, Collins VP, 
Wolf S, Wiemann S, Lehrach H, Brors B, Scheurlen W, Felsberg J, Reifenberger G,
Northcott PA, Taylor MD, Meyerson M, Pomeroy SL, Yaspo ML, Korbel JO, Korshunov
A, Eils R, Pfister SM, Lichter P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.

Medulloblastoma is an aggressively growing tumour, arising in the cerebellum or
medulla/brain stem. It is the most common malignant brain tumour in children, and
shows tremendous biological and clinical heterogeneity. Despite recent treatment 
advances, approximately 40% of children experience tumour recurrence, and 30%
will die from their disease. Those who survive often have a significantly reduced
quality of life. Four tumour subgroups with distinct clinical, biological and
genetic profiles are currently identified. WNT tumours, showing activated
wingless pathway signalling, carry a favourable prognosis under current treatment
regimens. SHH tumours show hedgehog pathway activation, and have an intermediate 
prognosis. Group 3 and 4 tumours are molecularly less well characterized, and
also present the greatest clinical challenges. The full repertoire of genetic
events driving this distinction, however, remains unclear. Here we describe an
integrative deep-sequencing analysis of 125 tumour-normal pairs, conducted as
part of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) PedBrain Tumor Project.
Tetraploidy was identified as a frequent early event in Group 3 and 4 tumours,
and a positive correlation between patient age and mutation rate was observed.
Several recurrent mutations were identified, both in known
medulloblastoma-related genes (CTNNB1, PTCH1, MLL2, SMARCA4) and in genes not
previously linked to this tumour (DDX3X, CTDNEP1, KDM6A, TBR1), often in
subgroup-specific patterns. RNA sequencing confirmed these alterations, and
revealed the expression of what are, to our knowledge, the first medulloblastoma 
fusion genes identified. Chromatin modifiers were frequently altered across all
subgroups. These findings enhance our understanding of the genomic complexity and
heterogeneity underlying medulloblastoma, and provide several potential targets
for new therapeutics, especially for Group 3 and 4 patients.

PMCID: PMC3662966
PMID: 22832583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2012 Aug;71(8):741-9.

Delayed maturation and differentiation of neurons in focal cortical dysplasia
with the transmantle sign: analysis of layer-specific marker expression.

Sakakibara T(1), Sukigara S, Saito T, Otsuki T, Takahashi A, Kaneko Y, Kaido T,
Saito Y, Sato N, Kimura Y, Nakagawa E, Sugai K, Sasaki M, Goto Y, Itoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Center, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

Transmantle dysplasia is a rare type of focal cortical dysplasia (FCD)
characterized by expansion of the cortex from the deep white matter to the
surface and in which there is a FCD IIA or IIB pathologic pattern. To
characterize possible mechanisms underlying this regional disorder of radial
migrating cells, we studied the expression patterns of neocortical layer-specific
markers using immunohistochemistry in surgical specimens from 5 FCD IIA and 4 FCD
IIB cases in children. All neuronal cells expressed the mature neuron marker
MAP2/2B but not the microglia markers Iba-1 and CD68. Some layer-specific markers
showed distinct expression patterns. TBR1-positive, SATB2-positive, and
FOXP1-positive cells were diffusely distributed in the cortex and/or the white
matter. TBR1-positive and FOXP1-positive cells were generally more numerous in
FCD IIB than in FCD IIA and were mostly in the cortical molecular and upper
layers. FOXP1-, FOXP2-, and CUTL1-positive cells also expressed the immature
neuron marker, Nestin/PROX1, whereas TBR1-, CTIP2-, and SATB2-positive cells only
expressed MAP2/2B. These data highlight differences between FCD IIB and FCD IIA
with more cells having the immature marker in upper layer markers in the former. 
By analyzing layer-specific marker expression patterns, we identified apparent
neuronal maturation differences between FCD IIA and FCD IIB in cases of
transmantle dysplasia.

PMID: 22805777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Brain Res. 2012 Aug 27;1470:89-97. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.06.009. Epub 2012
Jul 1.

Abnormal maturation and differentiation of neocortical neurons in epileptogenic
cortical malformation: unique distribution of layer-specific marker cells of
focal cortical dysplasia and hemimegalencephaly.

Arai A(1), Saito T, Hanai S, Sukigara S, Nabatame S, Otsuki T, Nakagawa E,
Takahashi A, Kaneko Y, Kaido T, Saito Y, Sugai K, Sasaki M, Goto Y, Itoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Center, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

Focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) and hemimegalencephaly (HME) are major causes of
intractable epilepsy in children. The probable pathogenesis of FCD and HMG is the
abnormal migration and differentiation of neurons. The aim of the present study
was to clarify the abnormal cytoarchitecture, based on neuronal immaturation.
Tissue samples were obtained from 16 FCD and seven HME patients, aged between 2
months and 12 years, who had been diagnosed as typical FCD and HME, following
surgical treatment for intractable epilepsy. Paraffin-embedded sections were
stained with the antibodies of three layer-markers that are usually present only 
during the fetal period, namely SATB2 (expressed in the upper layer of the normal
fetal neocortex), FOXP1 (expressed in the 5th layer), and TBR1 (expressed in the 
6th layer). In FCD, SATB2-positive (+) cells located in the middle and deep
regions of FCD Ia and Ib, but only in the superficial region of FCD IIa and IIb. 
FOXP1+ cells diffusely located in the neocortex, especially the upper layer of
FCD IIa and IIb. TBR1+ cells mainly located in the middle and deep regions, and
also white matter. In FCD IIb, TBR1+ cells were in the superficial region. In
HME, SATB2+ and FOXP1+ cells were found diffusely. TBR1+ cells were in the middle
and deep regions. On the basis of continued expression of fetal cortical
layer-specific markers in FCD and HME brains, the abnormal neocortical formation 
in both is likely to be the result of disrupted neuronal migration and
dysmaturation. The expression pattern is different between FCD and HME.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22759905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Neurosci. 2012 Jun 27;32(26):8831-44. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5746-11.2012.

Tbr2 deficiency in mitral and tufted cells disrupts excitatory-inhibitory balance
of neural circuitry in the mouse olfactory bulb.

Mizuguchi R(1), Naritsuka H, Mori K, Mao CA, Klein WH, Yoshihara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Neurobiology of Synapse, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama
351-0198, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2012 Sep 26;32(39):13639. Mao, Chai-An [added]; Klein, William H
[added].

The olfactory bulb (OB) is the first relay station in the brain where odor
information from the olfactory epithelium is integrated, processed through its
intrinsic neural circuitry, and conveyed to higher olfactory centers. Compared
with profound mechanistic insights into olfactory axon wiring from the nose to
the OB, little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying the formation
of functional neural circuitry among various types of neurons inside the OB.
T-box transcription factor Tbr2 is expressed in various types of glutamatergic
excitatory neurons in the brain including the OB projection neurons, mitral and
tufted cells. Here we generated conditional knockout mice in which the Tbr2 gene 
is inactivated specifically in mitral and tufted cells from late embryonic
stages. Tbr2 deficiency caused cell-autonomous changes in molecular expression
including a compensatory increase of another T-box member, Tbr1, and a
concomitant shift of vesicular glutamate transporter (VGluT) subtypes from VGluT1
to VGluT2. Tbr2-deficient mitral and tufted cells also exhibited anatomical
abnormalities in their dendritic morphology and projection patterns.
Additionally, several non-cell-autonomous phenotypes were observed in
parvalbumin-, calbindin-, and 5T4-positive GABAergic interneurons. Furthermore,
the number of dendrodendritic reciprocal synapses between mitral/tufted cells and
GABAergic interneurons was significantly reduced. Upon stimulation with odorants,
larger numbers of mitral and tufted cells were activated in Tbr2 conditional
knockout mice. These results suggest that Tbr2 is required for not only the
proper differentiation of mitral and tufted cells, but also for the establishment
of functional neuronal circuitry in the OB and maintenance of
excitatory-inhibitory balance crucial for odor information processing.

PMCID: PMC3700647
PMID: 22745484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Neurosci. 2012 May 30;32(22):7672-84. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0894-12.2012.

Filamin a regulates neural progenitor proliferation and cortical size through
Wee1-dependent Cdk1 phosphorylation.

Lian G(1), Lu J, Hu J, Zhang J, Cross SH, Ferland RJ, Sheen VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Cytoskeleton-associated proteins play key roles not only in regulating cell
morphology and migration but also in proliferation. Mutations in the
cytoskeleton-associated gene filamin A (FlnA) cause the human disorder
periventricular heterotopia (PH). PH is a disorder of neural stem cell
development that is characterized by disruption of progenitors along the
ventricular epithelium and subsequent formation of ectopic neuronal nodules.
FlnA-dependent regulation of cytoskeletal dynamics is thought to direct neural
progenitor migration and proliferation. Here we show that embryonic FlnA-null
mice exhibited a reduction in brain size and decline in neural progenitor numbers
over time. The drop in the progenitor population was not attributable to cell
death or changes in premature differentiation, but to prolonged cell cycle
duration. Suppression of FlnA led to prolongation of the entire cell cycle
length, principally in M phase. FlnA loss impaired degradation of cyclin
B1-related proteins, thereby delaying the onset and progression through mitosis. 
We found that the cdk1 kinase Wee1 bound FlnA, demonstrated increased expression 
levels after loss of FlnA function, and was associated with increased
phosphorylation of cdk1. Phosphorylation of cdk1 inhibited activation of the
anaphase promoting complex degradation system, which was responsible for cyclin
B1 degradation and progression through mitosis. Collectively, our results
demonstrate a molecular mechanism whereby FlnA loss impaired G2 to M phase entry,
leading to cell cycle prolongation, compromised neural progenitor proliferation, 
and reduced brain size.

PMCID: PMC3368379
PMID: 22649246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Eur J Med Genet. 2012 Aug-Sep;55(8-9):455-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.04.004.
Epub 2012 Apr 22.

A novel chondroectodermal dysplasia mapped to chromosome 2q24.1-q31.1.

Khan B(1), Basit S, Touseef M, Tariq M, Khan MN, Ahmad W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam
University, Islamabad, Pakistan.

Chondroectodermal dysplasias are genetically heterogeneous group of disorders
involving defects in one or more ectodermal appendages (hair, nail, teeth and
sweat glands) in association with anomalies of the cartilage. In the present
study a novel form of chondroectodermal dysplasia, segregating in an autosomal
recessive pattern in a Pakistani family, was investigated. The clinical features 
including proportionate short stature, osteopenia with fracturing and breaking of
bones, hypodontia, hypertrophic and convex shaped nails, night blindness,
watering eyes and infection of ears were observed in affected individuals of the 
family. Genetic linkage study mapped the novel autosomal recessive form of
chondroectodermal dysplasia on human chromosome 2q24.1-q31.1. Linkage to the
region was established by scanning human genome using Human Mapping 250K Nsp
array. Linkage interval for chondroectodermal dysplasia on human chromosome
2q24.1-q31.1 spans 13.76 cM, which corresponds to 15.72 Mb according to the
sequence-based physical map (Build 36.2). The maximum multipoint LOD score of
3.37 was obtained with several markers along the disease interval. Sequence
analysis of three candidate genes (TANK, ITGB6, TBR1) located in the candidate
interval did not discover potentially causal variants.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22579605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Development. 2012 May;139(9):1630-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.075564.

COUP-TFII controls amygdala patterning by regulating neuropilin expression.

Tang K(1), Rubenstein JL, Tsai SY, Tsai MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. ktang_sc@yahoo.com

The development of the progenitor zones in the pallium, lateral ganglionic
eminence (LGE) and medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) in the subpallium has been
well studied; however, so far the role of the caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE), a
posterior subpallial domain, in telencephalon patterning remains poorly
understood. COUP-TFII, an orphan nuclear receptor, is preferentially expressed in
the CGE. We generated COUP-TFII mouse mutants, using Rx-Cre
(RxCre;COUP-TFII(F/F)), to study its function in telencephalon development. In
these mutants, we found severe defects in the formation of the amygdala complex, 
including the lateral (LA), basolateral (BLA) and basomedial (BMA) amygdala
nuclei. Molecular analysis provided evidence that the migration of CGE-derived
Pax6(+) cells failed to settle into the BMA nucleus, owing to reduced expression 
of neuropilin 1 (Nrp1) and Nrp2, two semaphorin receptors that regulate neuronal 
cell migration and axon guidance. Our ChIP assays revealed that Nrp1 and Nrp2
genes are the direct targets of COUP-TFII in the telencephalon in vivo.
Furthermore, our results showed that the coordinated development between the CGE 
originated subpallial population (Pax6(+) cells) and pallial populations (Tbr1(+)
and Lhx2(+) cells) was essential for patterning the amygdala assembly. Our study 
presented novel genetic evidence that the caudal ganglionic eminence, a distinct 
subpallial progenitor zone, contributes cells to the basal telencephalon, such as
the BMA nucleus.

PMCID: PMC3317968
PMID: 22492355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2012 Jun;63(3):848-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ympev.2012.02.033.
Epub 2012 Mar 14.

Gene trees, species trees, and morphology converge on a similar phylogeny of
living gars (Actinopterygii: Holostei: Lepisosteidae), an ancient clade of
ray-finned fishes.

Wright JJ(1), David SR, Near TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA. jjwright@umich.edu

Extant gars represent the remaining members of a formerly diverse assemblage of
ancient ray-finned fishes and have been the subject of multiple phylogenetic
analyses using morphological data. Here, we present the first hypothesis of
phylogenetic relationships among living gar species based on molecular data,
through the examination of gene tree heterogeneity and coalescent species tree
analyses of a portion of one mitochondrial (COI) and seven nuclear (ENC1, myh6,
plagl2, S7 ribosomal protein intron 1, sreb2, tbr1, and zic1) genes. Individual
gene trees displayed varying degrees of resolution with regards to species-level 
relationships, and the gene trees inferred from COI and the S7 intron were the
only two that were completely resolved. Coalescent species tree analyses of
nuclear genes resulted in a well-resolved and strongly supported phylogenetic
tree of living gar species, for which Bayesian posterior node support was further
improved by the inclusion of the mitochondrial gene. Species-level relationships 
among gars inferred from our molecular data set were highly congruent with
previously published morphological phylogenies, with the exception of the
placement of two species, Lepisosteus osseus and L. platostomus. Re-examination
of the character coding used by previous authors provided partial resolution of
this topological discordance, resulting in broad concordance in the phylogenies
inferred from individual genes, the coalescent species tree analysis, and
morphology. The completely resolved phylogeny inferred from the molecular data
set with strong Bayesian posterior support at all nodes provided insights into
the potential for introgressive hybridization and patterns of allopatric
speciation in the evolutionary history of living gars, as well as a solid
foundation for future examinations of functional diversification and evolutionary
stasis in a "living fossil" lineage.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22445447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31547. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031547. Epub 2012 Feb 14.

Cultured subventricular zone progenitor cells transduced with neurogenin-2 become
mature glutamatergic neurons and integrate into the dentate gyrus.

Chen X(1), Lepier A, Berninger B, Tolkovsky AM, Herbert J.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

We have previously shown that transplantation of immature DCX+/NeuN+/Prox1+
neurons (found in the neonatal DG), but not undifferentiated neuronal progenitor 
cells (NPCs) from ventral subventricular zone (SVZ), results in neuronal
maturation in vivo within the dentate niche. Here we investigated whether we
could enhance the integration of SVZ NPCs by forced expression of the proneural
gene Neurogenin 2 (NEUROG2). NPCs cultured from neonatal GFP-transgenic rat SVZ
for 7 days in a non-differentiating medium were transduced with a retrovirus
encoding NEUROG2 and DsRed or the DsRed reporter gene alone (control). By 3 days 
post-transduction, the NEUROG2-transduced cells maintained in culture contained
mostly immature neurons (91% DCX+; 76% NeuN+), whereas the control
virus-transduced cells remained largely undifferentiated (30% DCX+; <1% NeuN+).
At 6 weeks following transplantation into the DG of adult male rats, there were
no neurons among the transplanted cells treated with the control virus but the
majority of the NEUROG2-transduced DsRed+ SVZ cells became mature neurons (92%
NeuN+; DCX-negative). Although the NEUROG2-transduced SVZ cells did not express
the dentate granule neuron marker Prox1, most of the NEUROG2-transduced SVZ cells
(78%) expressed the glutamatergic marker Tbr1, suggesting the acquisition of a
glutamatergic phenotype. Moreover, some neurons extended dendrites into the
molecular layer, grew axons containing Ankyrin G+ axonal initial segments, and
projected into the CA3 region, thus resembling mature DG granule neurons. A
proportion of NEUROG2 transduced cells also expressed c-Fos and P-CREB, two
markers of neuronal activation. We conclude that NEUROG2-transduction is
sufficient to promote neuronal maturation and integration of transplanted NPCs
from SVZ into the DG.

PMCID: PMC3279376
PMID: 22348101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Neurosci. 2011 Oct 26;31(43):15604-17. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4439-11.2011.

FGF signaling expands embryonic cortical surface area by regulating
Notch-dependent neurogenesis.

Rash BG(1), Lim HD, Breunig JJ, Vaccarino FM.

Author information: 
(1)Yale Child Study Center, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

The processes regulating cortical surface area expansion during development and
evolution are unknown. We show that loss of function of all fibroblast growth
factor receptors (FgfRs) expressed at the earliest stages of cortical development
causes severe deficits in surface area growth by embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5) in
the mouse. In FgfR mutants, accelerated production of neurons led to severe loss 
of radial progenitors and premature termination of neurogenesis. Nevertheless,
these mutants showed remarkably little change in cortical layer structure.
Birth-dating experiments indicated that a greater proportion of layer fates was
generated during early neurogenic stages, revealing that FgfR activity normally
slows the temporal progression of cortical layer fates. Electroporation of a
dominant-negative FgfR at E11.5 increased cortical neurogenesis in normal
mice--an effect that was blocked by simultaneous activation of the Notch pathway.
Together with changes in the expression of Notch pathway genes in FgfR mutant
embryos, these findings indicate that Notch lies downstream of FgfR signaling in 
the same pathway regulating cortical neurogenesis and begin to establish a
mechanism for regulating cortical surface expansion.

PMCID: PMC3235689
PMID: 22031906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dis Model Mech. 2012 Mar;5(2):200-9. doi: 10.1242/dmm.007336. Epub 2011 Oct 25.

Neuronal regeneration in a zebrafish model of adult brain injury.

Kishimoto N(1), Shimizu K, Sawamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Nagoya City University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.

Neural stem cells in the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the adult mammalian
forebrain are a potential source of neurons for neural tissue repair after brain 
insults such as ischemic stroke and traumatic brain injury (TBI). Recent studies 
show that neurogenesis in the ventricular zone (VZ) of the adult zebrafish
telencephalon has features in common with neurogenesis in the adult mammalian
SVZ. Here, we established a zebrafish model to study injury-induced neurogenesis 
in the adult brain. We show that the adult zebrafish brain possesses a remarkable
capacity for neuronal regeneration. Telencephalon injury prompted the
proliferation of neuronal precursor cells (NPCs) in the VZ of the injured
hemisphere, compared with in the contralateral hemisphere. The distribution of
NPCs, viewed by BrdU labeling and ngn1-promoter-driven GFP, suggested that they
migrated laterally and reached the injury site via the subpallium and pallium.
The number of NPCs reaching the injury site significantly decreased when the fish
were treated with an inhibitor of <U+03B3>-secretase, a component of the Notch signaling
pathway, suggesting that injury-induced neurogenesis mechanisms are at least
partly conserved between fish and mammals. The injury-induced NPCs differentiated
into mature neurons in the regions surrounding the injury site within a week
after the injury. Most of these cells expressed T-box brain protein (Tbr1),
suggesting they had adopted the normal neuronal fate in this region. These
results suggest that the telencephalic VZ contributes to neural tissue recovery
following telencephalic injury in the adult zebrafish, and that the adult
zebrafish is a useful model for regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC3291641
PMID: 22028327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25788. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025788. Epub 2011 Sep 30.

Anti-Aß drug screening platform using human iPS cell-derived neurons for the
treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Yahata N(1), Asai M, Kitaoka S, Takahashi K, Asaka I, Hioki H, Kaneko T, Maruyama
K, Saido TC, Nakahata T, Asada T, Yamanaka S, Iwata N, Inoue H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that causes 
progressive memory and cognitive decline during middle to late adult life. The AD
brain is characterized by deposition of amyloid ß peptide (Aß), which is produced
from amyloid precursor protein by ß- and <U+03B3>-secretase (presenilin
complex)-mediated sequential cleavage. Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells
potentially provide an opportunity to generate a human cell-based model of AD
that would be crucial for drug discovery as well as for investigating mechanisms 
of the disease.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We differentiated human iPS (hiPS) cells into
neuronal cells expressing the forebrain marker, Foxg1, and the neocortical
markers, Cux1, Satb2, Ctip2, and Tbr1. The iPS cell-derived neuronal cells also
expressed amyloid precursor protein, ß-secretase, and <U+03B3>-secretase components, and
were capable of secreting Aß into the conditioned media. Aß production was
inhibited by ß-secretase inhibitor, <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor (GSI), and an NSAID;
however, there were different susceptibilities to all three drugs between early
and late differentiation stages. At the early differentiation stage, GSI
treatment caused a fast increase at lower dose (Aß surge) and drastic decline of 
Aß production.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results indicate that the hiPS cell-derived
neuronal cells express functional ß- and <U+03B3>-secretases involved in Aß production; 
however, anti-Aß drug screening using these hiPS cell-derived neuronal cells
requires sufficient neuronal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3184175
PMID: 21984949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Ecol. 2011 Nov;20(22):4707-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2011.05279.x. Epub
2011 Sep 27.

Parallel ecological diversification in Antarctic notothenioid fishes as evidence 
for adaptive radiation.

Rutschmann S(1), Matschiner M, Damerau M, Muschick M, Lehmann MF, Hanel R,
Salzburger W.

Author information: 
(1)Zoological Institute, University of Basel, Vesalgasse 1, CH-4051 Basel,
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Mol Ecol. 2011 Nov;20(22):4590-1.

Antarctic notothenioid fishes represent a rare example of a marine species flock.
They evolved special adaptations to the extreme environment of the Southern Ocean
including antifreeze glycoproteins. Although lacking a swim bladder,
notothenioids have diversified from their benthic ancestor into a wide array of
water column niches, such as epibenthic, semipelagic, cryopelagic and pelagic
habitats. Applying stable carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) isotope analyses to gain
information on feeding ecology and foraging habitats, we tested whether
ecological diversification along the benthic-pelagic axis followed a single
directional trend in notothenioids, or whether it evolved independently in
several lineages. Population samples of 25 different notothenioid species were
collected around the Antarctic Peninsula, the South Orkneys and the South
Sandwich Islands. The C and N stable isotope signatures span a broad range (mean 
d(13) C and d(15) N values between -25.4 and -21.9 and between 8.5 and 13.8, 
respectively), and pairwise niche overlap between four notothenioid families was 
highly significant. Analysis of isotopic disparity-through-time on the basis of
Bayesian inference and maximum-likelihood phylogenies, performed on a
concatenated mitochondrial (cyt b) and nuclear gene (myh6, Ptr and tbr1) data set
(3148 bp), showed that ecological diversification into overlapping feeding niches
has occurred multiple times in parallel in different notothenioid families. This 
convergent diversification in habitat and trophic ecology is a sign of
interspecific competition and characteristic for adaptive radiations.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21951675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Neurosci. 2011 Sep 21;31(38):13400-11. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2944-11.2011.

Cocaine alters BDNF expression and neuronal migration in the embryonic mouse
forebrain.

McCarthy DM(1), Zhang X, Darnell SB, Sangrey GR, Yanagawa Y, Sadri-Vakili G,
Bhide PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and NeuroEpigenetcis Laboratory, MassGeneral Institute
for Neurodegenerative Disease, Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General
Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Prenatal cocaine exposure impairs brain development and produces lasting
alterations in cognitive function. In a prenatal cocaine exposure mouse model, we
found that tangential migration of GABA neurons from the basal to the dorsal
forebrain and radial neuron migration within the dorsal forebrain were
significantly decreased during the embryonic period. The decrease in the
tangential migration occurred early in gestation and normalized by late
gestation, despite ongoing cocaine exposure. The decrease in radial migration was
associated with altered laminar positioning of neurons in the medial prefrontal
cortex. The cocaine exposure led to transient decreases in the expression of Tbr2
and Tbr1, transcription factors associated with intermediate progenitor cells and
newborn neurons of the dorsal forebrain, respectively, although neurogenesis was 
not significantly altered. Since cocaine can modulate brain derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF) expression in the mature brain, we examined whether cocaine can
alter BDNF expression in the embryonic brain. We found a transient decrease in
BDNF protein expression in the cocaine-exposed embryonic forebrain early in
gestation. By late gestation, the BDNF expression recovered to control levels,
despite ongoing cocaine exposure. In basal forebrain explants from
cocaine-exposed embryos, cell migration was significantly decreased,
corroborating the in vivo data on tangential GABA neuron migration. Since BDNF
can influence tangential neuronal migration, we added BDNF to the culture medium 
and observed increased cell migration. Our data suggest that cocaine can alter
tangential and radial neuronal migration as well as BDNF expression in the
embryonic brain and that decreased BDNF may mediate cocaine's effects on neuronal
migration.

PMCID: PMC3182852
PMID: 21940433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Comp Neurol. 2012 Feb 15;520(3):453-78. doi: 10.1002/cne.22762.

Subdivisions of the turtle Pseudemys scripta hypothalamus based on the expression
of regulatory genes and neuronal markers.

Moreno N(1), Domínguez L, Morona R, González A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Biology, University Complutense of
Madrid, 28040, Madrid, Spain. nerea@bio.ucm.es

The patterns of distribution of a set of conserved brain developmental regulatory
transcription factors and neuronal markers were analyzed in the hypothalamus of
the juvenile turtle, Pseudemys scripta. Combined immunohistochemical techniques
were used for the identification of the main boundaries and subdivisions in the
optic, paraventricular, tuberal, and mammillary hypothalamic regions. The
combination of Tbr1 and Pax6 with Nkx2.1 allowed identification of the boundary
between the telencephalic preoptic area, rich in Nkx2.1 expression, and the
prethalamic eminence, rich in Tbr1 expression. In addition, at this level Nkx2.2 
expression defined the boundary between the telencephalon and the hypothalamus.
The dorsalmost hypothalamic domain was the supraoptoparaventricular region that
was defined by the expression of Otp/Pax6 and the lack of Nkx2.1/Isl1. It is
subdivided into rostral, rich in Otp and Nkx2.2, and caudal, only Otp-positive,
portions. Ventrally, the suprachiasmatic area was identified by its
catecholaminergic groups and the lack of Otp, and could be further divided into a
rostral portion, rich in Nkx2.1 and Nkx2.2, and a caudal portion, rich in Isl1
and devoid of Nkx2.1 expression. The expressions of Nkx2.1 and Isl1 defined the
tuberal hypothalamus, whereas only the rostral portion expressed Otp. Its caudal 
boundary was evident by the lack of Isl1 in the adjacent mammillary area, which
expressed Nkx2.1 and Otp. All these results provide an important set of data on
the interpretation of the hypothalamic organization in a reptile, and hence make 
a useful contribution to the understanding of hypothalamic evolution.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21935937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Development. 2011 Oct;138(19):4315-26. doi: 10.1242/dev.069534. Epub 2011 Aug 24.

Pallial origin of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons in the nucleus basalis of
Meynert and horizontal limb of the diagonal band nucleus.

Pombero A(1), Bueno C, Saglietti L, Rodenas M, Guimera J, Bulfone A, Martinez S.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, 03550 San Juan, Alicante, Spain.

Erratum in
    Development. 2011 Oct;138(20):4565.

The majority of the cortical cholinergic innervation implicated in attention and 
memory originates in the nucleus basalis of Meynert and in the horizontal limb of
the diagonal band nucleus of the basal prosencephalon. Functional alterations in 
this system give rise to neuropsychiatric disorders as well as to the cognitive
alterations described in Parkinson and Alzheimer's diseases. Despite the
functional importance of these basal forebrain cholinergic neurons very little is
known about their origin and development. Previous studies suggest that they
originate in the medial ganglionic eminence of the telencephalic subpallium;
however, our results identified Tbr1-expressing, reelin-positive neurons
migrating from the ventral pallium to the subpallium that differentiate into
cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain nuclei projecting to the cortex.
Experiments with Tbr1 knockout mice, which lack ventropallial structures,
confirmed the pallial origin of cholinergic neurons in Meynert and horizontal
diagonal band nuclei. Also, we demonstrate that Fgf8 signaling in the
telencephalic midline attracts these neurons from the pallium to follow a
tangential migratory route towards the basal forebrain.

PMID: 21865321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Comp Neurol. 2012 Feb 15;520(3):633-55. doi: 10.1002/cne.22757.

Subdivisions of the adult zebrafish subpallium by molecular marker analysis.

Ganz J(1), Kaslin J, Freudenreich D, Machate A, Geffarth M, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Center and Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Dresden
University of Technology, 01307 Dresden, Germany.

The morphology of the telencephalon displays great diversity among different
vertebrate lineages. Particularly the everted telencephalon of ray-finned fishes 
shows a noticeably different morphology from the evaginated telencephalon of
nonray-finned fishes and other vertebrates. This makes the comparison between the
different parts of the telencephalon of ray-finned fishes and other vertebrates
difficult. Based on neuroanatomical, neurochemical, and connectional data no
consensus on the subdivisions of the adult telencephalon of ray-finned fishes and
their relation to nuclei in the telencephalon of other vertebrates has been
reached yet. For tetrapods, comparative expression pattern analysis of homologous
developmental genes has been a successful approach to clarify homologies between 
different parts of the telencephalon. In the larval zebrafish, subdivisions of
the subpallium have been proposed using conserved developmental gene expression. 
In this study, we investigate the subdivisions of the adult zebrafish
telencephalon by analyzing the expression pattern of conserved molecular marker
genes. We identify the boundary between the pallium and subpallium based on the
complementary expression of dlx2a, dlx5a in the subpallium and tbr1, neurod in
the pallium. Furthermore, combinatorial expression of Isl, nkx2.1b, lhx1b, tbr1, 
eomesa, emx1, emx2, and emx3 identifies striatal-like, pallidal-like, and
septal-like subdivisions within the subpallium. In contrast to previous models,
we propose that the striatum and pallidum are stretched along the rostrocaudal
axis of the telencephalon. Further, the septal nuclei derive from both the
pallium and subpallium. On this basis, we present a new model for the
subdivisions of the subpallium in teleost fish.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21858823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Stem Cell Rev. 2012 Mar;8(1):210-23. doi: 10.1007/s12015-011-9287-x.

In vitro modelling of cortical neurogenesis by sequential induction of human
umbilical cord blood stem cells.

Ali H(1), Forraz N, McGuckin CP, Jurga M, Lindsay S, Ip BK, Trevelyan A, Basford 
C, Habibollah S, Ahmad S, Clowry GJ, Bayatti N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, International Centre for Life, Newcastle
University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE1 3BZ, United Kingdom.

Neurogenesis of excitatory neurons in the developing human cerebral neocortex is 
a complex and dynamic set of processes and the exact mechanisms controlling the
specification of human neocortical neuron subtypes are poorly understood due to
lack of relevant cell models available. It has been shown that the transcription 
factors Pax6, Tbr2 and Tbr1, which are sequentially expressed in the rodent
neocortex, regulate and define corticogenesis of glutamatergic neocortical
neurons. In humans the homologues of these genes are generally expressed in a
similar pattern, but with some differences. In this study, we used purified human
umbilical cord blood stem cells, expressing pluripotency marker genes (OCT4, SOX2
and NANOG), to model human neocortical neurogenesis in vitro. We analyzed the
expression patterns of PAX6, TBR2 and TBR1, at both protein and mRNA levels,
throughout the 24 days of a sequential neuronal induction protocol. Their
expression patterns correlated with those found in the developing human neocortex
where they define different developmental stages of neocortical neurons. The
derived cord blood neuron-like cells expressed a number of neuronal markers. They
also expressed components of glutamatergic neurotransmission including glutamate 
receptor subunits and transporters, and generated calcium influxes upon
stimulation with glutamate. Thus we have demonstrated that it is possible to
model neocortical neurogenesis using cord blood stem cells in vitro. This may
allow detailed analysis of the molecular mechanisms regulating neocortical
neuronal specification, thus aiding the development of potential therapeutic
tools for diseases and injuries of the cerebral cortex.

PMID: 21678036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2011 Oct;61(1):149-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ympev.2011.05.020.
Epub 2011 Jun 6.

Reconciling gene trees of eastern North American minnows.

Hollingsworth PR Jr(1), Darrin Hulsey C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Tennessee, 569
Dabney Hall, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA. phollin1@utk.edu

Most eastern North American cyprinid fishes belong to a clade known as the "open 
posterior myodome" (OPM) minnows, but phylogenetic relationships within this
clade have been difficult to ascertain. Previous attempts to resolve
relationships among the generally benthic "chubs" and the more pelagic "shiners",
that constitute the majority of OPM minnows, have led to highly discordant
phylogenetic hypotheses. To further examine relationships among the OPM minnows, 
we utilized both a concatenated Bayesian approach and a coalescent-based species 
tree method to analyze data from six protein coding nuclear loci (Enc1, Ptr,
Ryr3, Sh3px3, Tbr1, and Zic1), as well as the mitochondrial locus (Cytb). We
focused our analyses on the chub-like genus Phenacobius, a group that has drifted
topologically between other benthic chubs and the more pelagic shiners, and also 
included exemplar taxa from 11 other OPM lineages. Individual gene trees were
highly discordant regarding relationships within Phenacobius and across the OPM
clade. The concatenated Bayesian analysis and coalescent-based species tree
reconstruction recovered slightly different phylogenetic topologies.
Additionally, the posterior support values for clades using the coalescent-based 
approach were consistently lower than the concatenated analysis. However,
Phenacobius was resolved as monophyletic and as the sister lineage to Erimystax
regardless of the combined data approach taken. Furthermore,
Phenacobius+Erimystax was recovered as more closely related to the shiners we
examined than to other chubs. Relationships within Phenacobius varied depending
on the combined phylogenetic method utilized. Our results highlight the
importance of multi-locus, coalescent-based approaches for resolving the
phylogeny of diverse clades like the eastern North American OPM minnows.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21669293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Microbes Infect. 2011 Oct;13(11):943-52. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2011.05.007. Epub 
2011 May 27.

Diversity of response to Trypanosoma brucei gambiense infections in the
Forecariah mangrove focus (Guinea): perspectives for a better control of sleeping
sickness.

Ilboudo H(1), Jamonneau V, Camara M, Camara O, Dama E, Léno M, Ouendeno F,
Courtin F, Sakande H, Sanon R, Kaboré J, Coulibaly B, N'Dri L, Diarra A, N'Goran 
E, Bucheton B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre International de Recherche-Développement sur l'Elevage en zone
Subhumide (CIRDES), 01BP454 Bobo-Dioulasso 01, Burkina Faso.

At a time when human African trypanosomiasis (HAT) elimination again seems a
reachable goal in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa, it is becoming increasingly
important to characterise the factors involved in disease resurgence or
maintenance to develop sustainable control strategies. In this study conducted in
the Forecariah mangrove focus in Guinea, HAT patients and serological suspects
(SERO) were identified through mass screening of the population with the Card
Agglutination Test for Trypanosomiasis (CATT) and were followed up for up to 2
years. Analysis of the samples collected during the follow-up of HAT patients and
SERO was performed with PCR (TBR1/TBR2) and the trypanolysis serological test
(TL) in order to clarify the role played by these individuals in the epidemiology
of HAT. PCR positivity was higher in TL<U+207A> than in SERO TL<U+207B> (50% vs. 18%,
respectively). Whereas CATT plasma titres decreased both in treated HAT patients 
and SERO TL<U+207B>, SERO TL<U+207A> maintained high CATT titres. Four out of 17 SERO TL<U+207A>
developed HAT during the study. These results strongly suggest that SERO TL<U+207A>
individuals are asymptomatic carriers. In the context where disease prevalence is
sufficiently low, treating SERO TL<U+207A> individual may thus be of crucial importance 
in order to cut transmission.

Copyright © 2011 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 21658462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Neural Dev. 2011 May 18;6:25. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-6-25.

Zac1 plays a key role in the development of specific neuronal subsets in the
mouse cerebellum.

Chung SH(1), Marzban H, Aldinger K, Dixit R, Millen K, Schuurmans C, Hawkes R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada.
sehchung@ucdavis.edu

BACKGROUND: The cerebellum is composed of a diverse array of neuronal subtypes.
Here we have used a candidate approach to identify Zac1, a tumor suppressor gene 
encoding a zinc finger transcription factor, as a new player in the
transcriptional network required for the development of a specific subset of
cerebellar nuclei and a population of Golgi cells in the cerebellar cortex.
RESULTS: We found that Zac1 has a complex expression profile in the developing
cerebellum, including in two proliferating progenitor populations; the cerebellar
ventricular zone and the external granular layer overlying posterior cerebellar
lobules IX and X. Zac1 is also expressed in some postmitotic cerebellar neurons, 
including a subset of GABAergic interneurons in the medial cerebellar nuclei.
Notably, GABAergic interneurons in the cerebellar nuclei are derived from the
cerebellar ventricular zone, where Zac1 is also expressed, consistent with a
lineage relationship between these two Zac1+ populations. Zac1 is also expressed 
in a small subset of cells in the posterior vermis, including some
neurogranin-immunoreactive (NG+) Golgi cells, which, based on short-term
birthdating, are derived from the EGL, where Zac1 is also expressed. However,
Zac1+ cells and NG+ Golgi cells in the cerebellar cortex also display unique
properties, as they are generated within different, albeit overlapping, time
windows. Finally, consistent with the expression profile of Zac1, two conspicuous
abnormalities were found in the cerebellum of Zac1 null mice: the medial
cerebellar nuclei, and not the others, were significantly reduced in size; and
the number of Golgi cells in cerebellar lobule IX was reduced by approximately
60% compared to wild-type littermates.
CONCLUSIONS: The data presented here indicate that the tumor suppressor gene Zac1
is expressed in a complex fashion in the developing cerebellum, including in two 
dividing progenitor populations and in specific subsets of postmitotic neurons,
including Golgi cells and GABAergic neurons in the medial nuclei, which require
Zac1 for their differentiation. We thus conclude that Zac1 is a critical
regulator of normal cerebellar development, adding a new transcriptional
regulator to the growing list of factors involved in generating neuronal
diversity in the developing cerebellum.

PMCID: PMC3113315
PMID: 21592321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Neurosignals. 2011;19(3):128-41. doi: 10.1159/000327819. Epub 2011 May 13.

Targeted deletion of CASK-interacting nucleosome assembly protein causes higher
locomotor and exploratory activities.

Chung WC(1), Huang TN, Hsueh YP.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Academia
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

CASK-interacting nucleosome assembly protein (CINAP) has been shown to interact
with the calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine kinase (CASK) and the T-box
transcription factor T-brain-1 (Tbr1) thus modulating the expression of
N-methyl-D-aspartic acid receptor subunit 2b (NMDAR2b) in cultured hippocampal
neurons. To explore the physiological significance of CINAP in vivo, CINAP
knockout mice were generated and subjected to biochemical, anatomical, and
behavioral analyses. Unexpectedly, CINAP deletion did not impact NMDAR2b
expression, and these CINAP knockout mice were consistently comparable to
wild-type littermates in terms of immediate memory (assessed with the Y maze) and
associative memory (evaluated by conditioned taste aversion and contextual and
auditory fear conditioning). Although CINAP deletion did not obviously influence 
learning and memory behaviors, CINAP knockout mice exhibited higher locomotor and
exploratory activities. Compared with wild-type littermates, the horizontal and
vertical movements of the CINAP knockout mice were higher in a novel environment;
in home cages, rearing, sniffing, and jumping also occurred more frequently in
CINAP knockout mice. These observations suggest that although CINAP deletion in
mice does not influence learning and memory behaviors, CINAP is required for
restriction of locomotor and exploratory activities.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21576927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cereb Cortex. 2011 Nov;21(11):2599-611. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr046. Epub 2011 Apr
5.

Ascl1 participates in Cajal-Retzius cell development in the neocortex.

Dixit R(1), Zimmer C, Waclaw RR, Mattar P, Shaker T, Kovach C, Logan C, Campbell 
K, Guillemot F, Schuurmans C.

Author information: 
(1)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute,
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

Cajal-Retzius cells are essential pioneer neurons that guide neuronal migration
in the developing neocortex. During development, Cajal-Retzius cells arise from
distinct progenitor domains that line the margins of the dorsal telencephalon, or
pallium. Here, we show that the proneural gene Ascl1 is expressed in
Cajal-Retzius cell progenitors in the pallial septum, ventral pallium, and
cortical hem. Using a short-term lineage trace, we demonstrate that it is
primarily the Ascl1-expressing progenitors in the pallial septum and ventral
pallium that differentiate into Cajal-Retzius cells. Accordingly, we found a
small, albeit significant reduction in the number of Reelin(+) and Trp73(+)
Cajal-Retzius cells in the Ascl1(-/-) neocortex. Conversely, using a
gain-of-function approach, we found that Ascl1 induces the expression of both
Reelin, a Cajal-Retzius marker, and Tbr1, a marker of pallial-derived neurons, in
a subset of early-stage pallial progenitors, an activity that declines over
developmental time. Taken together, our data indicate that the proneural gene
Ascl1 is required and sufficient to promote the differentiation of a subset of
Cajal-Retzius neurons during early neocortical development. Notably, this is the 
first study that reports a function for Ascl1 in the pallium, as this gene is
best known for its role in specifying subpallial neuronal identities.

PMID: 21467208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Neural Dev. 2011 Apr 5;6:12. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-6-12.

Sequential generation of olfactory bulb glutamatergic neurons by
Neurog2-expressing precursor cells.

Winpenny E(1), Lebel-Potter M, Fernandez ME, Brill MS, Götz M, Guillemot F,
Raineteau O.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Robinson Way, CB2 0PY Cambridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: While the diversity and spatio-temporal origin of olfactory bulb (OB)
GABAergic interneurons has been studied in detail, much less is known about the
subtypes of glutamatergic OB interneurons.
RESULTS: We studied the temporal generation and diversity of Neurog2-positive
precursor progeny using an inducible genetic fate mapping approach. We show that 
all subtypes of glutamatergic neurons derive from Neurog2 positive progenitors
during development of the OB. Projection neurons, that is, mitral and tufted
cells, are produced at early embryonic stages, while a heterogeneous population
of glutamatergic juxtaglomerular neurons are generated at later embryonic as well
as at perinatal stages. While most juxtaglomerular neurons express the T-Box
protein Tbr2, those generated later also express Tbr1. Based on morphological
features, these juxtaglomerular cells can be identified as tufted interneurons
and short axon cells, respectively. Finally, targeted electroporation experiments
provide evidence that while the majority of OB glutamatergic neurons are
generated from intrabulbar progenitors, a small portion of them originate from
extrabulbar regions at perinatal ages.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide the first comprehensive analysis of the temporal and
spatial generation of OB glutamatergic neurons and identify distinct populations 
of juxtaglomerular interneurons that differ in their antigenic properties and
time of origin.

PMCID: PMC3087671
PMID: 21466690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2011 Jul;31(5):715-27. doi: 10.1007/s10571-011-9669-2. Epub
2011 Mar 20.

In vitro differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells into neurons of the dorsal
forebrain.

Jing Y(1), Machon O, Hampl A, Dvorak P, Xing Y, Krauss S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Zhengzhou University, China.

Pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESCs) are able to differentiate into all cell
types in the organism including cortical neurons. To follow the dynamic
generation of progenitors of the dorsal forebrain in vitro, we generated ESCs
from D6-GFP mice in which GFP marks neocortical progenitors and neurons after
embryonic day (E) 10.5. We used several cell culture protocols for
differentiation of ESCs into progenitors and neurons of the dorsal forebrain. In 
cell culture, GFP-positive cells were induced under differentiation conditions in
quickly formed embryoid bodies (qEBs) after 10-12 day incubation. Activation of
Wnt signaling during ESC differentiation further stimulated generation of
D6-GFP-positive cortical cells. In contrast, differentiation protocols using
normal embryoid bodies (nEBs) yielded only a few D6-GFP-positive cells. Gene
expression analysis revealed that multiple components of the canonical Wnt
signaling pathway were expressed during the development of embryoid bodies. As
shown by immunohistochemistry and quantitative qRT-PCR, D6-GFP-positive cells
from qEBs expressed genes that are characteristic for the dorsal forebrain such
as Pax6, Dach1, Tbr1, Tbr2, or Sox5. qEBs culture allowed the formation of a
D6-GFP positive pseudo-polarized neuroepithelium with the characteristic presence
of N-cadherin at the apical pole resembling the structure of the developing
neocortex.

PMCID: PMC3100494
PMID: 21424551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Feb 15;108(7):3041-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1016723108. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

TBR1 directly represses Fezf2 to control the laminar origin and development of
the corticospinal tract.

Han W(1), Kwan KY, Shim S, Lam MM, Shin Y, Xu X, Zhu Y, Li M, Sestan N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Kavli Institute of Neuroscience, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

The corticospinal (CS) tract is involved in controlling discrete voluntary
skilled movements in mammals. The CS tract arises exclusively from layer (L) 5
projection neurons of the cerebral cortex, and its formation requires L5 activity
of Fezf2 (Fezl, Zfp312). How this L5-specific pattern of Fezf2 expression and CS 
axonal connectivity is established with such remarkable fidelity had remained
elusive. Here we show that the transcription factor TBR1 directly binds the Fezf2
locus and represses its activity in L6 corticothalamic projection neurons to
restrict the origin of the CS tract to L5. In Tbr1 null mutants, CS axons
ectopically originate from L6 neurons in a Fezf2-dependent manner. Consistently, 
misexpression of Tbr1 in L5 CS neurons suppresses Fezf2 expression and
effectively abolishes the CS tract. Taken together, our findings show that TBR1
is a direct transcriptional repressor of Fezf2 and a negative regulator of CS
tract formation that restricts the laminar origin of CS axons specifically to L5.

PMCID: PMC3041103
PMID: 21285371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Neurosci. 2011 Jan 12;31(2):549-64. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4131-10.2011.

Tbr1 and Fezf2 regulate alternate corticofugal neuronal identities during
neocortical development.

McKenna WL(1), Betancourt J, Larkin KA, Abrams B, Guo C, Rubenstein JL, Chen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA.

The molecular mechanisms regulating fate divergence of closely related, but
distinct, layer 6 corticothalamic and layer 5 subcerebral projection neurons are 
largely unknown. We present evidence for central transcriptional mechanisms that 
regulate fate specification of corticothalamic (layer 6) and subcerebral (layer
5) projection neurons. We found that TBR1 promotes the identity of
corticothalamic neurons and represses subcerebral fates through reducing
expression of Fezf2 and CTIP2. These conclusions are based on the following: (1) 
In Tbr1(-/-) mice, the number of cells expressing layer 6 markers was reduced,
and the number of cells expressing layer 5 markers was increased. Early-born
(birthdated on E11.5) neurons ectopically expressed subcerebral neuronal markers,
and extended their axons into subcerebral targets. (2) Ectopic Tbr1 expression in
layer 5 neurons prevented them from extending axons into the brainstem and the
spinal cord. (3) Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis using TBR1 antibodies
showed that TBR1 bound to a conserved region in the Fezf2 gene. (4) Analysis of
Fezf2 mutants and Tbr1(-/-); Fezf2(-/-) compound mutants provided evidence that
Fezf2 blocks corticothalamic fate in layer 5 by reducing Tbr1 expression in
subcerebral neurons. All neocortical regions appear to use this core
transcriptional program to specify corticothalamic (layer 6) and subcerebral
(layer 5) projection neurons.

PMCID: PMC3276402
PMID: 21228164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Brain Res. 2011 Feb 4;1372:29-40. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.11.041. Epub 2010 
Nov 27.

Dynamic expression of the p53 family members p63 and p73 in the mouse and human
telencephalon during development and in adulthood.

Hernández-Acosta NC(1), Cabrera-Socorro A, Morlans MP, Delgado FJ, Suárez-Solá
ML, Sottocornola R, Lu X, González-Gómez M, Meyer G.

Author information: 
(1)Depto Anatomía, Facultad de Medicina, 38071 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.

p63 and p73, family members of the tumor suppressor p53, are critically involved 
in the life and death of mammalian cells. They display high homology and may act 
in concert. The p73 gene is relevant for brain development, and p73-deficient
mice display important malformations of the telencephalon. In turn, p63 is
essential for the development of stratified epithelia and may also play a part in
neuronal survival and aging. We show here that p63 and p73 are dynamically
expressed in the embryonic and adult mouse and human telencephalon. During
embryonic stages, Cajal-Retzius cells derived from the cortical hem co-express
p73 and p63. Comparison of the brain phenotypes of p63- and p73- deficient mice
shows that only the loss of p73 function leads to the loss of Cajal-Retzius
cells, whereas p63 is apparently not essential for brain development and
Cajal-Retzius cell formation. In postnatal mice, p53, p63, and p73 are present in
cells of the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricle, a site of
continued neurogenesis. The neurogenetic niche is reduced in size in
p73-deficient mice, and the numbers of young neurons near the ventricular wall,
marked with doublecortin, Tbr1 and calretinin, are dramatically decreased,
suggesting that p73 is important for SVZ proliferation. In contrast to their
restricted expression during brain development, p73 and p63 are widely detected
in pyramidal neurons of the adult human cortex and hippocampus at protein and
mRNA levels, pointing to a role of both genes in neuronal maintenance in
adulthood.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21114965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Neurosci. 2010 Nov 10;30(45):15317-29. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1821-10.2010.

Flotillin-mediated endocytic events dictate cell type-specific responses to
semaphorin 3A.

Carcea I(1), Ma'ayan A, Mesias R, Sepulveda B, Salton SR, Benson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Mount Sinai 
School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

Cortical efferents growing in the same environment diverge early in development. 
The expression of particular transcription factors dictates the trajectories
taken, presumably by regulating responsiveness to guidance cues via cellular
mechanisms that are not yet known. Here, we show that cortical neurons that are
dissociated and grown in culture maintain their cell type-specific identities
defined by the expression of transcription factors. Using this model system, we
sought to identify and characterize mechanisms that are recruited to produce cell
type-specific responses to Semaphorin 3A (Sema3A), a guidance cue that would be
presented similarly to cortical axons in vivo. Axons from presumptive
corticofugal neurons lacking the transcription factor Satb2 and expressing Ctip2 
or Tbr1 respond far more robustly to Sema3A than those from presumptive callosal 
neurons expressing Satb2. Both populations of axons express similar levels of
Sema3A receptors (neuropilin-1, cell adhesion molecule L1, and plexinA4), but
significantly, axons from neurons lacking Satb2 internalize more Sema3A, and they
do so via a raft-mediated endocytic pathway. We used an in silico approach to
identify the endocytosis effector flotillin-1 as a Sema3A signaling candidate. We
tested the contributions of flotillin-1 to Sema3A endocytosis and signaling, and 
show that raft-mediated Sema3A endocytosis is defined by and depends on the
recruitment of flotillin-1, which mediates LIM domain kinase activation and
regulates axon responsiveness to Sema3A in presumptive corticofugal axons.

PMCID: PMC3496384
PMID: 21068336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cereb Cortex. 2011 Jun;21(6):1395-407. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhq219. Epub 2010 Nov 
8.

The corticofugal neuron-associated genes ROBO1, SRGAP1, and CTIP2 exhibit an
anterior to posterior gradient of expression in early fetal human neocortex
development.

Ip BK(1), Bayatti N, Howard NJ, Lindsay S, Clowry GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics and Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Developing neocortical progenitors express transcription factors in gradients
that induce programs of region-specific gene expression. Our previous work
identified anteriorly upregulated expression gradients of a number of
corticofugal neuron-associated gene probe sets along the anterior-posterior axis 
of the human neocortex (8-12 postconceptional weeks [PCW]). Here, we demonstrate 
by real-time polymerase chain reaction, in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry that 3 such genes, ROBO1, SRGAP1, and CTIP2 are highly
expressed anteriorly between 8-12 PCW, in comparison with other genes (FEZF2,
SOX5) expressed by Layer V, VI, and subplate neurons. All 3 were prominently
expressed by early postmitotic neurons in the subventricular zone, intermediate
zone, and cortical plate (CP) from 8 to 10 PCW. Between 12 and 15 PCW expression 
patterns for ER81 and SATB2 (Layer V), TBR1 (Layer V/VI) and NURR1 (Layer VI)
revealed Layer V forming. By 15 PCW, ROBO1 and SRGAP1 expression was confined to 
Layer V, whereas CTIP2 was expressed throughout the CP anteriorly. We observed
ROBO1 and SRGAP1 immunoreactivity in medullary corticospinal axons from 11 PCW
onward. Thus, we propose that the coexpression of these 3 markers in the anterior
neocortex may mark the early location of the human motor cortex, including its
corticospinal projection neurons, allowing further study of their early
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3097990
PMID: 21060114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Comp Neurol. 2010 Dec 15;518(24):4877-902. doi: 10.1002/cne.22493.

Subdivisions of the turtle Pseudemys scripta subpallium based on the expression
of regulatory genes and neuronal markers.

Moreno N(1), Morona R, López JM, González A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University Complutense of Madrid, Spain.
nerea@bio.ucm.es

The patterns of distribution of a set of conserved brain developmental regulatory
transcription factors and neuronal markers were analyzed in the subpallium of the
juvenile turtle, Pseudemys scripta. Immunohistochemical techniques were used with
a combination of primary antibodies for the identification of the main boundaries
and subdivisions in the basal telencephalon. In the basal ganglia, the
combinatorial expression on Pax6, Nkx2.1, and GABA was a powerful tool for the
identification of the nucleus accumbens, the dorsal portion of the striatum, and 
the pallidal regions. It was also possible to suggest migratory streams of
neurons from the pallidum into the striatal regions. On the basis of GABA, Pax6, 
Tbr1, tyrosine hydroxylase, Darpp32, and Nkx2.1 combinatorial expression
patterns, the boundaries of the septal subdivisions and their embryological
origin were assessed. In particular, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis was 
identified. Within the amygdaloid complex, the striatal central amygdala was
characterized by Pax6 expression, whereas Orthopedia gene expression highlighted,
at least, a subdivision of the medial amygdala. A newly identified preoptic
commissural area and the boundaries of the preoptic area were assessed, mainly by
the localization of Nkx2.1 expression. Finally, additional data were obtained by 
combining immunohistochemistry and tracing techniques on the interneuronal nature
of the cholinerginergic, nitrergic, and Nkx2.1-positive striatal cells. Taken
together, all the results of the present study allowed recognizing main features 
in the organization of the subpallium in reptiles that, in most cases, are shared
with other amniotes and amphibians.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21031557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2011 Jan;46(1):108-21. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.08.011. Epub
2010 Aug 31.

The T-box brain 1 (Tbr1) transcription factor inhibits astrocyte formation in the
olfactory bulb and regulates neural stem cell fate.

Méndez-Gómez HR(1), Vergaño-Vera E, Abad JL, Bulfone A, Moratalla R, de Pablo F, 
Vicario-Abejón C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC),
Madrid, Spain.

The T-box brain 1 (Tbr1) gene encodes a transcription factor necessary for the
maintenance and/or differentiation of glutamatergic cells in the olfactory bulb
(OB) and cortex, although its precise function in the development of
glutamatergic neurons is not known. Furthermore, Tbr1 has not been reported to
regulate the formation of glial cells. We show that Tbr1 is expressed during the 
initial stages in the generation of glutamatergic mitral neurons from dividing
progenitors in the E12.5 mouse OB. Retroviral-mediated overexpression of Tbr1 in 
cultured embryonic and adult OB stem cells (OBSC) produces a marked increase in
the number of TuJ1(+) neurons (including VGLUT1(+) glutamatergic and GABA(+)
neurons) and O4(+) oligodendrocytes. Moreover, transduction of Tbr1 inhibits the 
production of GFAP(+) astrocytes from both cultured OBSC and dividing progenitor 
cells in vivo. These results show that the expression of Tbr1 in neural stem and 
progenitor cells prevents them from following an astrocyte fate during OB
development. Our findings suggest that the transduction of Tbr1 into neural stem 
cells could be useful to increase the production of neurons and oligodendrocytes 
in studies of neuroregeneration.

Copyright Â© 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 20807572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2010 Sep;69(9):880-95. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181ed7a41.

Decreased Lin7b expression in layer 5 pyramidal neurons may contribute to
impaired corticostriatal connectivity in huntington disease.

Zucker B(1), Kama JA, Kuhn A, Thu D, Orlando LR, Dunah AW, Gokce O, Taylor DM,
Lambeck J, Friedrich B, Lindenberg KS, Faull RL, Weiller C, Young AB,
Luthi-Carter R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Motor dysfunction, cognitive impairment, and regional cortical atrophy indicate
cerebral cortical involvement in Huntington disease (HD). To address the
hypothesis that abnormal corticostriatal connectivity arises from
polyglutamine-related alterations in cortical gene expression, we isolated layer 
5 cortical neurons by laser-capture microdissection and analyzed
transcriptome-wide mRNA changes in them. Enrichment of transcription factor mRNAs
including foxp2, tbr1, and neuroD6, and neurotransmission- and plasticity-related
RNAs including sema5A, pclo, ntrk2, cntn1, and Lin7b were observed. Layer 5 motor
cortex neurons of transgenic R6/2 HD mice also demonstrated numerous
transcriptomic changes, including decreased expression of mRNAs encoding the Lin7
homolog b ([Lin7b] also known as veli-2 and mals2). Decreases in LIN7B and CNTN1 
RNAs were also detected in human HD layer 5 motor cortex neurons. Lin7 homolog b,
a scaffold protein implicated in synaptic plasticity, neurite outgrowth, and
cellular polarity, was decreased at the protein level in layer 5 cortical neurons
in R6/2 mice and human HD brains. Decreases in Lin7b and Lin7a mRNAs were
detected in R6/2 cortex as early as 6 weeks of age, suggesting that this is an
early pathogenetic event. Thus, decreased cortical LIN7 expression may contribute
to abnormal corticostriatal connectivity in HD.

PMCID: PMC3376025
PMID: 20720508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Neurosci. 2010 Aug 4;30(31):10563-74. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0776-10.2010.

A novel transient glutamatergic population migrating from the pallial-subpallial 
boundary contributes to neocortical development.

Teissier A(1), Griveau A, Vigier L, Piolot T, Borello U, Pierani A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-Unité Mixte de Recherche 7592,
Institut Jacques Monod, Université Paris Diderot, 75205 Paris Cedex 13, France.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2011 Aug 24;31(34):12385.

The generation of a precise number of neural cells and the determination of their
laminar fate are tightly controlled processes during development of the cerebral 
cortex. Using genetic tracing in mice, we have identified a population of
glutamatergic neurons generated by Dbx1-expressing progenitors at the
pallial-subpallial boundary predominantly at embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5) and
subsequent to Cajal-Retzius cells. We show that these neurons migrate
tangentially to populate the cortical plate (CP) at all rostrocaudal and
mediolateral levels by E14.5. At birth, they homogeneously populate cortical
areas and represent <5% of cortical cells. However, they are distributed into
neocortical layers according to their birthdates and express the corresponding
markers of glutamatergic differentiation (Tbr1, ER81, Cux2, Ctip2). Notably, this
population dies massively by apoptosis at the completion of corticogenesis and
represents 50% of dying neurons in the postnatal day 0 cortex. Specific genetic
ablation of these transient Dbx1-derived CP neurons leads to a 20% decrease in
neocortical cell numbers in perinatal animals. Our results show that a previously
unidentified transient population of glutamatergic neurons migrates from
extraneocortical regions over long distance from their generation site and
participates in neocortical radial growth in a non-cell-autonomous manner.

PMID: 20685999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cereb Cortex. 2011 Mar;21(3):588-96. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhq125. Epub 2010 Jul
12.

Neocortical layer formation of human developing brains and lissencephalies:
consideration of layer-specific marker expression.

Saito T(1), Hanai S, Takashima S, Nakagawa E, Okazaki S, Inoue T, Miyata R,
Hoshino K, Akashi T, Sasaki M, Goto Y, Hayashi M, Itoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National Center of
Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, 187-8502, Japan.

To investigate layer-specific molecule expression in human developing
neocortices, we performed immunohistochemistry of the layer-specific markers
(TBR1, FOXP1, SATB2, OTX1, CUTL1, and CTIP2), using frontal neocortices of the
dorsolateral precentral gyri of 16 normal controls, aged 19 gestational weeks to 
1 year old, lissencephalies of 3 Miller-Dieker syndrome (MDS) cases, 2 X-linked
lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia (XLAG) cases, and 4 Fukuyama-type
congenital muscular dystrophy (FCMD) cases. In the fetal period, we observed
SATB2+ cells in layers II-IV, CUTL1+ cells in layers II-V, FOXP1+ cells in layer 
V, OTX1+ cells in layers II or V, and CTIP2+ and TBR1+ cells in layers V and VI. 
SATB2+ and CUTL1+ cells appeared until 3 months of age, but the other markers
disappeared after birth. Neocortices of MDS and XLAG infants revealed SATB2+,
CUTL1+, FOXP1+, and TBR1+ cells diffusely located in the upper layers. In fetal
FCMD neocortex, neurons labeled with the layer-specific markers located over the 
glia limitans. The present study provided new knowledge indicating that the
expression pattern of these markers in the developing human neocortex was similar
to those in mice. Various lissencephalies revealed abnormal layer formation by
random migration.

PMID: 20624841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 20;107(29):13129-34. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1002285107. Epub 2010 Jul 6.

Tbr1 regulates regional and laminar identity of postmitotic neurons in developing
neocortex.

Bedogni F(1), Hodge RD, Elsen GE, Nelson BR, Daza RA, Beyer RP, Bammler TK,
Rubenstein JL, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, WA 98101, USA.

Areas and layers of the cerebral cortex are specified by genetic programs that
are initiated in progenitor cells and then, implemented in postmitotic neurons.
Here, we report that Tbr1, a transcription factor expressed in postmitotic
projection neurons, exerts positive and negative control over both regional
(areal) and laminar identity. Tbr1 null mice exhibited profound defects of
frontal cortex and layer 6 differentiation, as indicated by down-regulation of
gene-expression markers such as Bcl6 and Cdh9. Conversely, genes that implement
caudal cortex and layer 5 identity, such as Bhlhb5 and Fezf2, were up-regulated
in Tbr1 mutants. Tbr1 implements frontal identity in part by direct promoter
binding and activation of Auts2, a frontal cortex gene implicated in autism. Tbr1
regulates laminar identity in part by downstream activation or maintenance of
Sox5, an important transcription factor controlling neuronal migration and
corticofugal axon projections. Similar to Sox5 mutants, Tbr1 mutants exhibit
ectopic axon projections to the hypothalamus and cerebral peduncle. Together, our
findings show that Tbr1 coordinately regulates regional and laminar identity of
postmitotic cortical neurons.

PMCID: PMC2919950
PMID: 20615956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Vet Parasitol. 2010 Aug 4;171(3-4):185-93. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2010.04.001.
Epub 2010 Apr 10.

A comparison of six primer sets for detection of Trypanosoma evansi by polymerase
chain reaction in rodents and Thai livestock.

Pruvot M(1), Kamyingkird K, Desquesnes M, Sarataphan N, Jittapalapong S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Coopération internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour le
Développement (CIRAD)-Département Systèmes Biologiques (Bios),
UMR177-Trypanosomes, Montpellier, F-34000 France. mpruvot@ucalgary.ca

To face the worldwide threat of Surra caused by Trypanosoma evansi, international
organizations have stressed the need to evaluate and standardize diagnostic
tools. PCR detection of T. evansi has known a great expansion during the last 20 
years, but primer sets are often insufficiently assessed and compared. In this
work, we compared the performances of six primer pairs-TBR1/2 (Masiga et al.,
1992), ESAG6/7 (Holland et al., 2001a, b), TEPAN1/2 (Panyim et al., 1993), pMUTEC
F/R (Wuyts et al., 1994), TRYP1 R/S (Desquesnes et al., 2001) and TRYP4 R/S
(Desquesnes et al., unpublished)-tested with purified T. evansi DNA serial
dilutions, T. evansi-infected rat blood serial dilutions and Thai dairy cattle
samples. TBR1/2 primer set was able to detect 0.01 pg of purified DNA, and a
parasitaemia below one parasite per ml in rat blood. They presented the highest
sensitivity in cattle samples as well as a high specificity, without non-specific
products nor false positive reactions out of 84 negative cattle samples tested.
ESAG6/7 showed equivalent results with purified DNA and rat samples but presented
non-specific products with Thai dairy cattle samples, leading to non
interpretable results. TEPAN1/2 was not able to detect less than 0.1 pg of
purified DNA or 50 trypanosomes/ml in rat blood. In cattle, TEPAN1/2 primers
detected only 36% of the positives detected by TBR1/2. Given the parasitemic
level detected, pMUTEC F/R, TRYP1 R/S and TRYP4 R/S were not more sensitive than 
classical microscopic examination of the buffy coat. TBR1/2, TEPAN1/2, pMUTEC F/R
and TRYP4 R/S did not cross-reacted with Babesia sp., Trypanosoma theileri and
Anaplasma marginale. TBR1/2 was the most sensitive primer set to detect T. evansi
in purified DNA, rodent blood and cattle blood, and did not show cross reaction
with the other pathogens tested: it should be therefore preferred for
epidemiological surveys. These results confirmed that TBR1/2 primers remain the
reference for the detection of Trypanozoon DNA and should therefore be included
in subsequent evaluations of new diagnosis tools based on DNA detection.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20466489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Acta Neuropathol. 2010 Oct;120(4):517-28. doi: 10.1007/s00401-010-0686-x. Epub
2010 Apr 22.

The application of cortical layer markers in the evaluation of cortical
dysplasias in epilepsy.

Hadjivassiliou G(1), Martinian L, Squier W, Blumcke I, Aronica E, Sisodiya SM,
Thom M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy, Institute of Neurology,
University College London, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK.

The diagnostic criteria for focal cortical dysplasia type I (FCD I) remain to be 
well and consistently defined. Cortical layer-specific markers (CLM) provide a
potential tool for the objective assessment of any dyslamination. We studied
expression patterns of recognised CLM using immunohistochemistry for N200, ER81, 
Otx1, Map1b (subsets of V/VI projection neurones), Pax6, Tbr1, Tbr2
(differentially expressed in cortical neurones from intermediate progenitor
cells), Cux 1 (outer cortical layers) and MASH1 (ventricular zone progenitors).
Dysplasia subtypes included FCD I and II, dysplasias adjacent to hippocampal
sclerosis (HS) or dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumours (DNTs); all were
compared to neonatal and adult controls. Laminar expression patterns in normal
cortex were observed with Tbr1, Map1b, N200 and Otx1. FCDI cases in younger
patients were characterised by abnormal expression in layer II for Tbr1 and Otx1.
FCDII showed distinct labelling of balloon cells (Pax6, ER81 and Otx1) and
dysmorphic neurones (Tbr 1, N200 and Map1b) supporting origins from radial glia
and intermediate progenitor cells, respectively. In temporal lobe sclerosis cases
with dysplasia adjacent to HS, Tbr1 and Map1b highlighted abnormal orientation of
neurones in layer II. Dyslamination was not confirmed in the perilesional cortex 
of DNT with CLM. Finally, immature cell types (Otx1, Pax6 and Tbr2) were noted in
varied pathologies. One possibility is activation of progenitor cell populations 
which could contribute to the pathophysiology of these lesions.

PMCID: PMC2923329
PMID: 20411268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Apr 13;107(15):7042-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0912041107. Epub 2010 Mar 26.

Af9/Mllt3 interferes with Tbr1 expression through epigenetic modification of
histone H3K79 during development of the cerebral cortex.

Büttner N(1), Johnsen SA, Kügler S, Vogel T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Anatomy, Department of Neuroanatomy, University Medical Centre
Goettingen, Georg-August-University, 37075 Goettingen, Germany.

Mutations of leukemia-associated AF9/MLLT3 are implicated in neurodevelopmental
diseases, such as epilepsy and ataxia, but little is known about how AF9
influences brain development and function. Analyses of mouse mutants revealed
that during cortical development, AF9 is involved in the maintenance of
TBR2-positive progenitors (intermediate precursor cells, IPCs) in the
subventricular zone and prevents premature cell cycle exit of IPCs. Furthermore, 
in postmitotic neurons of the developing cortical plate, AF9 is implicated in the
formation of the six-layered cerebral cortex by suppressing a TBR1-positive cell 
fate mainly in upper layer neurons. We show that the molecular mechanism of TBR1 
suppression is based on the interaction of AF9 with DOT1L, a protein that
mediates transcriptional control through methylation of histone H3 lysine 79
(H3K79). AF9 associates with the transcriptional start site of Tbr1, mediates
H3K79 dimethylation of the Tbr1 gene, and interferes with the presence of RNA
polymerase II at the Tbr1 transcriptional start site. AF9 expression favors
cytoplasmic localization of TBR1 and its association with mitochondria. Increased
expression of TBR1 in Af9 mutants is associated with increased levels of
TBR1-regulated expression of NMDAR subunit Nr1. Thus, this study identified AF9
as a developmental active epigenetic modifier during the generation of cortical
projection neurons.

PMCID: PMC2872432
PMID: 20348416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Neuroscience. 2010 Mar 17;166(2):551-63. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.12.055.
Epub 2009 Dec 28.

The forkhead transcription factors, Foxp1 and Foxp2, identify different
subpopulations of projection neurons in the mouse cerebral cortex.

Hisaoka T(1), Nakamura Y, Senba E, Morikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1
Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan.

Foxp1 and Foxp2, which belong to the forkhead transcription factor family, are
expressed in the developing and adult mouse brain, including the striatum,
thalamus, and cerebral cortex. Recent reports suggest that FOXP1 and FOXP2 are
involved in the development of speech and language in humans. Although both Foxp1
and Foxp2 are expressed in the neural circuits that mediate speech and language, 
including the corticostriatal circuit, the functions of Foxp1 and Foxp2 in the
cerebral cortex remain unclear. To gain insight into the functions of Foxp1 and
Foxp2 in the cerebral cortex, we characterized Foxp1- and Foxp2-expressing cells 
in postnatal and adult mice using immunohistochemistry. In adult mice, Foxp1 was 
expressed in neurons of layers III-VIa in the neocortex, whereas the expression
of Foxp2 was restricted to dopamine and cyclic adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate-regulated phosphoprotein, 32 kDa (DARPP-32)(+) neurons of
layer VI. In addition, Foxp2 was weakly expressed in the neurons of layer V of
the motor cortex and hindlimb and forelimb regions of the primary somatosensory
cortex. Both Foxp1 and Foxp2 were expressed in the ionotropic glutamate receptor 
(GluR) 2/3(+) neurons, and colocalized with none of GluR1, gamma-aminobutyric
acid, calbindin, and parvalbumin, indicating that expression of Foxp1 and Foxp2
is restricted to projection neurons. During the postnatal stages, Foxp1 was
predominantly expressed in Satb2(+)/Ctip2(-) corticocortical projection neurons
of layers III-V and in Tbr1(+) corticothalamic projection neurons of layer VIa.
Although Foxp2 was also expressed in Tbr1(+) corticothalamic projection neurons
of layer VI, no colocalization of Foxp1 with Foxp2 was observed from postnatal
day (P) 0 to P7. These findings suggest that Foxp1 and Foxp2 may be involved in
the development of different cortical projection neurons during the early
postnatal stages in addition to the establishment and maintenance of different
cortical circuits from the late postnatal stage to adulthood.

Copyright (c) 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20040367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Gene Expr Patterns. 2010 Jan;10(1):9-15. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2009.11.005. Epub
2009 Dec 3.

Autism susceptibility candidate 2 (Auts2) encodes a nuclear protein expressed in 
developing brain regions implicated in autism neuropathology.

Bedogni F(1), Hodge RD, Nelson BR, Frederick EA, Shiba N, Daza RA, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, WA,
USA.

Autism susceptibility candidate 2 (Auts2) is a gene associated with autism and
mental retardation, whose function is unknown. Expression of Auts2 mRNA and
protein were studied in the developing mouse brain by in situ hybridization,
immunohistochemistry, and western blotting. Auts2 mRNA was highly expressed in
the developing cerebral cortex and cerebellum, regions often affected by
neuropathological changes in autism, and a few other brain regions. On embryonic 
day (E) 12, Auts2 mRNA was expressed in the cortical preplate, where it
colocalized with Tbr1, a transcription factor specific for postmitotic projection
neurons. From E16 to postnatal day 21, Auts2 was expressed most abundantly in
frontal cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum, including Purkinje cells and deep
nuclei. High levels of Auts2 were also detected in developing dorsal thalamus,
olfactory bulb, inferior colliculus and substantia nigra. Auts2 protein showed
similar regional expression patterns as the mRNA. At the cellular level, Auts2
protein was localized in the nuclei of neurons and some neuronal progenitors.

PMCID: PMC2818569
PMID: 19948250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Clin Genet. 2009 May;75(5):424-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2009.01186_1.x.

An X-linked microcephaly syndrome caused by disruptions of CASK implicates the
CASK-TBR1-RELN pathway in human brain development.

Bailey KA(1), Aldinger KA.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

PMID: 19459880  [PubMed]


101. Eur J Neurosci. 2009 Sep;30(5):742-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.06870.x.
Epub 2009 Aug 27.

IGF-I promotes neuronal migration and positioning in the olfactory bulb and the
exit of neuroblasts from the subventricular zone.

Hurtado-Chong A(1), Yusta-Boyo MJ, Vergaño-Vera E, Bulfone A, de Pablo F,
Vicario-Abejón C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid,
Spain.

While insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) supports neuronal and glial
differentiation in the CNS, it is largely unknown whether IGF-I also influences
neuronal migration and positioning. We show here that the pattern of olfactory
bulb (OB) layering is altered in Igf-I (-/-) mice. In these animals,
Tbr1(+)-glutamatergic neurons are misplaced in the mitral cell layer (ML) and the
external plexiform layer (EPL). In addition, there are fewer interneurons in the 
glomerular layer and the EPL of the Igf-I (-/-) mice, and fewer newborn neurons
are incorporated into the OB from the forebrain subventricular zone (SVZ).
Indeed, neuroblasts accumulate in the postnatal/adult SVZ of Igf-I (-/-) mice.
Significantly, the positioning of Tbr1(+)-cells in a primitive ML is stimulated
by IGF-I in cultured embryonic OB slices, an effect that is partially repressed
by the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor. In OB cell cultures, IGF-I
increases the phosphorylation of disabled1 (P-Dab1), an adaptor protein that is a
target of Src family kinases (SFK) in the reelin signalling pathway, whereas
reduced P-Dab1 levels were found in Igf-I (-/-) mice. Neuroblast migration from
the rostral migratory stream (RMS) explants of postnatal Igf-I (-/-) was similar 
to that from Igf-I (+/+) explants. However, cell migration was significantly
enhanced by IGF-I added to the explants, an effect that was repressed by PI3K and
SFK inhibitors. These findings suggest that IGF-I promotes neuronal positioning
in the OB and support a role for IGF-I in stimulating neuroblast exit from the
SVZ into the RMS, thereby promoting the incorporation of newly formed neurons
into the OB.

PMID: 19712103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Front Neuroanat. 2009 Jun 9;3:7. doi: 10.3389/neuro.05.007.2009. eCollection
2009.

Neurons in the white matter of the adult human neocortex.

Suárez-Solá ML(1), González-Delgado FJ, Pueyo-Morlans M, Medina-Bolívar OC,
Hernández-Acosta NC, González-Gómez M, Meyer G.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Legal Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain.

The white matter (WM) of the adult human neocortex contains the so-called
"interstitial neurons". They are most numerous in the superficial WM underlying
the cortical gyri, and decrease in density toward the deep WM. They are
morphologically heterogeneous. A subgroup of interstitial neurons display
pyramidal-cell like morphologies, characterized by a polarized dendritic tree
with a dominant apical dendrite, and covered with a variable number of dendritic 
spines. In addition, a large contingent of interstitial neurons can be classified
as interneurons based on their neurochemical profile as well as on morphological 
criteria. WM- interneurons have multipolar or bipolar shapes and express GABA and
a variety of other neuronal markers, such as calbindin and calretinin, the
extracellular matrix protein reelin, or neuropeptide Y, somatostatin, and nitric 
oxide synthase. The heterogeneity of interstitial neurons may be relevant for the
pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease and schizophrenia. Interstitial neurons are
most prominent in human brain, and only rudimentary in the brain of non-primate
mammals. These evolutionary differences have precluded adequate experimental work
on this cell population, which is usually considered as a relict of the subplate,
a transient compartment proper of development and without a known function in the
adult brain. The primate-specific prominence of the subplate in late fetal stages
points to an important role in the establishment of interstitial neurons. Neurons
in the adult WM may be actively involved in coordinating inter-areal connectivity
and regulation of blood flow. Further studies in primates will be needed to
elucidate the developmental history, adult components and activities of this
large neuronal system.

PMCID: PMC2697018
PMID: 19543540  [PubMed]


103. Eur J Neurosci. 2009 Jan;29(2):232-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06595.x.

Involvement of Ngn2, Tbr and NeuroD proteins during postnatal olfactory bulb
neurogenesis.

Roybon L(1), Deierborg T, Brundin P, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Neuronal Survival Unit, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Wallenberg
Neuroscience Center, BMC A10, 22184 Lund, Sweden. laurent.roybon@med.lu.se

Comment in
    Eur J Neurosci. 2009 Jan;29(2):231.

Postnatal neurogenesis takes place in two brain regions, the hippocampus and the 
subventricular zone (SVZ). The transcriptional cascade controlling hippocampal
neurogenesis has been described in detail; however, the transcriptional control
of olfactory bulb neurogenesis is still not well mapped. In this study, we
provide insights into the molecular events controlling postnatal olfactory bulb
neurogenesis. We first show the existence of diverse neural stem cell/progenitor 
populations along the SVZ-rostral migratory stream (RMS) axis, focusing on those 
expressing the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Mash1. We
provide evidence that Mash1-derived progenies generate oligodendrocytic and
neuronal precursors through the transient expression of the bHLH transcription
factors Olig2 and neurogenin2 (Ngn2), respectively. Furthermore, we reveal that
Ngn2-positive progenies express the T-box transcription factors Tbr2 and Tbr1,
which are usually present during cortical and hippocampal glutamatergic neuronal 
differentiation. We also highlight a cell population expressing another bHLH
transcription factor, neuroD1 (ND1). The ND1-positive cells are located in the
SVZ-RMS axis and also co-express Tbr2, Tbr1 and neuroD2. The observations that
these cells incorporate bromodeoxyuridine and express both doublecortin and
polysialylated form of neural cell adhesion molecule suggest that they are
newborn neurons. Finally, using an in vitro assay, we demonstrate that Ngn2 and
ND1 equally and exclusively direct differentiation of Mash1-expressing precursors
into calbindin-expressing and calretinin-expressing neurons, which are both
neuronal subtypes normally found in the olfactory bulb. Taken together, our data 
illustrate that Ngn2, neuroD and Tbr transcription factors are involved in
postnatal neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb.

PMID: 19200230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Neurosci. 2009 Jan 28;29(4):1202-11. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4516-08.2009.

Fgfr1 is required for cortical regeneration and repair after perinatal hypoxia.

Fagel DM(1), Ganat Y, Cheng E, Silbereis J, Ohkubo Y, Ment LR, Vaccarino FM.

Author information: 
(1)Child Study Center, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Chronic postnatal hypoxia causes an apparent loss of cortical neurons that is
reversed during recovery (Fagel et al., 2006). The cellular and molecular
mechanisms underlying this plasticity are not understood. Here, we show that
chronic hypoxia from postnatal days 3 (P3) to 10 causes a 30% decrease in
cortical neurons and a 24% decrease in cortical volume. T-brain-1 (Tbr1)(+) and
SMI-32(+) excitatory neuron numbers were completely recovered 1 month after the
insult, but the mice showed a residual deficit in Parvalbumin(+) and
Calretinin(+) GABAergic interneurons. In contrast, hypoxic mice carrying a
disrupted fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (Fgfr1) gene in GFAP+ cells [Fgfr1 
conditional knock-out (cKO)], demonstrated a persistent loss of excitatory
cortical neurons and a worsening of the interneuron defect. Labeling
proliferating progenitors at P17 revealed increased generation of cortical
NeuN(+) and Tbr1(+) excitatory neurons in wild-type mice subjected to hypoxic
insult, whereas Fgfr1 cKO failed to mount a cortical neurogenetic response.
Hypoxic wild-type mice also demonstrated a twofold increase in cell proliferation
in the subventricular zone (SVZ) at P17 and a threefold increase in neurogenesis 
in the olfactory bulb (OB) at P48, compared with normoxic mice. In contrast,
Fgfr1 cKO mice had decreased SVZ cell proliferation and curtailed reactive
neurogenesis in the OB. Thus, the activation of FGFR-1 in GFAP+ cells is required
for neuronal recovery after neonatal hypoxic injury, which is attributable in
part to enhanced cortical and OB neurogenesis. In contrast, there is incomplete
recovery of inhibitory neurons after injury, which may account for persistent
behavioral deficits.

PMCID: PMC2768410
PMID: 19176828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Nat Genet. 2008 Sep;40(9):1065-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.194.

Mutations of CASK cause an X-linked brain malformation phenotype with
microcephaly and hypoplasia of the brainstem and cerebellum.

Najm J(1), Horn D, Wimplinger I, Golden JA, Chizhikov VV, Sudi J, Christian SL,
Ullmann R, Kuechler A, Haas CA, Flubacher A, Charnas LR, Uyanik G, Frank U,
Klopocki E, Dobyns WB, Kutsche K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246
Hamburg, Germany.

CASK is a multi-domain scaffolding protein that interacts with the transcription 
factor TBR1 and regulates expression of genes involved in cortical development
such as RELN. Here we describe a previously unreported X-linked brain
malformation syndrome caused by mutations of CASK. All five affected individuals 
with CASK mutations had congenital or postnatal microcephaly, disproportionate
brainstem and cerebellar hypoplasia, and severe mental retardation.

PMID: 19165920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Apr 1;18(7):1252-65. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp025. Epub 2009 Jan
15.

Loss of Tsc2 in radial glia models the brain pathology of tuberous sclerosis
complex in the mouse.

Way SW(1), McKenna J 3rd, Mietzsch U, Reith RM, Wu HC, Gambello MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas
Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant, tumor predisposition
disorder characterized by significant neurodevelopmental brain lesions, such as
tubers and subependymal nodules. The neuropathology of TSC is often associated
with seizures and intellectual disability. To learn about the developmental
perturbations that lead to these brain lesions, we created a mouse model that
selectively deletes the Tsc2 gene from radial glial progenitor cells in the
developing cerebral cortex and hippocampus. These Tsc2 mutant mice were severely 
runted, developed post-natal megalencephaly and died between 3 and 4 weeks of
age. Analysis of brain pathology demonstrated cortical and hippocampal lamination
defects, hippocampal heterotopias, enlarged dysplastic neurons and glia, abnormal
myelination and an astrocytosis. These histologic abnormalities were accompanied 
by activation of the mTORC1 pathway as assessed by increased phosphorylated S6 in
brain lysates and tissue sections. Developmental analysis demonstrated that loss 
of Tsc2 increased the subventricular Tbr2-positive basal cell progenitor pool at 
the expense of early born Tbr1-positive post-mitotic neurons. These results
establish the novel concept that loss of function of Tsc2 in radial glial
progenitors is one initiating event in the development of TSC brain lesions as
well as underscore the importance of Tsc2 in the regulation of neural progenitor 
pools. Given the similarities between the mouse and the human TSC lesions, this
model will be useful in further understanding TSC brain pathophysiology, testing 
potential therapies and identifying other genetic pathways that are altered in
TSC.

PMCID: PMC2655769
PMID: 19150975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Neuroscience. 2009 Sep 1;162(3):574-88. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.12.025. 
Epub 2008 Dec 24.

Embryonic origins of ZebrinII parasagittal stripes and establishment of
topographic Purkinje cell projections.

Sillitoe RV(1), Gopal N, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue,
New York, NY 10021, USA.

The establishment of neural circuits involves both the precise positioning of
cells within brain regions and projection of axons to specific target cells. In
the cerebellum (Cb), the medial-lateral (M-L) and anterior-posterior (A-P)
position of each Purkinje cell (PC) and the topography of its axon can be defined
with respect to two coordinate systems within the Cb; one based on the pattern of
lobules and the other on PC gene expression in parasagittal clusters in the
embryo (e.g. Pcp2) and stripes in the adult (e.g. ZebrinII). The relationship
between the embryonic clusters of molecularly defined PCs and particular adult PC
stripes is not clear. Using a mouse genetic inducible fate mapping (GIFM)
approach and a Pcp2-CreER-IRES-hAP transgene, we marked three bilateral clusters 
of PC clusters with myristolated green fluorescent protein (mGfp) on
approximately embryonic day (E) 15 and followed their fate into adulthood. We
found that these three clusters contributed specifically to ZebrinII-expressing
PCs, including nine of the adult stripes. This result suggests that embryonic PCs
maintain a particular molecular identity, and that each embryonic cluster can
contribute PCs to more than one adult M-L stripe. Each PC projects a primary axon
to one of the deep cerebellar nuclei (DCN) or the vestibular nuclei in the
brainstem in an organized fashion that relates to the position of the PCs along
the M-L axis. We characterized when PC axons from the three M-L clusters acquire 
topographic projections. Using a combination of GIFM to mark the PC clusters with
mGfp and staining for human placental alkaline phosphatase (hAP) in
Pcp2-CreER-IRES-hAP transgenic embryos we found that axons from each embryonic PC
cluster intermingled with neurons within particular DCN or projected out of the
Cb toward the vestibular nuclei by E14.5. These studies show that PC molecular
patterning, efferent circuitry, and DCN nucleogenesis occur simultaneously,
suggesting a link between these processes.

PMCID: PMC2716412
PMID: 19150487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Neural Dev. 2009 Jan 16;4:3. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-4-3.

Adenomatous polyposis coli is required for early events in the normal growth and 
differentiation of the developing cerebral cortex.

Ivaniutsin U(1), Chen Y, Mason JO, Price DJ, Pratt T.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, Centre for Integrative Physiology, School of
Biomedical Sciences, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
u.ivaniutsin@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc) is a large multifunctional protein
known to be important for Wnt/beta-catenin signalling, cytoskeletal dynamics, and
cell polarity. In the developing cerebral cortex, Apc is expressed in
proliferating cells and its expression increases as cells migrate to the cortical
plate. We examined the consequences of loss of Apc function for the early
development of the cerebral cortex.
RESULTS: We used Emx1(Cre) to inactivate Apc specifically in proliferating
cerebral cortical cells and their descendents starting from embryonic day 9.5. We
observed reduction in the size of the mutant cerebral cortex, disruption to its
organisation, and changes in the molecular identity of its cells. Loss of Apc
leads to a decrease in the size of the proliferative pool, disrupted interkinetic
nuclear migration, and increased apoptosis. beta-Catenin, pericentrin, and
N-cadherin proteins no longer adopt their normal high concentration at the apical
surface of the cerebral cortical ventricular zone, indicating that cell polarity 
is disrupted. Consistent with enhanced Wnt/beta-catenin signalling resulting from
loss of Apc we found increased levels of TCF/LEF-dependent transcription and
expression of endogenous Wnt/beta-catenin target genes (Axin2 (conductin), Lef1, 
and c-myc) in the mutant cerebral cortex. In the Apc mutant cerebral cortex the
expression of transcription factors Foxg1, Pax6, Tbr1, and Tbr2 is drastically
reduced compared to normal and many cells ectopically express Pax3, Wnt1, and Wt1
(but not Wnt2b, Wnt8b, Ptc, Gli1, Mash1, Olig2, or Islet1). This indicates that
loss of Apc function causes cerebral cortical cells to lose their normal identity
and redirect to fates normally found in more posterior-dorsal regions of the
central nervous system.
CONCLUSION: Apc is required for multiple aspects of early cerebral cortical
development, including the regulation of cell number, interkinetic nuclear
migration, cell polarity, and cell type specification.

PMCID: PMC2649069
PMID: 19149881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Neurobiol Dis. 2009 Feb;33(2):250-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.10.010. Epub 2008
Nov 6.

Aberrant differentiation of glutamatergic cells in neocortex of mouse model for
fragile X syndrome.

Tervonen TA(1), Louhivuori V, Sun X, Hokkanen ME, Kratochwil CF, Zebryk P,
Castrén E, Castrén ML.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 56, 00014 Helsinki,
Finland.

The lack of fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) causes fragile X
syndrome, a common form of inherited mental retardation. Our previous studies
revealed alterations in the differentiation of FMRP-deficient neural progenitors.
Here, we show abnormalities in neurogenesis in the mouse and human embryonic
FMRP-deficient brain as well as after in utero transfection of I304N mutated
FMRP, which acts in a dominant negative manner in the wild-type mouse brain.
Progenitors accumulated abnormally in the subventricular zone of the embryonic
Fmr1-knockout (Fmr1-KO) mouse neocortex. An increased density of cells expressing
sequentially an intermediate progenitor marker, T-box transcription factor
(Tbr2), and a postmitotic neuron marker, T-brain 1 (Tbr1), indicated that the
differentiation to glutamatergic cell lineages was particularly disturbed. These 
abnormalities were associated with an increased density of pyramidal cells of the
layer V in the early postnatal neocortex suggesting a role for FMRP in the
regulation of the differentiation of neocortical glutamatergic neurons.

PMID: 19056494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Oct;28(8):1449-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06475.x.

Progressive loss of PAX6, TBR2, NEUROD and TBR1 mRNA gradients correlates with
translocation of EMX2 to the cortical plate during human cortical development.

Bayatti N(1), Sarma S, Shaw C, Eyre JA, Vouyiouklis DA, Lindsay S, Clowry GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK.

The transcription factors Emx2 and Pax6 are expressed in the proliferating zones 
of the developing rodent neocortex, and gradients of expression interact in
specifying caudal and rostral identities. Pax6 is also involved in
corticoneurogenesis, being expressed by radial glial progenitors that give rise
to cells that also sequentially express Tbr2, NeuroD and Tbr1, genes temporally
downstream of Pax6. In this study, using in situ hybridization, we analysed the
expression of EMX2, PAX6, TBR2, NEUROD and TBR1 mRNA in the developing human
cortex between 8 and 12 postconceptional weeks (PCW). EMX2 mRNA was expressed in 
the ventricular (VZ) and subventricular zones (SVZ), but also in the cortical
plate, unlike in the rodent. However, gradients of expression were similar to
that of the rodent at all ages studied. PAX6 mRNA expression was limited to the
VZ and SVZ. At 8 PCW, PAX6 was highly expressed rostrally but less so caudally,
as has been seen in the rodent, however this gradient disappeared early in
corticogenesis, by 9 PCW. There was less restricted compartment-specific
expression of TBR2, NEUROD and TBR1 mRNA than in the rodent, where the gradients 
of expression were similar to that of PAX6 prior to 9 PCW. The gradient
disappeared for TBR2 by 10 PCW, and for NEUROD and TBR1 by 12 PCW. These data
support recent reports that EMX2 but not PAX6 is more directly involved in
arealization, highlighting that analysis of human development allows better
spatio-temporal resolution than studies in rodents.

PMCID: PMC2675014
PMID: 18973570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Exp Parasitol. 2009 Jan;121(1):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2008.09.013. Epub 2008
Sep 26.

Trypanosoma evansi: A comparison of PCR and parasitological diagnostic tests in
experimentally infected mice.

Fernández D(1), González-Baradat B, Eleizalde M, González-Marcano E, Perrone T,
Mendoza M.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Nacional Experimental Simón Rodríguez, Instituto de Estudios
Científicos y Tecnológicos, Centro de Estudios Biomédicos y Veterinarios,
Apartado Postal 47925, Caracas 1041A, Venezuela.

Trypanosoma evansi is the causative agent of equine trypanosomosis, disease that 
affects horse's productivity and health. Parasitological and molecular methods
are mostly used to detect the infection. The aim of this work was evaluate PCR
sensitivity to detect T. evansi using the primers 21/22-mer, ITS1, ESAG 6/7 and
TBR 1/2 designed from repetitive (multicopies) genomic sequences. The results
were compare with two parasitological tests in mice, micro-haematocrite
centrifugation technique and direct microscopic examination. The results shows
(a) that the minimum amount of DNA from blood of highly parasitaemic mice that
was detectable by PCR was 0.001 ng, using the ESAG6/7 and TBR1/2 primer, (b)
using TBR1/2 primer for parasites purified could detect 0.000001 ng and (c) in
the prepatent period PCR detect the presence of parasites earlier than
parasitological techniques. Nevertheless, the percentage of detection for PCR
varies depending on primer employed with 60% and 66% for ITS1 and 21/22-mer, and 
80% for ESAG6/7 and TBR1/2. Consequently, TBR1/2 and ESAG6/7 were the best
primers to monitor T. evansi infections in mice. For epidemiological application,
such comparative evaluation should be made for detection of T. evansi in
livestock such as horses.

PMID: 18848544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Ann Nucl Med. 2008 Jul;22(6):475-80. doi: 10.1007/s12149-008-0147-y. Epub 2008
Aug 1.

Response of osteogenic sarcoma to neoadjuvant therapy: evaluated by 18F-FDG-PET.

Ye Z(1), Zhu J, Tian M, Zhang H, Zhan H, Zhao C, Yang D, Li W, Lin N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. zhujj666@sohu.com

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the potential role of
F-18-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) in assessing
the chemotherapy response of osteosarcoma when compared with histologically
assessed tumor necrosis.
METHODS: Fifteen patients were examined with whole-body FDG-PET prior to and
following neoadjuvant therapy. The maximum standard uptake value (SUV max) of
tumor and tumor to background ratio (TBR) prior to and following chemotherapy was
used for semiquantitative PET imaging analysis. The SUV max of prechemotherapy
and post-chemotherapy was recorded as SUV1 and SUV2. TBR1 and TBR2 represented
prechemotherapy and post-chemotherapy TBR. TBR was calculated by drawing an
identical region of interest over the tumor and the contralateral normal limb or 
pelvis. Tumor necrosis was classified according to Salzer-Kuntschik's criteria.
RESULTS: Eight patients with more than 90% tumor necrosis were classified as
showing good responses and seven patients with less than 90% tumor necrosis as
showing poor responses. SUV2/SUV1, TBR2/TBR1, and TBR2 were significantly
correlated with the tumor necrosis degree (P < 0.01, P < 0.001, P < 0.001).
TBR2/TBR1 were below 0.46 in all the patients with favorable responses, and
higher than 0.49 in all the patients with unfavorable responses. However, it was 
difficult to distinguish good responses from poor responses by SUV2/SUV1.
CONCLUSIONS: FDG-PET is a promising tool to assess the chemotherapy response of
osteosarcoma noninvasively. The TBR was better than SUV max in evaluating the
chemotherapy response in this study.

PMID: 18670853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Jun;38(2):170-82. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.02.002. Epub
2008 Mar 4.

Substantial migration of SVZ cells to the cortex results in the generation of new
neurons in the excitotoxically damaged immature rat brain.

Faiz M(1), Acarin L, Villapol S, Schulz S, Castellano B, Gonzalez B.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Histology, Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology,
Neuroscience Institute, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Spain.
maryam.faiz@neuro.gu.se

Mammalian SVZ progenitors continuously generate new neurons in the olfactory
bulb. After injury, changes in SVZ cell number suggest injury-induced migration. 
Studies that trace the migration of SVZ precursors into neurodegenerating areas
are lacking. Previously, we showed a decrease in BrdU+SVZ cells following
excitotoxic damage to the immature rat cortex. Here, we demonstrate that
NMDA-induced injury forces endogenous Cell Tracker Green (CTG) labeled VZ/SVZ
precursors out of the SVZ into the neurodegenerating cortex. CTG+/Nestin+/Filamin
A+ precursors are closely associated with vimentin+/GFAP+/GLAST+ filaments and
express both chemokine receptor CXCR4 and Robo1. In the cortex, SVZ-derived
progenitors show a progressive expression of developing, migrating and mature
neurons and glial markers. CTG+/GFAP+ astrocytes greatly outnumber
CTG+/MAP2+/NeuN+ neurons. SVZ-derived progenitors differentiate into both tbr1+
cortical glutamatergic neurons and calretinin+ interneurons. But, there is little
integration of these neurons into the existing circuitry, as seen by Fluorogold
retrograde tracing from the internal capsule.

PMID: 18434192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Neurosci. 2008 Apr 2;28(14):3707-17. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4280-07.2008.

Intermediate progenitors in adult hippocampal neurogenesis: Tbr2 expression and
coordinate regulation of neuronal output.

Hodge RD(1), Kowalczyk TD, Wolf SA, Encinas JM, Rippey C, Enikolopov G,
Kempermann G, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98101-1304, USA.

Neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus is a highly regulated process that
originates from multipotent progenitors in the subgranular zone (SGZ). Currently,
little is known about molecular mechanisms that regulate proliferation and
differentiation in the SGZ. To study the role of transcription factors (TFs), we 
focused on Tbr2 (T-box brain gene 2), which has been implicated previously in
developmental glutamatergic neurogenesis. In adult mouse hippocampus, Tbr2
protein and Tbr2-GFP (green fluorescent protein) transgene expression were
specifically localized to intermediate-stage progenitor cells (IPCs), a type of
transit amplifying cells. The Tbr2+ IPCs were highly responsive to neurogenic
stimuli, more than doubling after voluntary wheel running. Notably, the Tbr2+
IPCs formed cellular clusters, the average size of which (Tbr2+ cells per
cluster) likewise more than doubled in runners. Conversely, Tbr2+ IPCs were
selectively depleted by antimitotic drugs, known to suppress neurogenesis. After 
cessation of antimitotic treatment, recovery of neurogenesis was paralleled by
recovery of Tbr2+ IPCs, including a transient rebound above baseline numbers.
Finally, Tbr2 was examined in the context of additional TFs that, together,
define a TF cascade in embryonic neocortical neurogenesis (Pax6 --> Ngn2 --> Tbr2
--> NeuroD --> Tbr1). Remarkably, the same TF cascade was found to be linked to
stages of neuronal lineage progression in adult SGZ. These results suggest that
Tbr2+ IPCs play a major role in the regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis,
and that a similar transcriptional program controls neurogenesis in adult SGZ as 
in embryonic cerebral cortex.

PMID: 18385329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Brain Res Bull. 2008 Mar 18;75(2-4):214-7. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2007.10.016. Epub 2007 Nov 20.

Distinct immunohistochemically defined areas in the medial amygdala in the
developing and adult mouse.

Guirado S(1), Real MA, Dávila JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Genetics and Physiology, Faculty of Biology,
University of Málaga, Campus de Teatinos, 29071 Malaga, Spain. guirado@uma.es

The medial amygdala has been considered a subpallial structure, but various
studies have shown that is a somewhat complex structure expressing both pallial
and subpallial gene markers. In this regard, we analyzed the immunohistochemical 
expression of the neurotransmitter GABA, the vesicular glutamate transporter type
2 (VGLUT2), the neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS), and the calcium-binding
proteins calbindin-D28k (CB) and calretinin (CR) in the developing and adult
mouse medial amygdala. From intermediate embryonic stages on, neurochemical data 
show a distinctive superficial region forming a band all along the medial
amygdalar surface. This superficial band displays a strong VGLUT2-immunoreactive 
neuropil and numerous CR-immunoreactive fibers, as well as some nNOS-, CR- or
CB-positive cells. In contrast, the superficial region of the posterior medial
amygdala appears to be non-GABA immunoreactive. This band in the posterior medial
amygdala matches a Tbr1-expressing territory. Our results also show differences
between dorsal and ventral parts of the postnatal and adult posterior medial
amygdala. Especially, a compact cell aggregate of nNOS immunoreactive cells was
found in the ventral portion of the medial amygdala, whereas the dorsal part is
occupied by scattered weakly stained cells. Comparison of our results with gene
expression patterns and fiber-tracing studies, let us to propose that the
superficial band is a pallial derivative, whereas the dorsal and ventral nuclei
of the posterior medial amygdala receive each neurons from different subpallial
compartments, and the latter one a subset of excitatory, pallial projection
neurons.

PMID: 18331873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;28(5):1456-69. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

Basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors cooperate to specify a cortical
projection neuron identity.

Mattar P(1), Langevin LM, Markham K, Klenin N, Shivji S, Zinyk D, Schuurmans C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Maternal and Child Health, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University 
of Calgary, 2277 HSC, 3330 Hospital Dr. NW, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Several transcription factors are essential determinants of a cortical projection
neuron identity, but their mode of action (instructive versus permissive) and
downstream genetic cascades remain poorly defined. Here, we demonstrate that the 
proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) gene Ngn2 instructs a partial cortical
identity when misexpressed in ventral telencephalic progenitors, inducing ectopic
marker expression in a defined temporal sequence, including early (24 h; Nscl2), 
intermediate (48 h; BhlhB5), and late (72 h; NeuroD, NeuroD2, Math2, and Tbr1)
target genes. Strikingly, cortical gene expression was much more rapidly induced 
by Ngn2 in the dorsal telencephalon (within 12 to 24 h). We identify the bHLH
gene Math3 as a dorsally restricted Ngn2 transcriptional target and cofactor,
which synergizes with Ngn2 to accelerate target gene transcription in the cortex.
Using a novel in vivo luciferase assay, we show that Ngn2 generates only
approximately 60% of the transcriptional drive in ventral versus dorsal
telencephalic domains, an activity that is augmented by Math3, providing a
mechanistic basis for regional differences in Ngn2 function. Cortical bHLH genes 
thus cooperate to control transcriptional strength, thereby temporally
coordinating downstream gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2258790
PMID: 18160702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Dev Neurosci. 2008;30(1-3):65-81.

How neuronal migration contributes to the morphogenesis of the CNS: insights from
the zebrafish.

Mione M(1), Baldessari D, Deflorian G, Nappo G, Santoriello C.

Author information: 
(1)IFOM, FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology, Milan, Italy.
marina.mione@ifom-ieo-campus.it

We used transgenic zebrafish expressing GFP or YFP in subpopulations of neurons
to study the migration, homing process and axon extension of groups of CNS
neurons in different regions of the zebrafish brain. We found that extensive
migration takes place at all levels of the CNS and gives rise to nuclei or cell
populations with specific identities. Here, we describe 4 previously unknown or
only partially characterized migratory events taking place in the zebrafish
telencephalon and rhombic lip, using 3 different transgenic lines, and identify
the phenotypes of the cells undertaking these migrations. The migration of a
subgroup of mitral cell precursors from the dorsocaudal telencephalon to the
olfactory bulb, visualized in the tg(tbr1:YFP) transgenic line, is coupled with
morphogenetic transformation of the dorsal telencephalon. The tg(1.4dlx5a-6a:GFP)
transgenic line provides a means to analyze the migration of GABAergic
interneurons from the ventral to the dorsal telencephalon, thus extending the
occurrence of this migration to another vertebrate. The tg(Xeom:GFP) transgenic
line provides the first demonstration of the dorsoventral migration of
glutamatergic septal neurons, present in mammals and now described in fish, thus 
reconciling the contrasting evidence of dorsal patterning genes (tbr1, eomes)
expressed in a ventral cell population. Furthermore, migration studies in the
tg(1.4dlx5a-6a:GFP) and tg(Xeom:GFP) lines help determine the origin of 2
important cell populations in the fish cerebellum: projection neurons and
Purkinje cells. These examples reinforce the concept that migratory events
contribute to the distribution of cell types with diverse identities through the 
CNS and that zebrafish transgenic lines represent excellent tools to study these 
events.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18075256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Int J Parasitol. 2008 Apr;38(5):589-99. Epub 2007 Oct 1.

African trypanosomiasis: sensitive and rapid detection of the sub-genus
Trypanozoon by loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) of parasite DNA.

Njiru ZK(1), Mikosza AS, Matovu E, Enyaru JC, Ouma JO, Kibona SN, Thompson RC,
Ndung'u JM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing - Peel Campus, Murdoch University, Carleton Place, 15-17
Mandurah, WA 6210, Australia. z.njiru@murdoch.edu.au

Control of human African trypanosomiasis (HAT) is dependent on accurate diagnosis
and treatment of infected patients. However, sensitivities of tests in routine
use are unsatisfactory, due to the characteristically low parasitaemias in
naturally infected individuals. We have identified a conserved sequence in the
repetitive insertion mobile element (RIME) of the sub-genus Trypanozoon and used 
it to design primers for a highly specific loop-mediated isothermal amplification
(LAMP) test. The test was used to analyse Trypanozoon isolates and clinical
samples from HAT patients. The RIME LAMP assay was performed at 62 degrees C
using real-time PCR and a water bath. DNA amplification was detectable within
25min. All positive samples detected by gel electrophoresis or in real-time using
SYTO-9 fluorescence dye could also be detected visually by addition of SYBR Green
I to the product. The amplicon was unequivocally confirmed through restriction
enzyme NdeI digestion, analysis of melt curves and sequencing. The analytical
sensitivity of the RIME LAMP assay was equivalent to 0.001 trypanosomes/ml while 
that of classical PCR tests ranged from 0.1 to 1000 trypanosomes/ml. LAMP
detected all 75 Trypanozoon isolates while TBR1 and two primers (specific for
sub-genus Trypanozoon) showed a sensitivity of 86.9%. The SRA gene PCR detected
21 out of 40 Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense isolates while Trypanosoma
gambiense-specific glycoprotein primers (TgsGP) detected 11 out of 13 T. b.
gambiense isolates. Using clinical samples, the LAMP test detected parasite DNA
in 18 out of 20 samples which included using supernatant prepared from boiled
blood, CSF and direct native serum. The sensitivity and reproducibility of the
LAMP assay coupled with the ability to detect the results visually without the
need for sophisticated equipment indicate that the technique has strong potential
for detection of HAT in clinical settings. Since the LAMP test shows a high
tolerance to different biological substances, determination of the appropriate
protocols for processing the template to make it a user-friendly technique, prior
to large scale evaluation, is needed.

PMID: 17991469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cereb Cortex. 2008 Jul;18(7):1536-48. Epub 2007 Oct 26.

A molecular neuroanatomical study of the developing human neocortex from 8 to 17 
postconceptional weeks revealing the early differentiation of the subplate and
subventricular zone.

Bayatti N(1), Moss JA, Sun L, Ambrose P, Ward JF, Lindsay S, Clowry GJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Medical Sciences, Department of Child Health, Royal
Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 4LP, UK.

We have employed immunohistochemistry for multiple markers to investigate the
structure and possible function of the different compartments of human cerebral
wall from the formation of cortical plate at 8 postconceptional weeks (PCW) to
the arrival of thalamocortical afferents at 17 PCW. New observations include the 
subplate emerging as a discrete differentiated layer by 10 PCW, characterized by 
synaptophysin and vesicular gamma-aminobutyric acid transporter expression also
seen in the marginal zone, suggesting that these compartments may maintain a
spontaneously active synaptic network even before the arrival of thalamocortical 
afferents. The subplate expanded from 13 to 17 PCW, becoming the largest
compartment and differentiated further, with NPY neurons located in the outer
subplate and KCC2 neurons in the inner subplate. Glutamate decarboxylase and
calretinin-positive inhibitory neurons migrated tangentially and radially from
11.5 PCW, appearing in larger numbers toward the rostral pole. The proliferative 
zones, marked by Ki67 expression, developed a complicated structure by 12.5 PCW
reflected in transcription factor expression patterns, including TBR2 confined to
the inner subventricular and outer ventricular zones and TBR1 weakly expressed in
the subventricular zone (SVZ). PAX6 was extensively expressed in the
proliferative zones such that the human outer SVZ contained a large reservoir of 
PAX6-positive potential progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2430151
PMID: 17965125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Development. 2007 Nov;134(21):3883-91. Epub 2007 Oct 3.

Divergent roles of ApoER2 and Vldlr in the migration of cortical neurons.

Hack I(1), Hellwig S, Junghans D, Brunne B, Bock HH, Zhao S, Frotscher M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Anatomie und Zellbiologie, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg,
D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Reelin, its lipoprotein receptors [very low density lipoprotein receptor (Vldlr) 
and apolipoprotein E receptor 2 (ApoER2; also known as Lrp8)], and the
cytoplasmic adaptor protein disabled 1 (Dab1) are important for the correct
formation of layers in the cerebral cortex. Reeler mice lacking the reelin
protein show altered radial neuronal migration resulting in an inversion of
cortical layers. ApoER2 Vldlr double-knockout mutants and Dab1 mutants show a
reeler-like phenotype, whereas milder phenotypes are found if only one of the two
lipoprotein receptors for reelin is absent. However, the precise role of the
individual reelin receptors in neuronal migration remained unclear. In the study 
reported here, we performed fate mapping of newly generated cortical neurons in
single and double receptor mutants using bromodeoxyuridine-labeling and
layer-specific markers. We present evidence for divergent roles of the two reelin
receptors Vldlr and ApoER2, with Vldlr mediating a stop signal for migrating
neurons and ApoER2 being essential for the migration of late generated
neocortical neurons.

PMID: 17913789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Appl Microbiol. 2007 Oct;103(4):1041-7.

Identification of amino acids involved in the Flo11p-mediated adhesion of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae to a polystyrene surface using phage display with
competitive elution.

Mortensen HD(1), Dupont K, Jespersen L, Willats WG, Arneborg N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, The Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University, 
Frederiksberg C, Denmark.

AIMS: To identify the main amino acids involved in the Flo11p-mediated adhesion
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to the polystyrene surface PolySorp.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using a combination of phage display and competitive elution
revealed that 12-mer peptides of phages from competitive panning with S.
cerevisiae FLO11 wild-type (TBR1) cells had a higher consensus than those from
competitive panning with S. cerevisiae flo11Delta mutant (TBR5) cells, suggesting
that the wild-type cells interact with the plastic surface in a stronger and more
similar way than the mutant cells. Tryptophan and proline were more abundant in
the peptides of phages from competitive elution with FLO11 cells than in those
from competitive elution with flo11Delta cells. Furthermore, two phages with
hydrophobic peptides containing 1 or 2 tryptophan, and 3 or 5 proline, residues
inhibited the adhesion of FLO11 cells to PolySorp more than a phage with a
hydrophobic peptide containing no tryptophan and only two proline residues.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest a key role of tryptophan and proline in the
hydrophobic interactions between Flo11p on the S. cerevisiae cell surface and the
PolySorp surface.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Our study may contribute to the development
of novel strategies to limit yeast infections in hospitals and other medical
environments.

PMID: 17897208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Apr;45(4):267-71.

[Effect of external retinoic acid on Tbx1 gene during zebrafish embryogenesis].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang LF(1), Gui YH, Zhong T, Wang YX, Qian LX, Dong YX, Jiang Q, Sun SN, Song
HY.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China.

OBJECTIVE: DiGeorge/del22q11 syndrome is one of the most common genetic causes of
outflow tract and aortic arch defects in human. DiGeorge/del22q11 is thought to
involve an embryonic defect restricted to the pharyngeal arches and the
corresponding pharyngeal pouches. Previous studies have evidenced that retinoic
acid (RA) signaling is definitely indispensable for the development of the
pharyngeal arches. Tbx1, one of the T-box containing genes, is proved to be the
most attractive candidate gene for DiGeorge/del22q11 syndrome. However, the
interaction between RA and Tbx1 has not been fully investigated. Exploring the
interaction will contribute to discover the molecular pathways disrupted in
DiGeorge/del22q11 syndrome, and will also be essential for understanding genetic 
basis for congenital heart disease. It now seems possible that genes and
molecular pathways disrupted in DiGeorge syndrome will also account for some
isolated cases of congenital heart disease. Accordingly, the present study aimed 
to extensively study the effects of external RA on the cardiac development and
Tbx1 expression during zebrafish embryogenesis.
METHODS: The chemical genetics approach was applied by treating zebrafish embryos
with 5 x 10(-8) mol/L RA and 10(-7) mol/L RA at 12.5 hour post fertilization
(hpf). The expression patterns of Tbx1 were monitored by whole-mount in situ
hybridization and quantitative real-time RT-PCR, respectively.
RESULTS: The zebrafish embryos treated with 5 x 10(-8) mol/L RA and 10(-7) mol/L 
RA for 1.5 h at 12.5 hpf exhibited selective defects of abnormal heart tube. The 
results of whole-mount in situ hybridization with Tbx1 RNA probe showed that Tbx1
was expressed in cardiac region, pharyngeal arches and otic vesicle during
zebrafish embryogenesis. RA treatment led to a distinct spatio-temporal
expression pattern for Tbx1 from that in wild type embryo. The real-time PCR
analysis showed that Tbx1 expression levels were markedly reduced by RA
treatment. Tbx1 expression in the pharyngeal arches and heart were obviously down
regulated compared to the wild type embryos. In contrast to 5 x 10(-8) mol/L
RA-treated groups, 10(-7) mol/L RA caused a more severe effect on the Tbx1
expression level.
CONCLUSION: These results suggested that there was a genetic link between RA and 
Tbx1 during development of zebrafish embryo. RA could produce an altered Tbx1
expression pattern in zebrafish. RA may regulate the Tbx1 expression in a
dose-dependant manner. RA could represent a major epigenetic factor to cause
abnormal expression of Tbx1, secondarily, disrupt the pharyngeal arch and heart
development.

PMID: 17706063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Nat Neurosci. 2007 Sep;10(9):1141-50. Epub 2007 Aug 12.

A stream of cells migrating from the caudal telencephalon reveals a link between 
the amygdala and neocortex.

Remedios R(1), Huilgol D, Saha B, Hari P, Bhatnagar L, Kowalczyk T, Hevner RF,
Suda Y, Aizawa S, Ohshima T, Stoykova A, Tole S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, B-304, Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research, Homi Bhabha Road, Colaba, Mumbai 400005, India.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2007 Sep;10(9):1081-2.

The amygdaloid complex consists of diverse nuclei that belong to distinct
functional systems, yet many issues about its development are poorly understood. 
Here, we identify a stream of migrating cells that form specific amygdaloid
nuclei in mice. In utero electroporation showed that this caudal amygdaloid
stream (CAS) originated in a unique domain at the caudal telencephalic pole that 
is contiguous with the dorsal pallium, which was previously thought to generate
only neocortical cells. The CAS and the neocortex share mechanisms for
specification (transcription factors Tbr1, Lhx2 and Emx1/2) and migration (reelin
and Cdk5). Reelin, a critical cue for migration in the neocortex, and Cdk5, which
is specifically required for migration along radial glia in the neocortex, were
both selectively required for the normal migration of the CAS, but not for that
of other amygdaloid nuclei. This is first evidence of a dorsal pallial
contribution to the amygdala, demonstrating a developmental and mechanistic link 
between the amygdala and the neocortex.

PMID: 17694053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Mol Histol. 2007 Dec;38(6):517-25. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

Molecular identity of olfactory bulb interneurons: transcriptional codes of
periglomerular neuron subtypes.

Allen ZJ 2nd(1), Waclaw RR, Colbert MC, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH 45229, USA.

Interneurons in the glomerular layer (GL) of the olfactory bulb represent a
diverse set of cells, which can be identified by distinct expression of different
neurotransmitters as well as calcium binding proteins. Using genetic based fate
mapping, we show here that at least three of these different interneurons
subtypes (i.e. dopaminergic, calbindin- and calretinin-expressing) derive from
cells that express the homeobox genes Dlx5/6. The transcription factors ER81,
Meis2, Pax6 and Sp8 have all been implicated in olfactory bulb interneuron
development and each of these can be observed in Dlx5/6-derived periglomerular
cells. Conversely, the T-box factors Tbr1 and Tbx21, which mark olfactory bulb
projection neurons, are not expressed in the Dlx5/6-derived periglomerular cells.
While the interneuron subtypes that are marked by Pax6 and Sp8 have been
described, little information exists as to the specific subtypes that express
ER81 or Meis2. We show here that ER81 is expressed in dopaminergic cells and in a
subset of calretinin-expressing cells in the GL. Meis2 is found in dopaminergic
and calbindin-expressing cells as well as in a subpopulation of the
calretinin-expressing interneurons of the glomerular layer. These findings
suggest that distinct transcriptional codes may underlie the differentiation of
specific olfactory bulb interneuron subtypes.

PMID: 17624499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Development. 2007 Aug;134(15):2815-27. Epub 2007 Jul 4.

Conserved pattern of tangential neuronal migration during forebrain development.

Métin C(1), Alvarez C, Moudoux D, Vitalis T, Pieau C, Molnár Z.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U839, Institut du Fer à Moulin, 17 rue du Fer à Moulin, 75005 Paris,
France. metin@chups.jussieu.fr

Origin, timing and direction of neuronal migration during brain development
determine the distinct organization of adult structures. Changes in these
processes might have driven the evolution of the forebrain in vertebrates.
GABAergic neurons originate from the ganglionic eminence in mammals and migrate
tangentially to the cortex. We are interested in differences and similarities in 
tangential migration patterns across corresponding telencephalic territories in
mammals and reptiles. Using morphological criteria and expression patterns of
Darpp-32, Tbr1, Nkx2.1 and Pax6 genes, we show in slice cultures of turtle
embryos that early cohorts of tangentially migrating cells are released from the 
medial ganglionic eminence between stages 14 and 18. Additional populations
migrate tangentially from the dorsal subpallium. Large cohorts of tangentially
migrating neurons originate ventral to the dorsal ventricular ridge at stage 14
and from the lateral ganglionic eminence from stage 15. Release of GABAergic
cells from these regions was investigated further in explant cultures. Tangential
migration in turtle proceeds in a fashion similar to mammals. In chimeric slice
culture and in ovo graft experiments, the tangentially migrating cells behaved
according to the host environment - turtle cells responded to the available cues 
in mouse slices and mouse cells assumed characteristic migratory routes in turtle
brains, indicating highly conserved embryonic signals between these distant
species. Our study contributes to the evaluation of theories on the origin of the
dorsal cortex and indicates that tangential migration is universal in mammals and
sauropsids.

PMID: 17611228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Eur J Neurosci. 2007 May;25(9):2581-90.

Directing neurotransmitter identity of neurones derived from expanded adult
neural stem cells.

Berninger B(1), Guillemot F, Götz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany. benedikt.berninger@gsf.de

In-vitro expanded neural stem cells (NSCs) of the adult subependymal zone (SEZ)
may serve as a source for replacing degenerating neurones in disease and trauma. 
Crucial for the viability of this approach is the ability to selectively generate
specific types of neurones from these cells. Here we show that NSCs derived from 
the adult mouse SEZ and expanded in vitro as neurosphere cells lose their in-vivo
specification and generate a mixture of progeny comprising both GABAergic and
also, surprisingly, glutamatergic neurones. When forced to express the pro-neural
transcription factor neurogenin 2, virtually all progeny of in-vitro expanded
adult NSCs acquire a glutamatergic identity, whereas only GABAergic neurones are 
generated upon expression of the transcription factor Mash1. Respecification of
expanded NSCs from the adult SEZ by neurogenin 2 was accompanied by upregulation 
of the T-box transcription factor Tbr1, suggesting that their progeny had
acquired a dorsal telencephalic identity. Thus, in-vitro expanded adult NSCs have
the competence to become directed towards distinct functional neurotransmitter
phenotypes when the appropriate transcriptional cues are provided.

PMID: 17561834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 May 16;7:48.

Novel subdomains of the mouse olfactory bulb defined by molecular heterogeneity
in the nascent external plexiform and glomerular layers.

Williams EO(1), Xiao Y, Sickles HM, Shafer P, Yona G, Yang JY, Lin DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
eow1@cornell.edu <eow1@cornell.edu>

BACKGROUND: In the mouse olfactory system, the role of the olfactory bulb in
guiding olfactory sensory neuron (OSN) axons to their targets is poorly
understood. What cell types within the bulb are necessary for targeting is
unknown. What genes are important for this process is also unknown. Although
projection neurons are not required, other cell-types within the external
plexiform and glomerular layers also form synapses with OSNs. We hypothesized
that these cells are important for targeting, and express spatially
differentially expressed guidance cues that act to guide OSN axons within the
bulb.
RESULTS: We used laser microdissection and microarray analysis to find genes that
are differentially expressed along the dorsal-ventral, medial-lateral, and
anterior-posterior axes of the bulb. The expression patterns of these genes
divide the bulb into previously unrecognized subdomains. Interestingly, some
genes are expressed in both the medial and lateral bulb, showing for the first
time the existence of symmetric expression along this axis. We use a regeneration
paradigm to show that several of these genes are altered in expression in
response to deafferentation, consistent with the interpretation that they are
expressed in cells that interact with OSNs.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that the nascent external plexiform and glomerular
layers of the bulb can be divided into multiple domains based on the expression
of these genes, several of which are known to function in axon guidance,
synaptogenesis, and angiogenesis. These genes represent candidate guidance cues
that may act to guide OSN axons within the bulb during targeting.

PMCID: PMC1885806
PMID: 17506891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 5;7:29.

Perlecan controls neurogenesis in the developing telencephalon.

Girós A(1), Morante J, Gil-Sanz C, Fairén A, Costell M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Universitat de València,
Burjassot, Spain. m.amparo.giros@uv.es <m.amparo.giros@uv.es>

BACKGROUND: Perlecan is a proteoglycan expressed in the basal lamina of the
neuroepithelium during development. Perlecan absence does not impair basal lamina
assembly, although in the 55% of the mutants early disruptions of this lamina
conducts to exencephaly, impairing brain development. The rest of perlecan-null
brains complete its prenatal development, maintain basal lamina continuity
interrupted by some isolated ectopias, and are microcephalic. Microcephaly
consists of thinner cerebral walls and underdeveloped ganglionic eminences. We
have studied the mechanisms that generate brain atrophy in telencephalic areas
where basal lamina is intact.
RESULTS: Brain atrophy in the absence of perlecan started in the ventral
forebrain and extended to lateral and dorsal parts of the cortex in the following
stages. First, the subpallial forebrain developed poorly in early perlecan-null
embryos, because of a reduced cell proliferation: the number of cells in mitosis 
decreased since the early stages of development. This reduction resulted in a
decreased tangential migration of interneurons to the cerebral cortex.
Concomitant with the early hypoplasia observed in the medial ganglionic
eminences, Sonic Hedgehog signal decreased in the perlecan-null floor plate basal
lamina at E12.5. Second, neurogenesis in the pallial neuroepithelium was affected
in perlecan deficient embryos. We found reductions of nearly 50% in the number of
cells exiting the cell cycle at E12-E13. The labeling index, which was normal at 
this age, significantly decreased with advancing corticogenesis. Moreover,
nestin+ or PCNA+ progenitors increased since E14.5, reaching up to about 150% of 
the proportion of PCNA+ cells in the wild-type at E17.5. Thus, labeling index
reduction together with increased progenitor population, suggests that atrophy is
the result of altered cell cycle progression in the cortical progenitors.
Accordingly, less neurons populated the cortical plate and subplate of
perlecan-null neocortex, as seen with the neuronal markers beta-tubulin and Tbr1.
CONCLUSION: As a component of the basal lamina, perlecan both maintains this
structure and controls the response of the neuroepithelium to growth factors.
Less mitotic cells in the early medial ganglionic eminences, and impaired cell
cycle progression in the late neocortex, suggests insufficient recruitment and
signaling by neurogenic morphogens, such as SHH or FGF2.

PMCID: PMC1852307
PMID: 17411441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Brain Res. 2007 Apr 13;1141:25-36. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

Fibroblast growth factor promotes the development of deep cerebellar nuclear
neurons in dissociated mouse cerebellar cultures.

Marzban H(1), Hawkes R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Genes and Development Research Group, 
and Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Calgary,
3330 Hospital Drive N.W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

Neurons of the deep cerebellar nuclei and excitatory cerebellar interneurons
arise from the rhombic lip of the cerebellar anlage. In contrast, Purkinje cells 
and inhibitory interneurons arise in the neuroepithelium of the fourth ventricle.
During development, the projection neurons of the cerebellar nuclei are born
first (embryo age (E)9-E12 in mouse) followed closely by the Purkinje cells
(E10-E13). Cerebellar interneurons arise later and differentiate postnatally. We 
have examined the development of cerebellar nuclear neurons in primary cultures. 
Embryonic cerebella from E15 to E18 pups were cultured 21 days in vitro. Three
distinct classes of large neurons were identified: those expressing calbindin,
typical of Purkinje cells; those expressing neurogranin (Golgi cells); and a
third class expressing parvalbumin but not calbindin, consistent with the
morphology of large projection neurons of the cerebellar nuclei. These neurons
also express Tbr1, a specific antigenic marker of cerebellar nuclear neurons.
Birthdating by using BrdU incorporation shows that the putative DCN neurons are
not born in vitro. To confirm their identity the E18 cerebellum was dissected
into cerebellar nuclear-containing (ventral) and -lacking (dorsal) halves, which 
were then dissociated and cultured separately. Only the ventral cultures produce 
putative cerebellar nuclear neurons. In contrast to E15-E18 cultures, dissociated
E13-E14 cerebella in vitro do not yield putative cerebellar nuclear neurons.
However, E14 cultures do produce them when fibroblast growth factors are added to
the medium. We conclude that FGF signaling is required for the maturation of
cerebellar nuclear neurons.

PMID: 17300764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Jan;56(1):334-44.

Postnatal induction of transforming growth factor beta signaling in fibroblasts
of mice recapitulates clinical, histologic, and biochemical features of
scleroderma.

Sonnylal S(1), Denton CP, Zheng B, Keene DR, He R, Adams HP, Vanpelt CS, Geng YJ,
Deng JM, Behringer RR, de Crombrugghe B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Increased signaling by transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) has
been implicated in systemic sclerosis (SSc; scleroderma), a complex disorder of
connective tissues characterized by excessive accumulation of collagen and other 
extracellular matrix components in systemic organs. To directly assess the effect
of sustained TGFbeta signaling in SSc, we established a novel mouse model in
which the TGFbeta signaling pathway is activated in fibroblasts postnatally.
METHODS: The mice we used (termed TBR1(CA); Cre-ER mice) harbor both the DNA for 
an inducible constitutively active TGFbeta receptor I (TGFbetaRI) mutation, which
has been targeted to the ROSA locus, and a Cre-ER transgene that is driven by a
fibroblast-specific promoter. Administration of 4-hydroxytamoxifen 2 weeks after 
birth activates the expression of constitutively active TGFbetaRI.
RESULTS: These mice recapitulated clinical, histologic, and biochemical features 
of human SSc, showing pronounced and generalized fibrosis of the dermis, thinner 
epidermis, loss of hair follicles, and fibrotic thickening of small blood vessel 
walls in the lung and kidney. Primary skin fibroblasts from these mice showed
elevated expression of downstream TGFbeta targets, reproducing the hallmark
biochemical phenotype of explanted SSc dermal fibroblasts. The mouse fibroblasts 
also showed elevated basal expression of the TGFbeta-regulated promoters
plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 and 3TP, increased Smad2/3 phosphorylation, and
enhanced myofibroblast differentiation.
CONCLUSION: Constitutive activation of TGFbeta signaling in fibroblastic cells of
mice after birth caused a marked fibrotic phenotype characteristic of SSc. These 
mice should be excellent models with which to test therapies aimed at correcting 
excessive TGFbeta signaling in human scleroderma.

PMID: 17195237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cereb Cortex. 2007 Jul;17(7):1531-41. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

Novel IgCAM, MDGA1, expressed in unique cortical area- and layer-specific
patterns and transiently by distinct forebrain populations of Cajal-Retzius
neurons.

Takeuchi A(1), Hamasaki T, Litwack ED, O'Leary DD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The laminar and area patterning of the mammalian neocortex are two organizing
principles that define its functional architecture. Members of the immunoglobulin
(Ig) superfamily of cell adhesion molecules influence neural development by
regulating cell adhesion, migration, and process growth. Here we describe the
dynamic expression of the unique Ig-containing cell adhesion molecule, MAM
domain-containing glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor 1 (MDGA1), during forebrain
development in mice and compare it with other markers. We show that MDGA1 is a
layer-specific marker and an area-specific marker, being expressed in layers 2/3 
throughout the neocortex, but within the primary somatosensory area (S1), MDGA1
is also uniquely expressed in layers 4 and 6a. Comparisons with other markers,
including cadherins, serotonin, cytochrome oxidase, ROR beta, and COUP-TF1,
reveal unique features of patterned expression of MDGA1 within cortex and S1
barrels. Further, our findings indicate that at earlier stages of development,
MDGA1 is expressed by Reelin- and Tbr1-positive Cajal-Retzius neurons that
originate from multiple sources outside of neocortex and emigrate into it. At
even earlier stages, MDGA1 is expressed by the earliest diencephalic and
mesencephalic neurons, which appear to migrate from a MDGA1-positive domain of
progenitors in the diencephalon and form a "preplate." These findings show that
MDGA1 is a unique marker for studies of cortical lamination and area patterning
and together with recent reports suggest that MDGA1 has critical functions in
forebrain/midbrain development.

PMID: 16959869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2006 May-Jun;32(1-2):200-14.

A unique subpopulation of Tbr1-expressing deep layer neurons in the developing
cerebral cortex.

Kolk SM(1), Whitman MC, Yun ME, Shete P, Donoghue MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Yale University School of Medicine 333 Cedar
Street, SHM/B301 New Heaven, CT 06520, USA.

Corrected and republished from
    Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Dec;30(4):538-51.

Cells of the subplate (SP) and deep cortical plate (CP) are among the pioneer
neurons of the developing cerebral cortex, an important group of early-born cells
that impact cortical organization and function. Similarities between pioneer
neurons in different cortical positions and heterogeneities in pioneer cells in
the same cortical location, however, have made it difficult to appreciate the
characteristics and functions of particular sets of these cells. Here, we provide
a tool to illuminate a unique subset of SP and deep CP neurons: expression of a
Tbrain-1 (Tbr1)-driven transgene. Transgene-expressing cells were consistently
positive for neuronal but not glial markers, were born early in corticogenesis,
representing just a subset of SP and deep CP neurons, were morphologically
complex during the formation of the cortex, and were maintained into maturity.
This analysis reveals a novel group of pioneer neurons and demonstrates
unrecognized diversity within this cortical population. In the future, this
information will help to uncover the roles of discrete pioneer populations in
cortical development.

PMID: 16858776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Neurosci Res. 2006 Jul;55(3):223-33. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Transcription factors in glutamatergic neurogenesis: conserved programs in
neocortex, cerebellum, and adult hippocampus.

Hevner RF(1), Hodge RD, Daza RA, Englund C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Harborview Medical Center, 
Harborview Pathology, Box 359791, 325 Ninth Ave., Seattle, WA 98104, USA.
rhevner@u.washington.edu

Glutamatergic, pyramidal-projection neurons are produced in the embryonic
cerebral cortex by a series of genetically programmed fate choices, implemented
in large part by developmental transcription factors. Our work has focused on
Pax6, Tbr2/Eomes, NeuroD, and Tbr1, which are expressed sequentially during the
neurogenesis of pyramidal-projection neurons. Recently, we have found that the
same transcription factors are expressed, in the same order, during glutamatergic
neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus, and (with modifications) in the
developing cerebellum. While the precise functional significance of this
transcription factor expression sequence is unknown, its common appearance in
embryonic and adult neurogenesis, and in different brain regions, suggests it is 
part of a conserved genetic program that specifies general properties of
glutamatergic neurons in these regions. Subtypes of glutamatergic neurons (e.g., 
layer-specific fates in the cortex) are further determined by combinations of
transcription factors, superimposed on general sequential programs. These new
perspectives on neurogenesis add to the conceptual framework for strategies to
engineer neural stem cells for the repair of specific brain circuits.

PMID: 16621079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Neurosci. 2006 Mar 15;26(11):3066-76.

Development of the deep cerebellar nuclei: transcription factors and cell
migration from the rhombic lip.

Fink AJ(1), Englund C, Daza RA, Pham D, Lau C, Nivison M, Kowalczyk T, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology (Neuropathology), University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98104, USA.

The deep cerebellar nuclei (DCN) are the main output centers of the cerebellum,
but little is known about their development. Using transcription factors as cell 
type-specific markers, we found that DCN neurons in mice are produced in the
rhombic lip and migrate rostrally in a subpial stream to the nuclear transitory
zone (NTZ). The rhombic lip-derived cells express transcription factors Pax6,
Tbr2, and Tbr1 sequentially as they enter the NTZ. A subset of rhombic
lip-derived cells also express reelin, a key regulator of Purkinje cell
migrations. In organotypic slice cultures, the rhombic lip was necessary and
sufficient to produce cells that migrate in the subpial stream, enter the NTZ,
and express Pax6, Tbr2, Tbr1, and reelin. In later stages of development, the
subpial stream is replaced by the external granular layer, and the NTZ organizes 
into distinct DCN nuclei. Tbr1 expression persists to adulthood in a subset of
medial DCN projection neurons. In reeler mutant mice, which have a severe
cerebellar malformation, rhombic lip-derived cells migrated to the NTZ, despite
reelin deficiency. Studies in Tbr1 mutant mice suggested that Tbr1 plays a role
in DCN morphogenesis but is not required for reelin expression, glutamatergic
differentiation, or the initial formation of efferent axon pathways. Our findings
reveal underlying similarities in the transcriptional programs for glutamatergic 
neuron production in the DCN and the cerebral cortex, and they support a model of
cerebellar neurogenesis in which glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons are produced
from separate progenitor compartments.

PMID: 16540585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Mar;6(3):285-93. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Expression of coiled-coil protein 1, a novel gene downstream of FGF2, in the
developing brain.

Pellicano F(1), Inglis-Broadgate SL, Pante G, Ansorge W, Iwata T.

Author information: 
(1)Beatson Laboratories for Cancer Research, Division of Cancer Sciences and
Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Glasgow, Garscube Estate,
Switchback Road, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) plays an important role in cortical
development. However, the genes downstream of FGF2 that mediate its effect are
largely unknown. We have performed a microarray screening of genes regulated by
FGF2 using primary cortical neuron culture derived from embryonic day 14.5
(E14.5) mouse forebrains. In this study, we have analysed a previously
uncharacterised gene encoding a 180-amino acid protein, hereby named 'coiled-coil
protein 1 (ccp1)', that showed a modest up-regulation upon FGF2 stimulation.
Northern blots and RT-PCR showed specific expression of ccp1 in multiple tissues 
including adult and embryonic brains. In situ hybridizations revealed that ccp1
was expressed in the cortical plate between Reelin and Tbr1-positive layers in
the dorsal cortex at E15.5. Furthermore, the expression pattern of ccp1 at
E13.5-E14.5 reflected some of the aspects of tangential migration of cortical
progenitors during the early phase. We observed that the expressed ccp1 protein
was localised to endo/lysosomal compartment in the cell body as well as to
vesicles present in the processes of primary cortical neurons and oligodendrocyte
cell line.

PMID: 16378758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Int J Dev Biol. 2006;50(1):55-61.

TBX1, a DiGeorge syndrome candidate gene, is inhibited by retinoic acid.

Zhang L(1), Zhong T, Wang Y, Jiang Q, Song H, Gui Y.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China.

Both retinoic acid (RA) and Tbx1 are definitively indispensable for the
development of the pharyngeal arches. The defects produced by a loss of Tbx1
highly resemble those induced by hyper- and hypo-RA. Based on these similarities,
the effects of RA on Tbx1 expression pattern were explored during pharyngeal arch
development in zebrafish. Whole-mount in situ hybridization and real-time
quantitative PCR were used. Zebrafish embryos were treated with 5 x 10(-8)mol/L
and 10(-7)mol/L RA at 12.5 hours post fertilization for 1.5 hours, respectively. 
Whole-mount in situ hybridization showed that Tbx1 was expressed in the cardiac
region, pharyngeal arch and otic vesicle between 24 hpf and 72 hpf in zebrafish. 
Tbx1 expression was obviously reduced, even lost, in the pharyngeal arch and
outflow tract in RA treated groups. Real-time quantitative PCR analysis showed
that Tbx1 expression rose to a peak level at 36 hpf in wild type group.
Repression of Tbx1 expression was most evident at 36 hpf, 24 hours after RA
treatment. 10(-7 )mol/L RA caused a more severe effect on the Tbx1 expression
level than 5 x 10(-8)mol/L RA. The results suggested that RA could produce an
altered Tbx1 expression pattern in zebrafish. In addition, RA could repress Tbx1 
expression in a dose-dependent manner.

PMID: 16323078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Dec 6;102(49):17792-7. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

Zfp312 is required for subcortical axonal projections and dendritic morphology of
deep-layer pyramidal neurons of the cerebral cortex.

Chen JG(1), Rasin MR, Kwan KY, Sestan N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Pyramidal neurons of the cerebral cortex display marked layer- and
subtype-specific differences in their axonal projections and dendritic
morphologies. Here we show that transcription factor Zfp312 is selectively
expressed by layer V and VI subcortical projection pyramidal neurons and their
progenitor cells. Knocking down Zfp312 with small interfering RNAs dramatically
reduced the number of subcortical axonal projections from deep-layer pyramidal
neurons and altered their dendritic morphology. In contrast, misexpression of
Zfp312 in cortically projecting pyramidal neurons of layers II and III induced
the expression of Tbr1, a transcription factor enriched in deep-layer neurons,
and the formation of ectopic subcortical axonal projections. Thus, our results
indicate that transcription factor Zfp312 plays a critical role in layer- and
neuronal subtype-specific patterning of cortical axonal projections and dendritic
morphologies.

PMCID: PMC1308928
PMID: 16314561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Neuron. 2005 Oct 6;48(1):31-43.

Math1 expression redefines the rhombic lip derivatives and reveals novel lineages
within the brainstem and cerebellum.

Wang VY(1), Rose MF, Zoghbi HY.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2005 Oct 6;48(1):1-4.

The rhombic lip (RL) is an embryonic proliferative neuroepithelium that generates
several groups of hindbrain neurons. However, the precise boundaries and
derivatives of the RL have never been genetically identified. We use
beta-galactosidase expressed from the Math1 locus in Math1-heterozygous and
Math1-null mice to track RL-derived cells and to evaluate their developmental
requirements for Math1. We uncover a Math1-dependent rostral rhombic-lip
migratory stream (RLS) that generates some neurons of the parabrachial, lateral
lemniscal, and deep cerebellar nuclei, in addition to cerebellar granule neurons.
A more caudal Math1-dependent cochlear extramural stream (CES) generates the
ventral cochlear nucleus and cochlear granule neurons. Similarly, mossy-fiber
precerebellar nuclei require Math1, whereas the inferior olive and locus
coeruleus do not. We propose that Math1 expression delimits the extent of the
rhombic lip and is required for the generation of the hindbrain superficial
migratory streams, all of which contribute neurons to the
proprioceptive/vestibular/auditory sensory network.

PMID: 16202707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Dec;30(4):538-51. Epub 2005 Sep 26.

A unique subpopulation of Tbr1-expressing deep layer neurons in the developing
cerebral cortex.

Kolk SM(1), Whitman MC, Yun ME, Shete P, Donoghue MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar St.,
SHM/B301, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Neurosci. 2006 May-Jun;32(1-2):199.

Corrected and republished in
    Mol Cell Neurosci. 2006 May-Jun;32(1-2):200-14.

Cells of the subplate (SP) and deep cortical plate (CP) are among the pioneer
neurons of the developing cerebral cortex, an important group of early-born cells
that impact cortical organization and function. Similarities between pioneer
neurons in different cortical positions and heterogeneities in pioneer cells in
the same cortical location, however, have made it difficult to appreciate the
characteristics and functions of particular sets of these cells. Here, we provide
a tool to illuminate a unique subset of SP and deep CP neurons: expression of a
Tbrain-1 (Tbr1)-driven transgene. Transgene-expressing cells were consistently
positive for neuronal but not glial markers, were born early in corticogenesis,
representing just a subset of SP and deep CP neurons, were morphologically
complex during the formation of the cortex, and were maintained into maturity.
This analysis reveals a novel group of pioneer neurons and demonstrates
unrecognized diversity within this cortical population. In the future, this
information will help to uncover the roles of discrete pioneer populations in
cortical development.

PMID: 16188453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Brain Res Bull. 2005 Sep 15;66(4-6):394-401. Epub 2005 Mar 5.

The nuclear receptor COUP-TFI represses differentiation of Cajal-Retzius cells.

Studer M(1), Filosa A, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy.
studer@tigem.it

The cellular diversity of neurons located in the marginal zone (MZ) of the cortex
has a crucial role in cortical development. However, little is known about the
molecular mechanisms involved in how these different neuronal cell types are
specified. Here, we show that in the MZ, the nuclear receptor COUP-TFI is
localized in calbindin-positive cells and not in reelin-positive cells. High
expression of COUP-TFI has been detected in preplate (PP) and subplate (SP)
cells, suggesting that this nuclear receptor is down-regulated during preplate
differentiation towards the Cajal-Retzius (CR) cell lineage. By maintaining high 
ectopic expression of COUP-TFI in preplate cells, we show that COUP-TFI represses
the CR cell markers reelin and calretinin, and with lower efficiency the
transcription factor Tbr1. Furthermore, general differentiation is not affected, 
strongly suggesting that COUP-TFI represses differentiation of CR cells.

PMID: 16144621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Neurosci. 2005 Mar 23;25(12):3067-79.

Distinct roles of calcineurin-nuclear factor of activated T-cells and protein
kinase A-cAMP response element-binding protein signaling in presynaptic
differentiation.

Yoshida T(1), Mishina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology and Pharmacology, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of Tokyo, and Solution-Oriented Research for Science and
Technology, Japan Science and Technology Corporation, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Synaptic vesicle accumulation and morphological changes are characteristic
features of axon terminal differentiation during synaptogenesis. To investigate
the regulatory mechanism that orchestrates synaptic molecules to form mature
presynaptic terminals, we visualized a single axon terminal of zebrafish
olfactory sensory neurons in vivo and examined the effects of the neuron-specific
gene manipulations on the axon terminal differentiation. Synaptic vesicles
visualized with vesicle-associated membrane protein 2 (VAMP2)-enhanced green
fluorescent protein (EGFP) fusion protein gradually accumulated in axon
terminals, whereas the axon terminals visualized with GAP43 fused with EGFP
remodeled from complex shapes with filopodia to simple shapes without filopodia
from 50 h postfertilization (hpf) to 84 hpf. Expression of dominant-negative
protein kinase A (PKA) or cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) suppressed
the VAMP2-EGFP punctum formation in axon terminals during synaptogenesis.
Consistently, constitutively active PKA or CREB stimulated VAMP2-EGFP puncta
formation. On the other hand, cyclosporine A treatment or suppression of nuclear 
factor of activated T cells (NFAT) activation prevented the axon terminal
remodeling from complex to simple shapes during synaptogenesis. Consistently,
expression of constitutively active calcineurin accelerated the axon terminal
remodeling. These results suggest that calcineurin-NFAT signaling regulates axon 
terminal remodeling, and PKA-CREB signaling controls synaptic vesicle
accumulation.

PMID: 15788763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 Feb;35(2):129-39.

Sequence variation in the cadherin gene of Ostrinia nubilalis: a tool for field
monitoring.

Coates BS(1), Sumerford DV, Hellmich RL, Lewis LC.

Author information: 
(1)USDA-ARS, Corn Insects and Crop Genetics Research Unit, 113 Genetics
Laboratory, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA. coates@iastate.edu

Toxin-binding proteins of insect midgut epithelial cells are associated with
insect resistance to Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) Cry toxins. A 5378 nt cDNA
encoding a 1717 amino acid putative midgut cadherin-like glycoprotein and
candidate Cry1Ab toxin-binding protein was characterized from Ostrinia nubilalis.
Intraspecific alignment of partial O. nubilalis cadherin gene sequences
identified variance within proposed Cry1A toxin binding region 2 (TBR2),
1328IPLQTSILVVT[I/V] N1340, and flanking Cry1A toxin binding region 1 (TBR1),
861DIEIEIIDTNN871. DNA sequence and PCR-RFLP detected single nucleotide
polymorphism between cadherin alleles, and pedigree analysis demonstrated
Mendelian inheritance. A population sample from Mead, Nebraska showed allelic
polymorphism. These assays may be useful for linkage mapping and field
surveillance of wild populations and of O. nubilalis.

PMID: 15681223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Neurosci. 2005 Jan 5;25(1):247-51.

Pax6, Tbr2, and Tbr1 are expressed sequentially by radial glia, intermediate
progenitor cells, and postmitotic neurons in developing neocortex.

Englund C(1), Fink A, Lau C, Pham D, Daza RA, Bulfone A, Kowalczyk T, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195-7470, USA.

The developing neocortex contains two types of progenitor cells for
glutamatergic, pyramidal-projection neurons. The first type, radial glia, produce
neurons and glia, divide at the ventricular surface, and express Pax6, a
homeodomain transcription factor. The second type, intermediate progenitor cells,
are derived from radial glia, produce only neurons, and divide away from the
ventricular surface. Here we show that the transition from radial glia to
intermediate progenitor cell is associated with upregulation of Tbr2, a T-domain 
transcription factor, and downregulation of Pax6. Accordingly, Tbr2 expression in
progenitor compartments (the subventricular zone and ventricular zone) rises and 
falls with cortical plate neurogenesis. The subsequent transition from
intermediate progenitor cell to postmitotic neuron is marked by downregulation of
Tbr2 and upregulation of Tbr1, another T-domain transcription factor. These
findings delineate the transcription factor sequence Pax6 --> Tbr2 --> Tbr1 in
the differentiation of radial glia --> intermediate progenitor cell -->
postmitotic projection neuron. This transcription factor sequence is modified in 
preplate neurons, in which Tbr2 is transiently coexpressed with Tbr1, and in the 
direct differentiation pathway from radial glia --> postmitotic projection
neuron, in which Tbr2 is expressed briefly or not at all.

PMID: 15634788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Neurochem. 2004 Dec;91(6):1483-92.

Identification of Tbr-1/CASK complex target genes in neurons.

Wang TF(1), Ding CN, Wang GS, Luo SC, Lin YL, Ruan Y, Hevner R, Rubenstein JL,
Hsueh YP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Tbr-1, a neuron-specific T-box transcription factor, plays a critical role in
brain development. Here, we performed a computational search using the
non-palindromic T-box binding sequence, namely the non-palindromic T-element, to 
determine the putative downstream target genes of Tbr-1. More than 20 identified 
genes containing the non-palindromic T-element in the 5' regulatory region were
found expressed in brain. Luciferase reporter assays using cultured hippocampal
neurons showed that overexpression of Tbr-1 and CASK-enhanced promoter activities
of some of these putative target genes, including NMDAR subunit 2b (NR2b),
glycine transporter, interleukin 7 receptor (IL-7R) and OX-2. Among these genes, 
NR2b promoter responded strongest to overexpression of Tbr-1 and CASK. Deletion
of the non-palindromic T-elements from NR2b promoter impaired the induction by
Tbr-1 and CASK. We also examined expression of these target genes in Tbr-1
knockout mice, it was found that NR2b expression was consistently downregulated. 
Similarly, both RNA and protein expression levels of NMDAR subunit 1 (NR1), which
also contains the non-palindromic T-elements in its 5' regulatory region, were
reduced in Tbr-1 knockout mice. We suggest that Tbr-1/CASK protein complex
regulates expression of these downstream target genes and thus modulates neuronal
activity and function.

PMID: 15584924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Neuro Oncol. 2004 Oct;6(4):281-9.

Detrended fluctuation analysis of genome-wide copy number profiles of
glioblastomas using array-based comparative genomic hybridization.

Nakahara Y(1), Shiraishi T, Okamoto H, Mineta T, Oishi T, Sasaki K, Tabuchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine, Saga University, Saga
849-850, Japan. nakahara@post.saga-med.ac.jp

We examined whole genomic aberrations of biopsied samples from 19 independent
glioblastomas by array-based comparative genomic hybridization analysis. The
highest frequencies of copy number gains were observed on RFC2 (73.3%), EGFR
(63.2%), and FGR, ELN, CDKN1C , FES, TOP2A, and ARSA (57.9% each). The highest
frequencies of copy number losses were detected on TBR1 (52.6%), BMI1 (52.6%),
EGR2 (47.4%), DMBT1 (47.4%), MTAP (42.1%), and FGFR2 (42.1%). The copy number
gains of CDKN1C and INS and the copy number losses of TBR1 were significantly
correlated with longer survival of patients. High-level amplifications were
identified on EGFR, SAS/CDK4, PDGFRA, MDM2, and ARSA. These genes are assumed to 
be involved in tumorigenesis or progression of glioblastomas. The first attempts 
to apply detrended fluctuation analysis to copy number profiles by considering
the reading direction as the time axis demonstrated that higher long-term fractal
scaling exponents (alpha2) correlated well with longer survival of glioblastoma
patients. The present study indicates that array-based comparative genomic
hybridization analysis has great potential for assessment of copy number changes 
and altered chromosomal regions of brain tumors. Furthermore, we show that
nonlinear analysis methods of whole genome copy number profiles may provide
prognostic information about glioblastoma patients.

PMCID: PMC1872007
PMID: 15494095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2004 Jul 26;126(2):121-8.

High affinity binding of Dab1 to Reelin receptors promotes normal positioning of 
upper layer cortical plate neurons.

Herrick TM(1), Cooper JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100
Fairview Ave N, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

The positions of neurons in the neocortex, hippocampus, cerebellum and various
other laminated brain regions are regulated by a signaling pathway initiated by
the secreted protein Reelin and requiring the intracellular adaptor protein Dab1.
Dab1 and the Reelin receptors VLDLR and ApoER2 are expressed by neurons whose
migrations are coordinated by Reelin. In vitro, Dab1 binds with high affinity to 
the cytoplasmic tails of VLDLR and ApoER2 via its PTB domain. To test the
importance of Dab1 binding to VLDLR and ApoER2, we replaced the Dab1 gene with a 
cDNA cassette encoding a point mutant allele, Dab1(F158V). This mutation strongly
decreases Dab1 binding in vitro to peptides containing the ApoER2 or VLDLR
cytoplasmic regions. Surprisingly, Dab1(F158V/F158V) homozygotes have no
discernable phenotype. However, Dab1(F158V/-) hemizygous animals have a subtle
phenotype in which late-generated cortical plate neurons migrate excessively into
the marginal zone. Early cortical plate neurons, subplate neurons, hippocampal
pyramidal cells and cerebellar Purkinje cells are positioned normally. Thus
Dab(F158V) is a weak loss-of-function (hypomorphic) allele that has no detectable
effect when homozygous. The phenotype of Dab1(F158V/-) hemizygotes shows that
late cortical plate neurons of layers 2-3 require efficient Reelin-Dab1 signaling
to prevent them entering the marginal zone. The Dab1(F158V) allele adds to a
series of Dab1 alleles that demonstrates cell type-specific variation in the
Reelin-Dab1 pathway.

PMID: 15249135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Comp Neurol. 2004 Jul 5;474(4):562-77.

Expression of the genes Emx1, Tbr1, and Eomes (Tbr2) in the telencephalon of
Xenopus laevis confirms the existence of a ventral pallial division in all
tetrapods.

Brox A(1), Puelles L, Ferreiro B, Medina L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Murcia, 30100 
Murcia, Spain.

To investigate the pallial organization and the exact location and extension of
the ventral pallium in amphibians, we cloned a fragment of the homeobox
XenopusTbr1 (xTbr1) gene and analyzed its expression compared with that of the
genes xEomes (Tbr2) and xEmx1 in the telencephalon of the frog Xenopus laevis
during embryonic and larval development. The expression of xEmx1 was also
analyzed in the adult frog. We compared the expression patterns of these pallial 
marker genes with that of the subpallial gene xDistal-less-4 (xDll4). Our results
indicate that the whole pallium of Xenopus expresses the T-box genes xTbr1 and
xEomes (in proliferating cells and/or mantle) during embryonic and larval
development, and the expression of these genes is topographically complementary
to that of xDll4 in the subpallium. In addition to their massive expression in
the pallium, both xTbr1 and xEomes are expressed in a few dispersed cells in the 
subpallium, which may represent immigrant cells of pallial origin, because these 
genes are not found in the subpallial proliferating cells. On the other hand,
during development xEmx1 is expressed in a large part of the pallium
(proliferating and postmitotic cells) except for an area adjacent to the
pallio-subpallial boundary, where xEmx1 is observed only in some mantle cells.
This pallial area poor in xEmx1 expression and poor in expression of the
subpallial gene xDll4, but expressing the pallial marker genes xTbr1 and xEomes, 
appears to represent the amphibian ventral pallium, comparable to that described 
in other vertebrates (Puelles et al. [2000] J. Comp. Neurol. 424:409-438). In the
adult frog, the ventral pallium appears to include the rostral part of the
lateral amygdalar nucleus as well as a large part of the medial amygdalar nucleus
(as defined by Marín et al. [1998] J. Comp. Neurol. 392:285-312). In contrast,
the caudal part of the previously termed lateral amygdalar nucleus shows strong
xEmx1 expression and may be a lateral pallial derivative. The possible homology
of these amphibian amygdalar nuclei is discussed. Finally, expression of xTbr1,
xEomes, and xEmx1 is observed in the mitral cell layer of the olfactory bulb from
early developmental stages, further supporting that this structure is a pallial
derivative.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15174073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Comp Neurol. 2004 Jul 5;474(4):504-23.

Expression of Dbx1, Neurogenin 2, Semaphorin 5A, Cadherin 8, and Emx1 distinguish
ventral and lateral pallial histogenetic divisions in the developing mouse
claustroamygdaloid complex.

Medina L(1), Legaz I, González G, De Castro F, Rubenstein JL, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Murcia, 30100 
Murcia, Spain. lmedina@um.es

We studied the lateral and ventral pallial divisions of the claustroamygdaloid
complex by means of analysis of expression patterns of the developmental
regulatory genes Tbr1, Dbx1, Neurogenin 2, Emx1, Cadherin 8, and Semaphorin 5A in
mouse developing telencephalon, from embryonic day 12.5 until birth. Our results 
indicate that these genes help to distinguish distinct lateral and ventral
pallial histogenetic divisions in the embryonic telencephalon. Tbr1 is broadly
expressed in both lateral and ventral pallial histogenetic divisions (the
lateroventral migratory stream plus the mantle) during early and intermediate
embryonic development; its signal becomes weak in parts of the mantle during late
embryonic development. Dbx1 is strongly and specifically expressed in progenitor 
cells (ventricular zone) of the ventral pallium during early embryonic
development, but there is no signal of this gene in the rest of the pallium nor
the subpallium. Neurogenin 2 and Semaphorin 5A are both expressed in a ventral
subdivision of the lateroventral migratory stream (called by us the ventral
migratory stream). Further, specific nuclei of the claustral complex and pallial 
amygdala show strong expression of Neurogenin 2 and/or Semaphorin 5A, including
the ventromedial claustrum and endopiriform nuclei, the lateral and basomedial
amygdalar nuclei, the anterior and posteromedial cortical amygdalar areas, plus
the amygdalo-hippocampal area. We interpret these nuclei or areas of the
claustroamygdaloid complex as possible derivatives of the ventral pallium. In
contrast, during embryonic development the dorsolateral claustrum, the
basolateral amygdalar nucleus, and the posterolateral cortical amygdalar area do 
not express or show weak expression of Neurogenin 2 or Semaphorin 5A, but express
selectively and strongly Cadherin 8 plus Emx1, and may be derivatives of the
lateral pallium. The lateral pallial and ventral pallial divisions of the
claustroamygdaloid complex appear to have some different sets of connections,
although this requires further investigation.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15174069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Neuron. 2004 Apr 8;42(1):113-28.

Transcriptional modification by a CASK-interacting nucleosome assembly protein.

Wang GS(1), Hong CJ, Yen TY, Huang HY, Ou Y, Huang TN, Jung WG, Kuo TY, Sheng M, 
Wang TF, Hsueh YP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Erratum in
    Neuron. 2004 Aug 5;43(3):437.

CASK acts as a coactivator for Tbr-1, an essential transcription factor in
cerebral cortex development. Presently, the molecular mechanism of the CASK
coactivation effect is unclear. Here, we report that CASK binds to another
nuclear protein, CINAP, which binds histones and facilitates nucleosome assembly.
CINAP, via its interaction with CASK, forms a complex with Tbr-1, regulating
expression of the genes controlled by Tbr-1 and CASK, such as NR2b and reelin. A 
knockdown of endogenous CINAP in hippocampal neurons reduces the promoter
activity of NR2b. Moreover, NMDA stimulation results in a reduction in the level 
of CINAP protein, via a proteasomal degradation pathway, correlating with a
decrease in NR2b expression in neurons. This study suggests that reduction of the
CINAP protein level by synaptic stimulation contributes to regulation of the
transcriptional activity of the Tbr-1/CASK/CINAP protein complex and thus
modifies expression of the NR2b gene.

PMID: 15066269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Plant J. 2003 Oct;36(1):122-40.

Establishment of a high-efficiency SNP-based framework marker set for
Arabidopsis.

Törjék O(1), Berger D, Meyer RC, Müssig C, Schmid KJ, Rosleff Sörensen T,
Weisshaar B, Mitchell-Olds T, Altmann T.

Author information: 
(1)University of Potsdam, Institute of Biochemistry and Biology-Genetics, Golm,
Germany.

The major goal of this project was the establishment of a tool for rapid mapping 
of new mutations and genotyping in Arabidopsis consisting of at least 100 evenly 
spaced framework markers. We assembled a single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP)-based marker set consisting of 112 polymorphic sites with average spacing
of 1.15 Mbp derived from an SNP database that we recently developed. This
information was used to set up efficient SNP detection reactions based on
multiplexed primer extension assays. The 112 Columbia (Col-0)/C24 framework
markers were used to assemble 18 multiplexed SNaPshot assays with which up to
eight separate loci can be genotyped in a single-tube/single-capillary format. In
addition, for 110 framework markers matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time of flight (MALDI-ToF) assays have been established for high throughput
analyses. We demonstrated the usefulness and the robustness of both procedures of
this tool by genotyping 48 BC3F1 individuals created between the accessions Col-0
and C24. Subsets of 10-62 of the established markers discriminate between various
combinations of the accessions Col-0, C24, Landsberg erecta (Ler), Cape Verdi
Islands (Cvi) and Niederzenz (Nd). Using a subset of 17 evenly distributed and
established SNP markers that are also polymorphic between Ler and Col-0, we were 
able to rapidly map a mutant gene (tbr1) to an interval of 2.3 Mbp in an Ler
(tbr1) x Col-0 cross.

PMID: 12974817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Biochemistry. 2003 Sep 9;42(35):10482-9.

Molecular basis for Bacillus thuringiensis Cry1Ab toxin specificity: two
structural determinants in the Manduca sexta Bt-R1 receptor interact with loops
alpha-8 and 2 in domain II of Cy1Ab toxin.

Gómez I(1), Dean DH, Bravo A, Soberón M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología UNAM, Apdo
postal 510-3, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62250, México.

The identification of epitopes involved in Cry toxin-receptor interaction could
provide insights into the molecular basis of insect specificity and for designing
new toxins to overcome the potential problem of insect resistance. In previous
works, we determined that the Manduca sexta Cry1A cadherin-like receptor
(Bt-R(1)) interacts with Cry1A toxins through epitope (865)NITIHITDTNN(875) and
by loop 2 of domain II in the toxin (Gomez, I., Miranda-Rios, J., Rudiño-Piñera, 
E., Oltean, D. I., Gill, S. S., Bravo, A., and Soberón, M. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 
277, 30137-30143.). In this work, we narrowed to 12 amino acids a previously
identified Bt-R(1) 66 amino acids epitope (Dorsch, J. A., Candas, M., Griko, N.
B., Maaty, W. S. A., Midbo, E. G., Vadlamudi, R. K., and Bulla, L. A., Jr. (2002)
Insect Biochem. Mol. Biol. 32, 1025-1036) and identified loop alpha-8 of Cry1Ab
domain II as its cognate binding epitope. Two amino acid Bt-R(1) toxin binding
regions of 70 residues, one comprised of residues 831-900 containing the
(865)NITIHITDTNN(875) epitope (TBR1) and the other comprised of residues
1291-1360 (TBR2) were cloned by RT-PCR and produced in Escherichia coli. Cry1A
toxins bind with the two TBR regions in contrast with the nontoxic Cry3A toxin.
The loop 2 synthetic peptide competed with the binding of Cry1Ab toxin to both
TBR regions in contrast to the alpha-8 synthetic peptide that only competed with 
Cry1Ab binding to TBR2. Western blots and competition ELISA analysis showed that 
the Cry1Ab loop 2 RR368-9EE mutant did not show observable binding to TBR1 but
still bound the TBR2 peptide. This result suggests that loop alpha-8 interacts
with the TBR2 region. Competition ELISA analysis of Cry1Ab binding to the two TBR
peptides revealed that the toxin binds the TBR1 region with 6-fold higher
affinity than the TBR2 region. The amino acid sequence of TBR2 involved on Cry1Ab
interaction was narrowed to 12 amino acids, (1331)IPLPASILTVTV(1342), by using
synthetic peptides as competitors for Cry1Ab binding to Bt-R(1). Our results show
that the specificity of Cry1A involves at least two structural determinants on
both molecules.

PMID: 12950175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Cereb Cortex. 2003 Jun;13(6):661-9.

Choreography of early thalamocortical development.

Molnár Z(1), Higashi S, López-Bendito G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, South Parks
Road, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK. zoltan.molnar@anat.ox.ac.uk

Thalamic axons, which carry most of the information from the sensory environment,
are amongst the first projections to reach the cerebral cortex during embryonic
development. It has been proposed that the scaffold of early generated cells in
the ventral thalamus, internal capsule and preplate play a pivotal role in their 
deployment through sharp gene expression boundaries. These ideas were recently
evaluated in various strains of mutant mice. In Tbr1, Gbx2, Pax6 KO both thalamic
and corticofugal projections fail to traverse the striatocortical junction. In
both Emx2 and Pax6 KO brains, the misrouted thalamic afferents are accompanied by
displacements of the pioneering projections from the internal capsule. Regardless
of their altered route, thalamic afferents in the reeler and L1 KO mice seem to
be able to redistribute themselves on the cortical sheet and establish normal
periphery-related representation in the somatosensory cortex. Early neural
activity delivered through the thalamic projections is thought to be involved in 
the realignment process of thalamic axons at the time of their accumulation in
the subplate layer. However, axonal growth and the early topographic arrangement 
of thalamocortical fiber pathways appear normal in the Snap25 KO, where action
potential mediated synaptic vesicle release is disrupted. We therefore suggest
that intercellular communication mediated by constitutive secretion of
transmitters or growth factors might play a dominant role during early
thalamocortical development.

PMID: 12764042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2003 Mar 14;141(1-2):39-53.

Cajal-Retzius cells in the mouse: transcription factors, neurotransmitters, and
birthdays suggest a pallial origin.

Hevner RF(1), Neogi T, Englund C, Daza RA, Fink A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Harborview Medical Center, 
Box 359630, 325 Ninth Ave, Seattle, WA 98104-2499, USA. rhevner@u.washington.edu

Cajal-Retzius cells are reelin-secreting neurons found in the marginal zone of
the mammalian cortex during development. Recently, it has been proposed that
Cajal-Retzius cells may be generated both early and late in corticogenesis, and
may migrate into the cortex from proliferative zones in the subpallium (lateral
ganglionic eminence and medial ganglionic eminence) or cortical hem. In the
present study, we used reelin as a marker to study the properties of
Cajal-Retzius cells, including their likely origins, neurotransmitters, and
birthdates. In double labeling experiments, Cajal-Retzius cells (reelin(+))
expressed transcription factors characteristic of pallial neurons (Tbr1 and
Emx2), contained high levels of glutamate, were usually calretinin(+), and were
born early in corticogenesis, on embryonic days (E)10.5 and E11.5. Tbr1(+) cells 
in the marginal zone were almost always reelin(+). The first Cajal-Retzius cells 
(Tbr1(+)/reelin(+)) appeared in the preplate on E10.5. In contrast, interneurons 
expressed a subpallial transcription factor (Dlx), contained high levels of GABA,
were frequently calbindin(+), and were born throughout corticogenesis (from E10.5
to E16.5). Interneurons (Dlx(+)) first appeared in the cortex on E12.5. Our
results suggest that the marginal zone contains two main types of neurons:
Cajal-Retzius cells derived from the pallium, and migrating interneurons derived 
from the subpallium.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 12644247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cereb Cortex. 2003 Mar;13(3):252-64.

Neural development of the neuregulin receptor ErbB4 in the cerebral cortex and
the hippocampus: preferential expression by interneurons tangentially migrating
from the ganglionic eminences.

Yau HJ(1), Wang HF, Lai C, Liu FC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, 155 Li-Rum Street,
Taipei, Taiwan 112, Republic of China.

The receptor tyrosine kinases represent an important class of signal transduction
molecules that have been shown to play critical roles in neural development. We
report in the present study that the neuregulin receptor ErbB4 is preferentially 
expressed by interneurons that are migrating tangentially from the ventral to the
dorsal rat telencephalon. ErbB4 immunoreactivity was detected in the medial
ganglionic eminence as early as embryonic day (E) 13 at the inception of
tangential migration. Prominent ErbB4-positive migratory streams consisting of
cells double-labeled with ErbB4 and Dlx, a marker of tangentially migrating
cells, were found to advance along the lower intermediate zone and the marginal
zone from the ventrolateral to the dorsomedial cortex at E16-E18. After E20, the 
ErbB4-positive stream in the lower intermediate zone shifted towards the germinal
zone and further extended via the cortex into the hippocampal primordium. ErbB4
was not expressed by Tbr1-positive glutamatergic projection neurons during
development. ErbB4 was preferentially expressed by the majority of
parvalbumin-positive interneurons and subsets of other GABAergic interneurons in 
the cerebral cortex and the hippocampus in adulthood. The early onset and
preferential expression of ErbB4 in tangentially migrating interneurons suggests 
that neuregulin/ErbB4 signaling may regulate the development and function of
telencephalic interneurons.

PMID: 12571115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Biol Psychiatry. 2003 Jan 1;53(1):39-47.

MRNA expression patterns and distribution of white matter neurons in dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex of depressed patients differ from those in schizophrenia
patients.

Molnar M(1), Potkin SG, Bunney WE, Jones EG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience, University of California, Davis, California 95616,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia, bipolar illness, and major depressive disorder have
distinct presentations, but share some common symptoms. Hence, some common
cellular and molecular abnormalities may be identifiable in these disorders.
METHODS: We examined cell-specific markers in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
of brains from 18 patients with bipolar or major depressive disorder, and 18
matched controls, using in situ hybridization histochemistry and staining for
nicotinamide-dinucleotide phosphate-diaphorase (NADPH). The distribution of
NADPH-positive interstitial cells of the white matter and the expression of the
mRNA for the 67 KD form of glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD(67)) had previously
been shown to be altered in prefrontal cortex of schizophrenics. Other markers
identifying glutamatergic neuronal populations were alpha-type II
calcium/calmodulin dependent protein kinase (CAMKII-alpha), brain derived
neurotrophic factor, (BDNF) and the putative transcription factor, T-brain-1
(TBR1).
RESULTS: Expression of GAD67 and the distribution of NADPH-positive cells in the 
white matter were not significantly altered in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
of depressed subjects. Expression of CAMKII-alpha and TBR1 mRNAs was
significantly increased in bipolar patients but not in major depressed patients, 
and there was a trend toward reduced BDNF expression in both groups. Abnormal
patterns of gene expression and neuronal distribution in schizophrenics are
markedly different from those in depressed patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings that TBR1 and CAMKII-alpha expression is increased only
in bipolar patients suggests abnormalities of specific genes related to a major
cortical cell type and its connectivity.

PMID: 12513943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Exp Zool. 2002 Aug 15;294(2):136-45.

Amphi-Eomes/Tbr1: an amphioxus cognate of vertebrate Eomesodermin and T-Brain1
genes whose expression reveals evolutionarily distinct domain in amphioxus
development.

Satoh G(1), Takeuchi JK, Yasui K, Tagawa K, Saiga H, Zhang P, Satoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8502, Japan. gouki@ascidian.zool.kyoto-u.ac.jp

A cDNA for a novel T-box containing gene was isolated from the amphioxus
Branchiostoma belcheri. A molecular phylogenetic tree constructed from the
deduced amino acid sequence of the isolated cDNA indicates that this gene belongs
to the T-Brain subfamily. In situ hybridization reveals that the expression is
first detected in the invaginating archenteron at the early gastrula stage and
this expression is down-regulated at the neurula stage. In early larvae, the
expression appears again and transcripts are detected exclusively in the pre-oral
pit (wheel organ-Hatschek's pit of the adult). In contrast to the vertebrate
counterparts, no transcripts are detected in the brain vesicle or nerve cord
throughout the development. These results are interpreted to mean that a role of 
T-Brain products in vertebrate forebrain development was acquired after the
amphioxus was split from the lineage leading to the vertebrates. On the other
hand, comparison of the tissue-specific expression domain of T-Brain genes and
other genes between amphioxus and vertebrates revealed that the pre-oral pit of
amphioxus has several molecular features which are comparable to those of the
vertebrate olfactory and hypophyseal placode.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12210114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Exp Zool. 2002 Aug 15;294(2):112-21.

Evolution of developmental functions by the Eomesodermin, T-brain-1, Tbx21
subfamily of T-box genes: insights from amphioxus.

Horton AC(1), Gibson-Brown JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63130-4899, 
USA.

We have identified an amphioxus T-box gene that is orthologous to the
Eomesodermin, T-brain-1, and Tbx21 genes of vertebrates, and we have
characterized its expression pattern during embryonic and larval development.
AmphiEomes/Tbr1/Tbx21 is maternally expressed in oocytes and cleavage stage
embryos. After the onset of zygotic transcription at the blastula stage, it is
expressed in invaginating mesendoderm cells during gastrulation, but it is
downregulated in presumptive ectoderm and neurectoderm. Expression is seen in
both axial and paraxial mesendoderm in neurulae and early larvae, but it is not
detected in differentiated endoderm, somites, or notochord. Expression persists
in mesendoderm cells of the tail bud in early larvae, but it disappears between 1
to 1.5 days post fertilization. Unlike orthologous genes in basal deuterostomes
or vertebrates, no anterior neural expression domain is detected at any stage of 
development. Integrating phylogenetic and developmental data, we have
reconstructed the evolutionary history of the Eomesodermin/Tbr1/Tbx21 subfamily
of T-box genes from a single ancestral locus that originated very early in
metazoan evolution, before the evolution of triploblasts from their diploblast
ancestor.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12210112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Science. 2002 Jul 19;297(5580):365-9.

Regulation of cerebral cortical size by control of cell cycle exit in neural
precursors.

Chenn A(1), Walsh CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2002 Jul 19;297(5580):328.

Transgenic mice expressing a stabilized beta-catenin in neural precursors develop
enlarged brains with increased cerebral cortical surface area and folds
resembling sulci and gyri of higher mammals. Brains from transgenic animals have 
enlarged lateral ventricles lined with neuroepithelial precursor cells,
reflecting an expansion of the precursor population. Compared with wild-type
precursors, a greater proportion of transgenic precursors reenter the cell cycle 
after mitosis. These results show that beta-catenin can function in the decision 
of precursors to proliferate or differentiate during mammalian neuronal
development and suggest that beta-catenin can regulate cerebral cortical size by 
controlling the generation of neural precursor cells.

PMID: 12130776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mech Dev. 2002 Aug;116(1-2):157-60.

Developmental expression of the T-box transcription factor T-bet/Tbx21 during
mouse embryogenesis.

Faedo A(1), Ficara F, Ghiani M, Aiuti A, Rubenstein JL, Bulfone A.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Institute (SCRI), Istituto Scientifico HS Raffaele, Via
Olgettina, 58 Milan, Italy. bulfone.alessandro@hsr.it

A novel type of DNA-binding domain, the 'T-box' domain, characterizes an
increasingly large family of transcription factors (Trends Genet. 15 (1999) 154).
We have identified and characterized the expression pattern of a new member of
the Tbr1 subfamily of T-box genes; this gene has been recently named T-bet/Tbx21 
(Genomics 70 (2000) 41; Cell 17 (2000) 655; Science 292 (2001) 1907; Science 295 
(2002) 338). The sequence and expression of Tbr1 and eomesodermin/Tbr2 are
closely related to T-bet/Tbx21. The expression of Tbr1 (Neuron 15 (1995) 63) and 
Tbr2 (Mech Dev 84 (1999) 133) have virtually identical onset, at around E10.5,
and expression domains in the mouse telencephalon. While Tbr1 is expressed in
postmitotic neurons, Tbr2 (which is also expressed during gastrulation is also
expressed in neural progenitors. We have used in situ hybridization to determine 
the temporal and spatial distribution of T-bet/Tbx21 expression during mouse
development. T-bet/Tbx21 expression is exclusively restricted to the olfactory
bulb and the thymus. To assess the distribution of T-BET/TBX21 expression in the 
haematopoietic compartment we used reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction and found its expression in several human blood cell lineages, including
progenitors/stem cells, immature B cells and peripheral T cells.

PMID: 12128215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jul 1;30(13):2930-9.

On the epigenetic regulation of the human reelin promoter.

Chen Y(1), Sharma RP, Costa RH, Costa E, Grayson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatric Institute, Department of Psychiatry, 1601 West Taylor Street, M/C 
912, College of Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Reln mRNA and protein levels are reduced by approximately 50% in various cortical
structures of post-mortem brain from patients diagnosed with schizophrenia or
bipolar illness with psychosis. To study mechanisms responsible for this
down-regulation, we have analyzed the promoter of the human reelin gene. We show 
that the reelin promoter directs expression of a reporter construct in multiple
human cell types: neuroblastoma cells (SHSY5Y), neuronal precursor cells (NT2),
differentiated neurons (hNT) and hepatoma cells (HepG2). Deletion constructs
confirmed the presence of multiple elements regulating Reln expression, although 
the promoter activity is promiscuous, i.e. activity did not correlate with
expression of the endogenous gene as reflected in terms of reelin mRNA levels.
Co-transfection of the -514 bp human reelin promoter with either Sp1 or Tbr1
demonstrated that these transcription factors activate reporter expression by 6- 
and 8.5-fold, respectively. Within 400 bp of the RNA start site there are 100
potential CpG targets for DNA methylation. Retinoic acid (RA)-induced
differentiation of NT2 cells to hNT neurons was accompanied by increased reelin
expression and by the appearance of three DNase I hypersensitive sites 5' to the 
RNA start site. RA-induced differentiation was also associated with demethylation
of the reelin promoter. To test if methylation silenced reelin expression, we
methylated the promoter in vitro prior to transfection. In addition, we treated
NT2 cells with the methylation inhibitor aza-2'-deoxycytidine and observed a
60-fold increase in reelin mRNA levels. The histone deacetylase inhibitors
trichostatin A (TSA) and valproic acid also induced expression of the endogenous 
reelin promoter, although TSA was considerably more potent. These findings
indicate that one determinant responsible for regulating reelin expression is the
methylation status of the promoter. Our data also raise the interesting
possibility that the down-regulation of reelin expression documented in
psychiatric patients might be the consequence of inappropriate promoter
hypermethylation.

PMCID: PMC117056
PMID: 12087179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Comp Neurol. 2002 May 20;447(1):8-17.

Cortical and thalamic axon pathfinding defects in Tbr1, Gbx2, and Pax6 mutant
mice: evidence that cortical and thalamic axons interact and guide each other.

Hevner RF(1), Miyashita-Lin E, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94143-0984, USA.

During development, cortical areas establish precise reciprocal projections with 
corresponding thalamic nuclei. Pioneer axons from the cortex and thalamus first
meet in the intermediate zone of the subcortical telencephalon (subpallium).
Their close interactions in the subpallium suggest that they may use each other
for guidance. To test this hypothesis, the development of corticothalamic and
thalamocortical connections was studied in mice with mutations of transcription
factor genes expressed specifically in the cortex (Tbr1), the dorsal thalamus
(Gbx2), or both (Pax6). In Tbr1 mutants, cortical pioneer axons entered the
subpallium at the appropriate time, but most stopped growing without entering the
diencephalon. Surprisingly, thalamic axons (which do not express Tbr1) deviated
into the external capsule and amygdala regions, without entering the cortex.
Conversely, in most Gbx2 mutants, thalamic axons were reduced in number and grew 
no farther than the subpallium. Cortical axons (which do not express Gbx2) grew
into the subpallium but did not enter the diencephalon. In one Gbx2- /- case,
sparse thalamocortical and corticothalamic projections both developed, but in no 
case did one projection reach its target and not the other. In Pax6 mutants,
neither corticothalamic nor thalamocortical axons reached their targets. These
results suggest that thalamocortical and corticothalamic projections may not form
independently. After reaching the subpallium, each projection may require a
molecularly intact reciprocal projection for further guidance. This type of
mechanism ensures that thalamocortical and corticothalamic axons project
reciprocally. However, the exact nature of the interaction between cortical and
thalamic pioneer axons remains to be elucidated.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11967891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Neuron. 2001 Feb;29(2):353-66.

Tbr1 regulates differentiation of the preplate and layer 6.

Hevner RF(1), Shi L, Justice N, Hsueh Y, Sheng M, Smiga S, Bulfone A, Goffinet
AM, Campagnoni AT, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of, Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2001 Feb;29(2):309-11.

During corticogenesis, early-born neurons of the preplate and layer 6 are
important for guiding subsequent neuronal migrations and axonal projections. Tbr1
is a putative transcription factor that is highly expressed in glutamatergic
early-born cortical neurons. In Tbr1-deficient mice, these early-born neurons had
molecular and functional defects. Cajal-Retzius cells expressed decreased levels 
of Reelin, resulting in a reeler-like cortical migration disorder. Impaired
subplate differentiation was associated with ectopic projection of
thalamocortical fibers into the basal telencephalon. Layer 6 defects contributed 
to errors in the thalamocortical, corticothalamic, and callosal projections.
These results show that Tbr1 is a common genetic determinant for the
differentiation of early-born glutamatergic neocortical neurons and provide
insights into the functions of these neurons as regulators of cortical
development.

PMID: 11239428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Neuron. 2001 Feb;29(2):309-11.

Tbr1 conducts the orchestration of early cortical development.

Dwyer ND(1), O'Leary DD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

Comment on
    Neuron. 2001 Feb;29(2):353-66.

PMID: 11239419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mech Dev. 2001 Jan;100(1):93-7.

Overlapping expression of zebrafish T-brain-1 and eomesodermin during forebrain
development.

Mione M(1), Shanmugalingam S, Kimelman D, Griffin K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. m.mione@ucl.ac.uk

T-box transcription factors are important determinants of embryonic cell fate and
behaviour. Two T-box genes are expressed in the developing telencephalon of
several vertebrate species, including amphibia, birds and mammals. Here we report
the cloning of zebrafish T-brain-1 (tbr1) and eomesodermin (eom). As a prelude to
genetic studies of neuro-ectodermal fate determination we studied their
expression pattern during embryogenesis and early larval development. Eom is
expressed in the presumptive telencephalon from around the 4-5 somite stage in
bilaterally symmetric groups of cells; the number of positive cells increases
dramatically with time and encompasses the entire dorsal telencephalon by the 22 
somite stage. Tbr1 is expressed from the 18 somite stage in a subset of
eom-expressing cells. By 24 hpf eom and tbr1 are expressed in largely overlapping
domains in the dorsal telencephalon, tbr1 is expressed in postmitotic cells
whereas eomes is also expressed in proliferative ventricular zone cells. Both
genes are also found in a small domain of the diencephalon bordering the
telencephalon. A detailed analysis of the expression of tbr1 and eom in the brain
of 4 day old larvae shows that the two T-box genes are differentially expressed
in various cell populations of the developing brain.

PMID: 11118891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Gene. 2000 Aug 22;254(1-2):29-35.

Genomic organization, sequence and chromosomal localization of the mouse Tbr2
gene and a comparative study with Tbr1.

Ueno M(1), Kimura N, Nakashima K, Saito-Ohara F, Inazawa J, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Members of the T-box family are known to play critical roles in the embryonic
development of most animal species. Recently, we have isolated its new mammalian 
member, Tbr2, from mouse embryonic brain. We have also shown that the expression 
patterns of Tbr2 and the closely related Tbr1 appear to be reciprocal in the
developing brain; Tbr2 is expressed in mesencephalon and rhombencephalon, but
expression of Tbr1 is restricted to telencephalon. To investigate possible
structural and functional relationships of Tbr2 and other T-box containing genes,
we analyzed genomic organization of the murine Tbr2 gene. The Tbr2 gene is
composed of six exons (1353, 155, 122, 159, 62 and 1035bp), and five introns
(920, 643, 602, 85 and 2036bp). This exon/intron organization is very similar to 
that of Tbr1. We also analyzed the 3.9kb sequence of the 5' promoter region
flanking the Tbr2 gene and the corresponding region of the Tbr1 gene. The sites
for Brn-2 and Tst-1 were found in the promoter of Tbr2 but not Tbr1. On the
contrary, there were eight HNF-3beta binding sites in the Tbr1 gene promoter but 
only three in the Tbr2 promoter. The differential presence of putative binding
sites for these brain-specific transcription factors may explain the reciprocal
expression of Tbr1 and Tbr2. Furthermore, a single chromosomal locus for mouse
Tbr2 was assigned to 9F3 by fluorescence in-situ hybridization 1.

PMID: 10974533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Comp Neurol. 2000 Aug 28;424(3):409-38.

Pallial and subpallial derivatives in the embryonic chick and mouse
telencephalon, traced by the expression of the genes Dlx-2, Emx-1, Nkx-2.1,
Pax-6, and Tbr-1.

Puelles L(1), Kuwana E, Puelles E, Bulfone A, Shimamura K, Keleher J, Smiga S,
Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphological Sciences, Medical School, University of Murcia,
E30100 Murcia, Spain. puelles@fcu.um.es

Pallial and subpallial morphological subdivisions of the developing chicken
telencephalon were examined by means of gene markers, compared with their
expression pattern in the mouse. Nested expression domains of the genes Dlx-2 and
Nkx-2.1, plus Pax-6-expressing migrated cells, are characteristic for the mouse
subpallium. The genes Pax-6, Tbr-1, and Emx-1 are expressed in the pallium. The
pallio-subpallial boundary lies at the interface between the Tbr-1 and Dlx-2
expression domains. Differences in the expression topography of Tbr-1 and Emx-1
suggest the existence of a novel "ventral pallium" subdivision, which is an
Emx-1-negative pallial territory intercalated between the striatum and the
lateral pallium. Its derivatives in the mouse belong to the claustroamygdaloid
complex. Chicken genes homologous to these mouse genes are expressed in
topologically comparable patterns during development. The avian subpallium,
called "paleostriatum," shows nested Dlx-2 and Nkx-2.1 domains and migrated
Pax-6-positive neurons; the avian pallium expresses Pax-6, Tbr-1, and Emx-1 and
also contains a distinct Emx-1-negative ventral pallium, formed by the massive
domain confusingly called "neostriatum." These expression patterns extend into
the septum and the archistriatum, as they do into the mouse septum and amygdala, 
suggesting that the concepts of pallium and subpallium can be extended to these
areas. The similarity of such molecular profiles in the mouse and chicken pallium
and subpallium points to common sets of causal determinants. These may underlie
similar histogenetic specification processes and field homologies, including some
comparable connectivity patterns.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10906711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Nature. 2000 Mar 16;404(6775):298-302.

Nuclear translocation and transcription regulation by the membrane-associated
guanylate kinase CASK/LIN-2.

Hsueh YP(1), Wang TF, Yang FC, Sheng M.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Neurobiology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston 02114, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature 2002 May 9;417(6885):205.

Comment in
    Nature. 2000 Mar 16;404(6775):241-2.

Membrane-associated guanylate kinases (MAGUKs) contain multiple protein-binding
domains that allow them to assemble specific multiprotein complexes in particular
regions of the cell. CASK/LIN-2, a MAGUK required for EGF receptor localization
and signalling in Caenorhabditis elegans, contains a calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase-like domain followed by PDZ, SH3 and guanylate kinase-like domains. In
adult rat brain, CASK is concentrated at neuronal synapses and binds to the
cell-surface proteins neurexin and syndecan and the cytoplasmic proteins
Mint/LIN-10 and Veli/LIN-7. Here we report that, through its guanylate kinase
domain, CASK interacts with Tbr-1, a T-box transcription factor that is involved 
in forebrain development. CASK enters the nucleus and binds to a specific DNA
sequence (the T-element) in a complex with Tbr-1. CASK acts as a coactivator of
Tbr-1 to induce transcription of T-element containing genes, including reelin, a 
gene that is essential for cerebrocortical development. Our findings show that a 
MAGUK which is usually associated with cell junctions has a transcription
regulation function.

PMID: 10749215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Nature. 2000 Mar 16;404(6775):241-2.

Cell biology. Reeling CASK into the nucleus.

Bredt DS.

Comment on
    Nature. 2000 Mar 16;404(6775):298-302.

PMID: 10749196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Public Health Manag Pract. 1999 Jul;5(4):1-6.

Geographic Information Systems (GIS) for state and local public health
practitioners, Part 2.

Richards TB(1), Croner CM, Novick LF.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Practice Program Office, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30341-3724, USA. tbr1@cdc.gov

PMID: 10538410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Cereb Cortex. 1999 Sep;9(6):524-32.

Genetic control of cortical regionalization and connectivity.

Rubenstein JL(1), Anderson S, Shi L, Miyashita-Lin E, Bulfone A, Hevner R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, University
of California at San Francisco, 94143-0984, USA. jlrr@cgl.ucsf.edu

Herein, the genetic control of regionalization and connectivity of the neocortex 
are reviewed. Evidence is accumulating which suggests that intrinsic mechanisms
have a central role in controlling cortical regional specification and
differentiation. Expression patterns of several genes (Id-2, Tbr-1, cadherin-6,
cadherin-8, neuropilin-2, Wnt-7b, Eph-A7 and RZR-beta) are described; the
expressions of these genes have regional boundaries which demarcate distinct
functional areas of the cerebral cortex in neonatal mice.

PMID: 10498270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mech Dev. 1999 Jun;84(1-2):133-8.

Expression pattern of the Tbr2 (Eomesodermin) gene during mouse and chick brain
development.

Bulfone A(1), Martinez S, Marigo V, Campanella M, Basile A, Quaderi N, Gattuso C,
Rubenstein JL, Ballabio A.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), San Raffaele Biomedical
Science Park, Milan, Italy. bulfone@tigem.it

The members of the T-box gene family share a highly conserved DNA binding domain 
named the T-domain, and important developmental functions. Here we report the
cloning of chicken Tbr1 and of murine and chicken Tbr2 (orthologs of the Xenopus 
eomesodermin gene), the mapping of the murine Tbr2 to chromosome 9, and their
pattern of expression during mouse and chick embryogenesis. Both Tbr 1 and 2 have
a restricted and conserved domain of expression in the telencephalic pallium of
the two species. Chick Tbr2 has a specific and dynamic expression in the
gastrulating embryo.

PMID: 10473127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 1999 Jun 2;115(2):183-93.

A novel mammalian T-box-containing gene, Tbr2, expressed in mouse developing
brain.

Kimura N(1), Nakashima K, Ueno M, Kiyama H, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, 2-3-10 Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo
101-0062, Japan.

We have identified and characterized a new member of the mammalian brain-specific
T-box gene family, Tbr2, which is closely related to mouse Tbr1, and to the
Xenopus earliest mesodermal gene, Eomesodermin. As Tbr1, Tbr2 is predominantly
expressed in some regions of the developing brain, but in a strikingly
complementary manner. On embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5), Tbr2 mRNA expression was
observed in the mesencephalon and rhombencephalon in contrast to Tbr1 which was
expressed mostly in the telencephalon. At this stage, Tbr2 mRNA was readily
detectable in the postmitotic and differentiating neurons located in various
brain regions, i.e., oculomotor, red, trigeminal, vestibular, facial, and
hypoglossal nuclei. However, expression of Tbr2 in these nuclei became
undetectable on E18.5. In contrast, Tbr2 mRNA expression was detected in the
hippocampus only from E18.5 onwards. Whereas Tbr2 expression disappeared in most 
parts of the mature adult brain, it remained detectable in the hippocampus and
olfactory bulb, regions where some neuronal precursors retain their
differentiation potential. These results suggest that Tbr2 may play a crucial
role in differentiating neurons rather than in proliferating or already
differentiated neurons. In addition, similarly to Xenopus Eomesodermin, mouse
Tbr2 showed biphasic expression; a first peak around E6.5 and a second peak
around E14.5, suggesting that Tbr2 may also be important at early stages of
gastrulation.

Copyright 1999 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 10407135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mech Dev. 1999 Mar;81(1-2):205-8.

Mapping and expression analysis of the mouse ortholog of Xenopus Eomesodermin.

Hancock SN(1), Agulnik SI, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, 701 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The T-box gene family has been conserved throughout metazoan evolution. The genes
code for putative transcription factors which share a uniquely defining DNA
binding domain, known as the T-box ([Bollag et al., 1994]). They are implicated
in the control of diverse developmental processes by their highly specific
expression patterns throughout gastrulation and organogenesis in mouse and other 
species ([Chapman et al., 1996]) ([Gibson-Brown et al., 1998]), and by mutations 
in T-box genes that have profound developmental effects ([Papaioannou, 1997];
[Chapman and Papaioannou, 1998]; [Papaioannou and Silver, 1998]). In this report,
we describe the mapping and expression pattern of the mouse ortholog of a gene,
Eomesodermin, first identified in Xenopus ([Ryan et al., 1996]). The mouse gene
was previously reported ([Wattler et al., 1998]) under the name MmEomes. The gene
maps to mouse chromosome 9 in a region syntenic with human chromosome 3p. Mouse
eomesodermin is expressed in the trophoblast of the blastocyst and in its
derivative, the chorionic ectoderm. At gastrulation, eomesodermin is expressed in
the primitive streak and embryonic mesoderm as well, but this expression
disappears prior to the end of gastrulation. Later, eomesodermin is expressed in 
the developing forebrain, in a pattern largely overlapping a closely related
T-box gene, Tbr1 ([Bulfone et al., 1995]), and is also seen in a localized area
of each limb.

PMID: 10330501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Mech Dev. 1999 Feb;80(2):219-21.

Spatially and temporally-restricted expression of two T-box genes during
zebrafish embryogenesis.

Yonei-Tamura S(1), Tamura K, Tsukui T, Izpisúa Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Gene Expression Laboratory, 10010
N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037-1099, USA.

T-box genes are conserved in all animal species. We have identified two members
of the T-box gene family from the zebrafish, Danio rerio. Zf-tbr1 and zf-tbx3
share high amino acid identity with human, murine, chick and Xenopus orthologs
and are expressed in specific regions during zebrafish development.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 10072792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Genomics. 1999 Jan 1;55(1):10-20.

Identification, mapping, and phylogenomic analysis of four new human members of
the T-box gene family: EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19.

Yi CH(1), Terrett JA, Li QY, Ellington K, Packham EA, Armstrong-Buisseret L,
McClure P, Slingsby T, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Nottingham, Queen's
Medical Centre, Nottingham, NG7 2UH.

Brachyury(T) is a mouse mutation, first described over 70 years ago, that causes 
defects in mesoderm formation. Recently several related genes, the T-box gene
family, that encode a similar N-terminal DNA binding domain, the T-box, and that 
play critical roles in human embryonic development have been identified. It has
been shown that human TBX5 and TBX3, if mutated, cause developmental disorders,
Holt-Oram syndrome (OMIM 142900) and ulnar-mammary syndrome (OMIM 181450),
respectively. We have identified four new human members of the T-box gene family,
EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19, and these genes have been mapped to different
chromosomal regions by radiation hybrid mapping. The four T-box genes were
classified into four different subfamilies and have also been subjected to
phylogenomic analysis. Human EOMES maps at 3p21.3-p21.2. This Tbr1-subfamily gene
is likely to play a significant role in early embryogenesis similar to that
described for Xenopus eomesodermin. Human TBX6 maps at 16p12-q12. This
Tbx6-subfamily gene is likely to participate in paraxial mesoderm formation and
somitogenesis in human embryo. TBX18 is a novel member of the Tbx1 subfamily that
maps at 6q14-q15. Two subgroups, TBX1/10 and TBX15/18 subgroups, could be
distinguished within the Tbx1 subfamily. TBX19 is an orthologue of chick TbxT and
maps at 1q23-q24. The genomic organization of TBX19 is highly similar to that of 
human T(Brachyury), another human member of the same subfamily.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9888994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Genetics. 1996 Sep;144(1):249-54.

Evolution of mouse T-box genes by tandem duplication and cluster dispersion.

Agulnik SI(1), Garvey N, Hancock S, Ruvinsky I, Chapman DL, Agulnik I, Bollag R, 
Papaioannou V, Silver LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, New Jersey 08544-1014, 
USA.

The T-box genes comprise an ancient family of putative transcription factors
conserved across species as divergent as Mus musculus and Caenorhabditis elegans.
All T-box gene products are characterized by a novel 174-186-amino acid DNA
binding domain called the T-box that was first discovered in the polypeptide
products of the mouse T locus and the Drosophila melanogaster optomotor-blind
gene. Earlier studies allowed the identification of five mouse T-box genes, T,
Tbx1-3, and Tbr1, that all map to different chromosomal locations and are
expressed in unique temporal and spatial patterns during embryogenesis. Here, we 
report the discovery of three new members of the mouse T-box gene family, named
Tbx4, Tbx5, and Tbx6. Two of these newly discovered genes, Tbx4 and Tbx5, were
found to be tightly linked to previously identified T-box genes. Combined results
from phylogenetic, linkage, and physical mapping studies provide a picture for
the evolution of a T-box subfamily by unequal crossing over to form a two-gene
cluster that was duplicated and dispersed to two chromosomal locations. This
analysis suggests that Tbx4 and Tbx5 are cognate genes that diverged apart from a
common ancestral gene during early vertebrate evolution.

PMCID: PMC1207498
PMID: 8878690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Transplantation. 1986 Oct;42(4):429-33.

Serological confirmation in Ia mutant B6.C-H-2bm12 of gene conversion.

David CS, McCormick JF, Lafuse WP, Hirose S.

Recently it has been suggested that a short segment of the DNA sequence of the Ia
beta gene in the mutant B6.C-H-2bm12 (bm12) is derived from the Eb beta gene by a
gene-conversion-like mechanism, and that the same segment is also seen in the Ek 
beta gene. To obtain serological evidence for this idea, we produced an antibody 
against the "new" determinant on the I-Abm12 molecule by immunizing A.BY mice
with bm12 cells. After absorption with B6 lymphocytes to remove antibodies
against background antigens, the antisera lysed bm12 cells. Typical Ia peaks were
obtained by immunoprecipitation. The absorbed antiserum reacted with B10.A (Ek
beta), B10.A(5R) (Eb beta) and B10.S(9R) (Es beta), but not B10. The unabsorbed
antiserum is specific for Ia when tested on A background mice. The antiserum
lysed spleen cells of Ik strains (A/Sn, A.AL, A.TBR1, and A.TFR1) but not Ak
strain, A.TBR13 (KsAkEbSbDb), confirming the presence of antibodies against the
I-Ek molecule. This anti-serum also lysed the cells from (A.BY X A.TFR5)F1, which
expresses the transcomplementing Eb beta Ek alpha molecule and from the (A.SW X
A.TFR5)F1 which expresses the transcomplementing Es beta Ek alpha molecule. These
data are consistent with DNA sequence analyses, and show the existence of a
determinant (Ia.51) generated in the bm12 mutant by a gene-conversion-like event 
that is also present in the I-Ek, I-Eb, and I-Es beta polypeptide chains.

PMID: 2429412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


