
1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jul;100(7):2557-64. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-1606. Epub
2015 May 5.

Cyclin E-Mediated Human Proopiomelanocortin Regulation as a Therapeutic Target
for Cushing Disease.

Liu NA(1), Araki T(1), Cuevas-Ramos D(1), Hong J(1), Ben-Shlomo A(1), Tone Y(1), 
Tone M(1), Melmed S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California
90048.

CONTEXT: Cushing disease, due to pituitary corticotroph tumor ACTH
hypersecretion, drives excess adrenal cortisol production with adverse morbidity 
and mortality. Loss of glucocorticoid negative feedback on the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis leads to autonomous transcription of the
corticotroph precursor hormone proopiomelanocortin (POMC), consequent ACTH
overproduction, and adrenal hypercortisolism. We previously reported that
R-roscovitine (CYC202, seliciclib), a 2,6,9-trisubstituted purine analog,
suppresses cyclin-dependent-kinase 2/cyclin E and inhibits ACTH in mice and
zebrafish. We hypothesized that intrapituitary cyclin E signaling regulates
corticotroph tumor POMC transcription independently of cell cycle progression.
The aim was to investigate whether R-roscovitine inhibits human ACTH in
corticotroph tumors by targeting the cyclin-dependent kinase 2/cyclin E signaling
pathway.
METHODS: Primary cell cultures of surgically resected human corticotroph tumors
were treated with or without R-roscovitine, ACTH measured by RIA and quantitative
PCR, and/or Western blot analysis performed to investigate ACTH and
lineage-specific transcription factors. Cyclin E and E2F transcription factor 1
(E2F1) small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection was performed in murine
corticotroph tumor AtT20 cells to elucidate mechanisms for drug action. POMC gene
promoter activity in response to R-roscovitine treatment was analyzed using
luciferase reporter and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
RESULTS: R-roscovitine inhibits human corticotroph tumor POMC and Tpit/Tbx19
transcription with decreased ACTH expression. Cyclin E and E2F1 exhibit
reciprocal positive regulation in corticotroph tumors. R-roscovitine disrupts
E2F1 binding to the POMC gene promoter and suppresses Tpit/Tbx19 and other
lineage-specific POMC transcription cofactors via E2F1-dependent and -independent
pathways.
CONCLUSION: R-roscovitine inhibits human pituitary corticotroph tumor ACTH by
targeting the cyclin E/E2F1 pathway. Pituitary cyclin E/E2F1 signaling is a
previously unappreciated molecular mechanism underlying neuroendocrine regulation
of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, providing a subcellular therapeutic
target for small molecule cyclin-dependent kinase 2 inhibitors of pituitary
ACTH-dependent hypercortisolism, ie, Cushing disease.

PMID: 25942479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Feb;29(2):187-99. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1176. Epub 2014 Dec
9.

Dmrt5 controls corticotrope and gonadotrope differentiation in the zebrafish
pituitary.

Graf M(1), Teo Qi-Wen ER, Sarusie MV, Rajaei F, Winkler C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Centre for Bioimaging Sciences, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 117543.

Dmrt transcription factors control sex determination or sex-specific
differentiation across all invertebrate and vertebrate species, in which they
have been studied so far. In addition to important functions in the reproductive 
system, also nongonadal roles have been assigned to several dmrt family members. 
One example is dmrt5, which was shown to guide neurogenesis in the forebrain of
some vertebrates including fish. Here we show that in zebrafish, dmrt5 is also
expressed adjacent to the pituitary anlage and later in the anterior pars
distalis in which it organizes differentiation of endocrine cells. We find that
pituitary induction, cell survival, proliferation, and early lineage
specification in the pituitary is independent of dmrt5. Instead, dmrt5 is
required for terminal differentiation of corticotropes and gonadotropes. Gene
knockdown and mutant analysis revealed that dmrt5 promotes corticotrope
differentiation via tbx19 expression, whereas it prevents gonadotrope
differentiation in the anterior pars distalis. In dmrt5 morphants and mutants,
reduced corticotrope numbers may result in irregular positioning and reduced
maintenance of lactotropes. In conclusion, our study establishes a novel function
for dmrt5 for cell differentiation in the anterior pituitary. Intriguingly, its
effect on gonadotrope numbers defines a first nongonadal role for a dmrt family
member that appears crucial for the activity of the reproductive system.

PMID: 25489906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2013 Jun;68(6):887-91. doi: 10.6061/clinics/2013(06)26.

PROP1 overexpression in corticotrophinomas: evidence for the role of PROP1 in the
maintenance of cells committed to corticotrophic differentiation.

Araujo RV(1), Chang CV, Cescato VA, Fragoso MC, Bronstein MD, Mendonca BB,
Arnhold IJ, Carvalho LR.

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, Laboratório de Hormônios e
Genética Molecular - LIM/42, Divisão de Endocrinologia, São Paulo/SP, Brazil.
araujorv@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: The expression of transcription factors involved in early pituitary
development, such as PROP1 and POU1F1, has been detected in pituitary adenoma
tissues. In this study, we sought to characterize the transcriptional profiles of
PROP1, POU1F1, and TBX19 in functioning and nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas in 
an attempt to identify their roles in tumorigenesis and hormone hypersecretion.
METHODS: RT-qPCR analyses were performed to assess the transcriptional pattern of
PROP1, POU1F1, TBX19, and hormone-producing genes in tissue samples of
corticotrophinomas (n=10), somatotrophinomas (n=8), and nonfunctioning adenomas
(n=6).
RESULTS: Compared with normal pituitary tissue, POU1F1 was overexpressed in
somatotrophinomas by 3-fold. PROP1 expression was 18-fold higher in
corticotrophinomas, 10-fold higher in somatotrophinomas, and 3-fold higher in
nonfunctioning adenomas. TBX19 expression was 27-fold higher in
corticotrophinomas. Additionally, the level of TBX19 mRNA positively correlated
with that of pro-opiomelanocortin (r=0.49, p=0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that PROP1 is overexpressed in pituitary
adenomas, mainly in corticotrophinomas. Together with previously published data
showing that patients who harbor PROP1 loss-of-function mutations present a
progressive decline in corticotrope function, our results support a role for
PROP1 in pituitary tumor development and in the maintenance of cell lineages
committed to corticotrophic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3674306
PMID: 23778486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Endocrinol. 2012 Dec;215(3):383-91. doi: 10.1530/JOE-12-0393. Epub 2012 Oct 5.

The side population phenomenon enriches for designated adrenocortical progenitor 
cells in mice.

Lichtenauer U(1), Shapiro I, Sackmann S, Drouin J, Scheele J, Maneck M, Klein C, 
Beuschlein F.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der
Universität München, Ziemssenstraße 1, D-80336 Munich, Germany.

Somatic adrenal stem cells are believed to reside in the periphery of the adrenal
cortex throughout life for organ maintenance. Herein, we used the side population
(SP) phenomenon to enrich for these progenitors, which made up to 0.01-0.64% of
the total cell count. Microarray analysis revealed an expression profile of SP
cells, which clearly differed from that of non-SP cells. However, a promising
adrenal specific stem cell marker could not be identified. In vitro, SP cells
could be maintained in long-term culture, whereas non-SP cells did not
proliferate. After 4 weeks of culturing, immunohistochemistry revealed the
expression of steroidogenic enzymes such as 3ß-HSD, StAR, and P450SCC, suggesting
spontaneous differentiation. Interestingly, the quantity of SP cells was
significantly diminished in Pbx1 haploinsufficient mice, suggesting a stem cell
deficit. By contrast, the subcapsular zone of ACTH-deficient Tpit(-/-) mice was
significantly wider compared with wild-type adrenals (Tpit(-/-) 259±10.7 vs
Tpit(+/-) 100±12.3%; P<0.01). Accordingly, the number of SP cells in these mice
was significantly higher (Tpit(-/-) 0.45±0.16 vs Tpit(+/-) 0.13±0.04%; P<0.004). 
ACTH treatment of these animals reverted the subcapsular zone width and the SP
fraction back to normal (130±10.2%; P=0.33 and 0.09%), providing indirect
evidence for a stem cell 'arrest' in Tpit(-/-) mice and the role of ACTH in
adrenocortical stem cell modulation and differentiation.

PMID: 23042945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Eur J Endocrinol. 2012 Mar;166(3):391-8. doi: 10.1530/EJE-11-1015. Epub 2011 Dec 
22.

Identification of TPIT and other novel autoantigens in lymphocytic hypophysitis: 
immunoscreening of a pituitary cDNA library and development of
immunoprecipitation assays.

Smith CJ(1), Bensing S, Burns C, Robinson PJ, Kasperlik-Zaluska AA, Scott RJ,
Kämpe O, Crock PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Faculty of Health, Locked
Bag 1, Newcastle Mail Centre, John Hunter Children's Hospital, University of
Newcastle, Newcastle 2310, New South Wales, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Lymphocytic hypophysitis is an organ-specific autoimmune disease of
the pituitary gland. A specific and sensitive serological test currently does not
exist to aid in the diagnosis.
OBJECTIVE: To identify target autoantigens in lymphocytic hypophysitis and
develop a diagnostic assay for these proteins.
DESIGN/METHODS: A pituitary cDNA expression library was immunoscreened using sera
from four patients with lymphocytic hypophysitis. Relevant cDNA clones from
screening, along with previously identified autoantigens pituitary gland-specific
factor 1a and 2 (PGSF1a and PGSF2) and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) were tested 
in an in vitro transcription and translation immunoprecipitation assay. The
corticotroph-specific transcription factor, TPIT, was investigated separately as 
a candidate autoantigen.
RESULTS: Significantly positive autoantibody reactivity against TPIT was found in
9/86 hypophysitis patients vs 1/90 controls (P = 0.018). The reactivity against
TPIT was not specific for lymphocytic hypophysitis with autoantibodies detectable
in the sera from patients with other autoimmune endocrine diseases.
Autoantibodies were also detected against chromodomain-helicase-DNA binding
protein 8, presynaptic cytomatrix protein (piccolo), Ca(2+)-dependent secretion
activator, PGSF2 and NSE in serum samples from patients with lymphocytic
hypophysitis, but at a frequency that did not differ from healthy controls.
Importantly, 8/86 patients with lymphocytic hypophysitis had autoantibodies
against any two autoantigens in comparison with 0/90 controls (P = 0.0093).
CONCLUSIONS: TPIT, a corticotroph-specific transcription factor, was identified
as a target autoantigen in 10.5% of patients with lymphocytic hypophysitis.
Further autoantigens related to vesicle processing were also identified as
potential autoantigens with different immunoreactivity patterns in patients and
controls.

PMCID: PMC3290121
PMID: 22193973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Mar;97(3):E486-95. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-1659. Epub 
2011 Dec 14.

Phenotypic homogeneity and genotypic variability in a large series of congenital 
isolated ACTH-deficiency patients with TPIT gene mutations.

Couture C(1), Saveanu A, Barlier A, Carel JC, Fassnacht M, Flück CE, Houang M,
Maes M, Phan-Hug F, Enjalbert A, Drouin J, Brue T, Vallette S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H2L
4M1.

CONTEXT: Congenital isolated ACTH deficiency (IAD) is a rare disease
characterized by low plasma ACTH and cortisol levels and preservation of all
other pituitary hormones. This condition was poorly defined before we identified 
TPIT, a T-box transcription factor with a specific role in differentiation of the
corticotroph lineage in mice and humans, as its principal molecular cause.
OBJECTIVE: We have enlarged our series of IAD patients to better characterize the
phenotype and the genotype of this rare disease.
DESIGN: Each exon of the TPIT gene was amplified and sequenced in IAD patients
without any identified cause. A functional analysis of each new TPIT mutation was
performed.
RESULTS: We described the largest series of 91 IAD patients and identified three 
distinct groups: neonatal onset complete or partial IAD or late onset IAD. We did
not identify any TPIT mutation in patients with partial or late-onset IAD.
However, we found a TPIT mutation in 65% of patients with neonatal-onset complete
IAD. These patients are homozygous or compound heterozygous for TPIT mutations,
and their parents are healthy heterozygous carriers. We identified nine new
mutations: four missense, one one-nucleotide deletion, three splice-site
mutations, and one large deletion. TPIT mutations lead to loss of function by
different mechanisms, such as non-sense-mediated mRNA decay, abnormal mRNA
splicing, loss of TPIT DNA binding or protein-protein interaction defects.
CONCLUSION: TPIT mutations are responsible for two thirds of neonatal-onset
complete IAD but can not be detected in partial or late-onset IAD.

PMID: 22170728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Sep;96(9):2670-4. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-0129. Epub
2011 Jul 13.

Severe cortisol deficiency associated with reversible growth hormone deficiency
in two infants: what is the link?

McEachern R(1), Drouin J, Metherell L, Huot C, Van Vliet G, Deal C.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Service and Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine and University of Montréal, Montréal,
Québec, Canada.

CONTEXT: Hypoglycemia is potentially life-threatening, especially in infants, and
can be due to congenital cortisol and/or GH deficiency (GHD).
CASE ILLUSTRATION: Two full-term infants had undetectable cortisol levels, but
also low GH levels, at the time of severe hypoglycemia. GHD persisted for several
months, even after cortisol replacement.
METHODS: Targeted molecular investigations were performed and revealed homozygous
inactivating mutations in MRAP (MIM ID 609196) in patient 1 and in TPIT (MIM ID
604614) in patient 2. Because GHD is not part of the MRAP or TPIT phenotypes, we 
performed GH stimulation tests. These revealed that GHD had resolved by 8 months 
(patient 1) and 3 yr (patient 2) of glucocorticoid replacement. GH replacement
was therefore stopped, hypoglycemia did not recur, and over the subsequent 10 yr,
growth and puberty have proceeded normally.
CONCLUSIONS: 1) Physiological glucocorticoid levels appear to be required for the
development and function of the somatotrophs during infancy. 2) Eucortisolism,
like euthyroidism, is required for the proper evaluation of GH secretory
capacity. 3) The metabolic effect of GH replacement is essential for the
maintenance of normoglycemia, especially in infants. And 4) targeted molecular
investigations are a powerful tool to clarify the diagnosis in severely ill
infants and to reevaluate the specific treatment they need.

PMID: 21752888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 15;286(28):25387-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.202788. Epub
2011 May 26.

The Ets factor Etv1 interacts with Tpit protein for pituitary
pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gene transcription.

Budry L(1), Couture C, Balsalobre A, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, Montréal, Quebec H2W 1R7, Canada.

Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) is expressed in two lineages of the pituitary, the
anterior lobe corticotrophs and the intermediate lobe melanotrophs. POMC
expression in these two lineages is highly dependent on the cell-restricted
transcription factor Tpit. As Tpit intervenes relatively late in differentiation 
of those lineages, we have been searching for other transcription factors that
may participate in their gene expression program. On the basis of similarity with
the Tpit expression profile, we identified Ets variant gene 1 (Etv1/Er81) as a
putative POMC transcription factor. Using Etv1-lacZ knockin mice, we describe
preferential Etv1 expression in pituitary POMC cells and also in posterior lobe
pituicytes. We further show that Etv1 enhances POMC transcription on its own and 
in synergy with Tpit. The Ets-binding site located within the Tpit/Pitx
regulatory element is necessary for Etv1 activity in POMC-expressing AtT-20 cells
but dispensable for synergy with Tpit. Etv1 and Tpit interact together in
coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Furthermore, Etv1 is present at the POMC
promoter, and siRNA-mediated knockdown of Etv1 in AtT-20 cells produces a
significant decrease in POMC expression. Etv1 knockout pituitaries show normal
POMC cell distribution and normal POMC mRNA abundance, suggesting compensation by
other factors. The coordinate expression of Etv1 with POMC cell differentiation
and its interaction with the highly cell-restricted Tpit factor indicate that
Etv1 participates in a combinatorial code for pituitary cell-specific gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3137109
PMID: 21622576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Endocrinology. 2011 Mar;152(3):989-1000. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1021. Epub 2011 Jan
14.

Changes in gene expression during pituitary morphogenesis and organogenesis in
the chick embryo.

Proszkowiec-Weglarz M(1), Higgins SE, Porter TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland 20742, USA.

The anterior pituitary gland plays an important role in the regulation of many
physiological processes. Formation of Rathke's pouch (RP), the precursor of the
anterior pituitary, involves evagination of the oral ectoderm in a multi-step
process regulated by cell interactions, signaling pathways, and transcription
factors. Chickens are an excellent model to study development because of the
availability of large sample sizes, accurate timing of development, and embryo
accessibility. The aim of this study was to quantify mRNA expression patterns in 
the developing chicken anterior pituitary to evaluate the chicken embryo as a
model for mammalian pituitary development. The expression profiles of 16 genes
differentially expressed in RP and neuroectoderm were determined in this study.
Among these, Pitx1, Pitx2, and Hesx1 mRNA levels were high on embryonic days (e) 
2.5 to e3 in RP and decreased during development. Expression of Pit1 and Tbx19
mRNA in RP reached the highest levels by e7 and e6.5, respectively. Levels of
glycoprotein subunit a mRNA increased beginning at e4. FGF8 mRNA showed the
highest expression at e3 to e3.5 in neuroectoderm. BMP2 showed slight decreases
in mRNA expression in both tissues during development, while Isl1 and Noggin mRNA
expression increased in later development. Taken together, we present the first
quantitative transcriptional profile of pituitary organogenesis. Our results will
help further understanding of the functional development of this gland. Moreover,
because of the high similarity in gene expression patterns observed between
chicken and mouse, chickens could serve as an excellent model to study genetic
and molecular mechanisms underlying pituitary development.

PMID: 21239434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Feb;25(2):348-59. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0422. Epub 2010 Dec
30.

A pituitary-specific enhancer of the POMC gene with preferential activity in
corticotrope cells.

Langlais D(1), Couture C, Sylvain-Drolet G, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, QC, H2W 1R7, Canada.

Cell-specific expression of the pituitary proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene depends
on the combination of tissue- and cell-restricted transcription factors such as
Pitx1 and Tpit. These factors act on the proximal POMC promoter together with
transcription factors that integrate inputs from signaling pathways. We now
report the identification of an upstream enhancer in the POMC locus that is
targeted by the same subset of transcription factors, except Pitx1. This enhancer
located at -7 kb in the mouse POMC gene is highly dependent on Tpit for activity.
Whereas Tpit requires Pitx1 for action on the promoter, it acts on the -7-kb
enhancer as homodimers binding to a palindromic Tpit response element (TpitRE).
Both half-sites of the TpitRE palindrome and Tpit homodimerization are required
for activity. In vivo, the enhancer exhibits preferential activity in
corticotrope cells of the anterior lobe whereas the promoter exhibits preference 
for intermediate lobe melanotropes. The enhancer is conserved among different
species with the TpitRE palindrome localized at the center of conserved
sequences. However, the mouse and human -7-kb enhancers do not exhibit
conservation of hormone responsiveness and may differ in their relative
importance for POMC expression. In summary, pituitary expression of the POMC gene
relies on an upstream enhancer that complements the activity of the proximal
promoter with Tpit as the major regulator of both regulatory regions.

PMID: 21193556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Front Horm Res. 2010;38:15-24. doi: 10.1159/000318490. Epub 2010 Jul 5.

Stem cells, differentiation and cell cycle control in pituitary.

Drouin J(1), Bilodeau S, Roussel-Gervais A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Montréal, QC, Canada.
jacques.drouin@ircm.qc.ca

As model of organogenesis, the pituitary gland is a relatively simple tissue;
yet, we understand little of the mechanisms that determine organ size, cell
number and allocation of cells to different lineages. While the discovery of
cell-restricted transcription factors has led to significant insight into the
mechanisms controlling differentiation and cell-specific gene expression, we
still need to integrate these processes with control of organ development. The
identification of pituitary stem cells has suggested mechanisms for maintenance
of adult pituitary but these findings again highlight the crucial role of cell
cycle control for determination of progenitor and differentiated cell numbers. We
recently described the mechanisms for progenitor cell cycle exit in early
pituitary development that critically depend on the cell cycle inhibitor p57Kip2.
It appears that cell cycle control is independent of differentiation, indicating 
that separate regulatory mechanisms must be involved in each process. The role of
p57Kip2 appears to be restricted to progenitor cell cycle exit and it is rather
the related p27Kip1 that prevents re-entry into the cycle of differentiated
cells. While these data revealed a new transient intermediate between progenitors
and differentiated cells, they also raised new questions and suggested that
separate signals may control differentiation and cell cycle.

Copyright (c) 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20616491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010 Jul;163(1):35-43. doi: 10.1530/EJE-10-0076. Epub 2010 Apr 
12.

Clinical, hormonal and molecular characterization of pituitary ACTH adenomas
without (silent corticotroph adenomas) and with Cushing's disease.

Raverot G(1), Wierinckx A, Jouanneau E, Auger C, Borson-Chazot F, Lachuer J,
Pugeat M, Trouillas J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U842, Lyon F-69372 France. gerald.raverot@chu-lyon.fr

OBJECTIVE: Silent corticotroph adenomas (SCAs) are rare pituitary tumours
immunoreactive for ACTH, but without clinical evidence of Cushing's disease. We
characterized SCAs based on clinical, hormonal and molecular data, and compared
the characteristics of these tumours with those of macro (MCA)- and micro
(mCA)-ACTH adenomas with Cushing's disease.
METHODS: Fifty ACTH adenomas (14 SCAs, 15 MCAs and 21 mCAs) with complete
corresponding clinical, radiological and biochemical data were selected.
Histological corticotroph differentiation; immunostaining for ACTH,
beta-endorphin and beta-LPH; and mRNA expression levels of TPIT, POMC, GRalpha,
prohormone convertase 1/3 (PC1/3) and galectin-3 were compared in 21
representative tumours.
RESULTS: Despite the absence of clinical hypercortisolism in patients with SCA,
elevated plasma ACTH levels that were similar to those associated with mCA were
observed. The cortisol/ACTH ratio was similar between SCA and MCA groups and
lower than that found with mCA (P<0.05). This dissociation could be explained by 
lower expression of PC1/3 in SCA and MCA than in mCA (P<0.05). After an i.v.
dexamethasone suppression test, ACTH levels were significantly higher in patients
with MCA than in those with mCA (P<0.05). Cytological and immunocytochemical
analyses as well as mRNA expression levels of TPIT, POMC and GRalpha confirmed
corticotroph differentiation in both mCAs and MCAs and in half of the SCAs, with 
a strong correlation between TPIT and POMC mRNA expression levels in SCAs
(R(2)=0.72; P<0.01) and in MCAs (R(2)=0.65; P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the absence of hypercortisolism, SCAs exhibit histological, 
biochemical and molecular corticotroph differentiation. SCA and MCA show hormonal
and molecular similarities differentiating them from mCA.

PMID: 20385723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Prilozi. 2009 Dec;30(2):33-55.

Growth hormone deficiency (GHD) and small for gestational age (SGA): genetic
alterations.

Jancevska A, Gucev ZS, Tasic V, Pop-Jordanova N.

Short stature associated with GH deficiency has been estimated to occur in about 
1 in 4000 to 1 in 10,000 in various studies. In the last decade new genetic
defects have been described in all the levels of the growth hormone-releasing
hormone (GH-RH)-GH-IGF (insulin-like growth factor) axis. Genetic defects in the 
GHRH and in various parts of the Insulin-like growth factor system have been
demonstrated. Genetic defects causing isolated GH deficiency (GHD), as well as
multiple pituitary hormonal deficiencies have been analysed in detail. Signalling
molecules and transcription factors leading to the development of the pituitary
gland have been discovered and their function recognized. In animal models and in
humans the importance of the transcription factors HESX1, PROP1, POU1F1, LHX3,
LHX4, TBX19, SOX2 and SOX3 has been extensively studied. Genetic alterations of
those transcription factors dictate the highly variable phenotype: from isolated 
hypopituitarism to multiple pituitary hormonal deficiencies with or without
malformations (e.g. septo-optic dysplasia or holoprosencephaly). Small for
gestational age (SGA) children are increasingly recognized to be a heterogeneous 
group in which new mechanisms of growth retardation and metabolic disturbances
have been proposed. Since SGA is considered to be the main reason for the short
stature in 10% of short adults this is a large group with a great potential for
novel insights into mechanisms of growth and metabolic disturbances. A group of
signalling proteins are involved in prenatal (SGA) growth retardation: IRS-1,
PDK1, AKT1, and S6K1. In addition, an attractive modern theory supposes that a
disturbed mother-placenta-foetus relation results in the activation of the
so-called "thrifty phenotype" of which the IGF system is a vital part. The
mechanisms assure short-term postnatal survival in conditions of deficient
nutritional supply. However, as a consequence, the abundant postnatal nutritional
supply and the "thrifty phenotype" result in increased adult risk of metabolic
syndrome, diabetes mellitus type 2 (DM2) and cardiovascular disease. The
manuscript reviews in brief genetic alterations in humans leading to growth
hormone deficiency (GHD), multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies (MPHD) and SGA.

PMID: 20087248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 Jul 8;323(1):4-19. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2009.12.012. Epub
2009 Dec 16.

Molecular mechanisms of pituitary organogenesis: In search of novel regulatory
genes.

Davis SW(1), Castinetti F, Carvalho LR, Ellsworth BS, Potok MA, Lyons RH,
Brinkmeier ML, Raetzman LT, Carninci P, Mortensen AH, Hayashizaki Y, Arnhold IJ, 
Mendonça BB, Brue T, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 41809-5618, USA.

Defects in pituitary gland organogenesis are sometimes associated with congenital
anomalies that affect head development. Lesions in transcription factors and
signaling pathways explain some of these developmental syndromes. Basic research 
studies, including the characterization of genetically engineered mice, provide a
mechanistic framework for understanding how mutations create the clinical
characteristics observed in patients. Defects in BMP, WNT, Notch, and FGF
signaling pathways affect induction and growth of the pituitary primordium and
other organ systems partly by altering the balance between signaling pathways.
The PITX and LHX transcription factor families influence pituitary and head
development and are clinically relevant. A few later-acting transcription factors
have pituitary-specific effects, including PROP1, POU1F1 (PIT1), and TPIT
(TBX19), while others, such as NeuroD1 and NR5A1 (SF1), are syndromic,
influencing development of other endocrine organs. We conducted a survey of genes
transcribed in developing mouse pituitary to find candidates for cases of
pituitary hormone deficiency of unknown etiology. We identified numerous
transcription factors that are members of gene families with roles in syndromic
or non-syndromic pituitary hormone deficiency. This collection is a rich source
for future basic and clinical studies.

PMCID: PMC2909473
PMID: 20025935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Apr;29(7):1895-908. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01885-08. Epub 2009 Jan 
12.

Distinct developmental roles of cell cycle inhibitors p57Kip2 and p27Kip1
distinguish pituitary progenitor cell cycle exit from cell cycle reentry of
differentiated cells.

Bilodeau S(1), Roussel-Gervais A, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

Patterning and differentiation signals are often believed to drive the
developmental program, including cell cycle exit of proliferating progenitors.
Taking advantage of the spatial and temporal separation of proliferating and
differentiated cells within the developing anterior pituitary gland, we
investigated the control of cell proliferation during organogenesis. Thus, we
identified a population of noncycling precursors that are uniquely marked by
expression of the cell cycle inhibitor p57(Kip2) and by cyclin E. In p57(Kip2-/-)
mice, the developing pituitary is hyperplastic due to accumulation of
proliferating progenitors, whereas overexpression of p57(Kip2) leads to
hypoplasia. p57(Kip2)-dependent cell cycle exit is not required for
differentiation, and conversely, blockade of cell differentiation, as achieved in
Tpit(-/-) pituitaries, does not prevent cell cycle exit but rather leads to
accumulation of p57(Kip2)-positive precursors. Upon differentiation, p57(Kip2) is
replaced by p27(Kip1). Accordingly, proliferating differentiated cells are
readily detected in p27(Kip1-/-) pituitaries but not in wild-type or p57(Kip2-/-)
pituitaries. Strikingly, all cells of p57(Kip2-/-);p27(Kip1-/-) pituitaries are
proliferative. Thus, during normal development, progenitor cell cycle exit is
controlled by p57(Kip2) followed by p27(Kip1) in differentiated cells; these
sequential actions, taken together with different pituitary outcomes of their
loss of function, suggest hierarchical controls of the cell cycle that are
independent of differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2655618
PMID: 19139274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Hum Genet. 2008 Jun;123(5):538.

Gene symbol: TBX19. Disease: ACTH deficiency, isolated?

Mueller OT(1), Coovadia A.

Author information: 
(1)All Childrens Hospital, Department of Pathology, 6th St. South, 801, 33071,
Saint Petersburg, USA. muellert@allkids.org

PMID: 20960606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Endocr J. 2007 Dec;54(6):961-8. Epub 2007 Dec 4.

Expression of adrenocorticotropic hormone, prolactin and transcriptional factors 
in clinically nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma.

Kageyama K(1), Ikeda H, Nigawara T, Sakihara S, Suda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hirosaki University Graduate
School of Medicine, Aomori, Japan.

We describe here a case of a clinically nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma, but
with expression of ACTH and PRL. A 42-year-old woman was referred to our
department for further evaluation of pituitary tumor. She had no acromegaloid
features, and no typical Cushingoid features. She had no galactorrhea, and had
regular menses. GH, IGF-I, LH, FSH, TSH, ACTH and cortisol levels in blood were
all within the normal ranges, while PRL levels were mildly elevated. Both ACTH
and cortisol levels were adequately increased in response to CRH, and both were
suppressed by a small dose of dexamethasone. Plasma ACTH and cortisol levels were
decreased at night, suggesting the circadian rhythms for plasma ACTH levels were 
undisturbed. Based on these findings we did not clinically suspect ACTH-producing
tumor, however immunohistochemistry revealed ACTH immunoreactivity in the
pituitary adenoma. Therefore, the tumor was considered a silent corticotroph
adenoma. PRL was co-expressed in a significant subpopulation of
ACTH-immunoreactive tumor cells. Ptx1, Neuro D1, and T pit were densely expressed
and Pit-1 was sparsely expressed in the nuclei of adenoma cells. It is therefore 
possible that a tumor originating in an immature or uncommited adenohypophysial
stem cell may later differentiate into different cell types due to a combination 
of certain specific transcriptional factors.

PMID: 18079591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Eur J Endocrinol. 2007 Dec;157(6):717-24.

Differential gene expression in ACTH -secreting and non-functioning pituitary
tumors.

Tateno T(1), Izumiyama H, Doi M, Yoshimoto T, Shichiri M, Inoshita N, Oyama K,
Yamada S, Hirata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Endocrinology, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University Graduate School, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
ttateno.cme@tmd.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Differential expression of several genes between ACTH-secreting
pituitary tumors causing Cushing' disease (CD), silent corticotroph adenoma
(SCA), and non-functioning pituitary tumors (NFT) was investigated.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We used tissue specimens from 35 pituitary tumors (12 CD, 8
SCA, and 15 NFT). Steady-state mRNA levels of the genes related to
proopiomelanocortin (POMC) transcription, synthesis, processing, and secretion,
such as neurogenic differentiation 1 (NeuroD1), T-box 19 (Tpit), corticotropin
releasing hormone receptor (CRHR), vasopressin receptor 1b (V1bR), prohormone
convertase (PC) 1/3 and PC2, 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11beta-HSD)
type 1 and type 2, glucocorticoid receptor alpha (GRalpha), annexin A1, histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), and BRM/SWI2-related gene 1, were determined by real-time 
RT-PCR.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: POMC and Tpit mRNA levels were greater in CD and SCA than
those in NFT. NeuroD1 mRNA levels were less in CD than those in NFT, but almost
comparable between SCA and NFT. PC1/3 mRNA levels were greater in CD, but less in
SCA than those in NFT. PC2 mRNA levels in CD and SCA were less than those in NFT.
CRHR, V1bR, and 11beta-HSD2 mRNA levels in CD were greater than those in SCA and 
NFT. HDAC2 mRNA levels in CD and SCA were lower than those in NFT. In conclusion,
our study demonstrated that the genes related to transcription, synthesis,
processing, and secretion of POMC are differentially regulated in ACTH-secreting 
pituitary tumors causing CD and SCA compared with those in NFT. This may partly
explain the development of clinically active and inactive CD.

PMID: 18057378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 1;313(1):118-29. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

Mechanisms underlying pituitary hypoplasia and failed cell specification in
Lhx3-deficient mice.

Ellsworth BS(1), Butts DL, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, The University of Michigan, Medical School, 4909
Buhl Bldg., Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0618, USA.

The LIM homeodomain transcription factor, LHX3, is essential for pituitary
development in mouse and man. Lhx3 engineered null mice have profound pituitary
hypoplasia that we find is attributable to an increase in cell death early in
pituitary development. Dying cells are localized to regions of TPIT expression
indicating that cell death may contribute to the severe reduction in
differentiated corticotrope cells and lower expression of the corticotrope
transcription factors, TPIT and NEUROD1. Lhx3 deficiency also results in dorsal
ectopic expression of transcription factors characteristic of gonadotropes, SF1
and ISL1, but no gonadotropin expression. This apparent disturbance of cell
differentiation may be due, in part, to loss of NOTCH2. NOTCH2 is normally
expressed in the pituitary at the boundary between dorsal, proliferating cells
and ventral, differentiating cells and is important for maintaining
dorsal-ventral patterning in other organs. Thus, Lhx3 contributes significantly
to pituitary development by maintaining normal dorsal-ventral patterning, cell
survival, and normal expression of corticotrope-specific transcription factors,
which are necessary for repressing ectopic gonadotrope differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2768753
PMID: 18037398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Eur J Endocrinol. 2007 Aug;157 Suppl 1:S3-14.

Hypothalamic and pituitary development: novel insights into the aetiology.

Kelberman D(1), Dattani MT.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Endocrine Research Group, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford
Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

The anterior pituitary gland is a central regulator of growth, reproduction and
homeostasis, and is the end-product of a carefully orchestrated pattern of
expression of signalling molecules and transcription factors leading to the
development of this complex organ secreting six hormones from five different cell
types. Naturally occurring and transgenic murine models have demonstrated a role 
for many of these molecules in the aetiology of combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD). These include the transcription factors HESX1, PROP1, POU1F1, 
LHX3, LHX4, TBX19, SOX2 and SOX3. The expression pattern of these transcription
factors dictates the phenotype that results when the gene encoding the relevant
transcription factor is mutated. The highly variable phenotype may consist of
isolated hypopituitarism, or more complex disorders such as septo-optic dysplasia
and holoprosencephaly. Since mutations in any one transcription factor are
uncommon, and since the overall incidence of mutations in known transcription
factors is low in patients with CPHD, it is clear that many genes remain to be
identified, and the characterization of these will further elucidate the
pathogenesis of these complex conditions and also shed light on normal pituitary 
development.

PMID: 17785694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Clin Genet. 2007 Sep;72(3):175-82.

Of old and new diseases: genetics of pituitary ACTH excess (Cushing) and
deficiency.

Drouin J(1), Bilodeau S, Vallette S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, Institut de recherches cliniques de
Montréal, Montréal QC, Canada. jacques.drouin@ircm.qc.ca

The pituitary gland orchestrates our endocrine environment: it produces hormones 
in response to hypothalamic factors that integrate neural inputs and its activity
is balanced by the feedback action of peripheral hormones. Disruption of this
equilibrium has severe consequences that affect multiple systems and may be
fatal. Genetic analysis of pituitary function led to discovery of critical
transcription factors that cause hormone deficiencies when mis-expressed. This
review will summarize recent findings that led to the first complete clinical
description of inherited, isolated corticotropin (ACTH) deficiency (IAD) and to
the first molecular mechanism for excessive ACTH production in Cushing's disease.
Indeed, mutations in TPIT, a positive or negative regulator of cell fates for
different pituitary lineages, cause neonatal IAD, a condition considered
anecdotic before discovery of this transcription factor. Cushing's disease is
caused by corticotroph adenomas that produce excess ACTH as a result of
resistance to glucocorticoids (Gc). Molecular investigation of the normal
mechanism of Gc feedback led to identification of two essential proteins for
pro-opiomelanocortin repression that are often mis-expressed in corticotroph
adenomas thus providing a molecular explanation for Gc resistance. These two
proteins, Brg1 and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), are involved in chromatin
remodeling and may also participate in the tumorigenic process, as Brg1 is a
tumor suppressor. These recent advances have provided improved diagnosis and
opened new perspectives for patient management and therapies.

PMID: 17718852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Oct;92(10):3991-9. Epub 2007 Jul 24.

The TPIT gene mutation M86R associated with isolated adrenocorticotropin
deficiency interferes with protein: protein interactions.

Vallette-Kasic S(1), Couture C, Balsalobre A, Gauthier Y, Metherell L, Dattani M,
Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, Institut de recherches cliniques de
Montréal, 110, avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, QC, Canada H2W 1R7.

CONTEXT: Tpit is a T-box transcription factor important for terminal
differentiation of pituitary proopiomelanocortin-expressing cells. We previously 
showed that human and murine mutations in the gene encoding this highly
cortico/melanotrope-specific transcription factor cause a neonatal onset form of 
congenital isolated ACTH deficiency (IAD). We characterized the largest series of
neonatal IAD patients caused by TPIT mutations, and this revealed a highly
homogeneous clinical presentation. So far, 12 different loss-of-function TPIT
mutations have been identified. The methionine 86 arginine (M86R) TPIT mutation
was recently identified in compound heterozygosity with the 782delA frame-shift
mutation in two siblings with early-onset IAD.
OBJECTIVE: We conducted a functional analysis of the missense M86R mutation to
assess transcriptional activity, DNA binding activity, and nuclear location, as
well as protein-protein interactions.
RESULTS: Although the M86 residue is located within the T-box DNA-binding domain,
it did not affect monomer DNA-binding activity per se, but it impaired DNA
binding with other DNA-bound proteins, including itself (homodimers) and
pituitary homeobox 1 (Pitx1). The M86 residue is at the interface between T
domains in the T dimers crystal structure, and it appears that the same residue
is involved in heterodimer formation with pituitary Pitx1. Furthermore, TPIT M86R
is deficient in the recruitment of the coactivator SRC2 that partly mediates the 
CRH stimulation of proopiomelanocortin transcription.
CONCLUSION: Thus, the M86R TPIT mutation is defining an important surface of the 
T domain for multiple protein interactions and for transcription.

PMID: 17652218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Pediatr Int. 2007 Aug;49(4):522-5.

Isolated adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency presenting with psychomotor
retardation.

Nozue H(1), Kamoda T, Imai H, Aoki T, Ichikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tsukuba Medical Center Hospital, Ibaraki, Japan.
nozueh@xds.so-net.ne.jp

PMID: 17587281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2008 Apr;34(3):217-22. Epub 2007 May 21.

Expression and mutation analysis of Tpit in the canine pituitary gland and
corticotroph adenomas.

Hanson JM(1), Mol JA, Leegwater PA, Bilodeau S, Drouin J, Meij BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Utrecht University, PO Box 80 154, NL-3508 TD Utrecht, The Netherlands.
j.m.hanson@vet.uu.nl

Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH) in dogs is caused by a pituitary
corticotroph adenoma. Although PDH is a common disorder in dogs, little is known 
about the underlying pathogenesis. In the pituitary glands of humans and mice,
the pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC)-expressing cell lineages, the corticotrophs and
melanotrophs, have a specific marker in common, the T-box transcription factor
Tpit (Tbx19), which is obligate for POMC expression. Tpit also regulates the late
differentiation of the corticotrophs and melanotrophs, and therefore may
contribute to the pathogenesis of the corticotroph adenomas. The aim of this
study was to perform an expression and mutation analysis of Tpit in the normal
canine pituitary and in corticotroph adenomas. The distribution of the Tpit
protein in the pituitary gland was studied with immunohistochemistry and the
expression of the gene with RT-PCR. The coding region of Tpit cDNA from 14 dogs
with PDH was screened for mutations. Tpit was expressed in corticotroph and
melanotroph cells of the normal and adenomatous canine pituitary, and remained
present in non-adenomatous corticotrophs of pituitaries from PDH dogs. No
tumor-specific mutation in the Tpit cDNA from the corticotroph adenomas was
found. However, a missense polymorphism in the highly conserved DNA-binding
domain, the T-box, was discovered in one dog. It is concluded that Tpit can be
used as a reliable marker for the corticotroph and melanotroph cells in the
canine pituitary tissue and that mutations in the Tpit gene are unlikely to play 
a major role in the pathogenesis of canine corticotroph adenomas.

PMID: 17544240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Endocrinol. 2007 May;193(2):279-90.

Corticotropin-releasing hormone or dexamethasone regulates rat
proopiomelanocortin transcription through Tpit/Pitx-responsive element in its
promoter.

Murakami I(1), Takeuchi S, Kudo T, Sutou S, Takahashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Okayama University, 3-1-1,
Tsusima-naka, Okayama, Japan.

Tpit/Pitx-responsive element (Tpit/PitxRE), which binds transcription factors
Tpit and Pitx1, confers cell-type specific expression of proopiomelanocortin
(POMC) gene in pituitary corticotrops where the gene expression is mainly
regulated by corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and glucocorticoids (Gcs). CRH
stimulates POMC gene expression, which is mediated by the accumulation of
intracellular cAMP and requires binding of Nur factors to Nur-responsive element 
(NurRE). Gcs antagonize NurRE-dependent POMC gene expression through direct
interaction between glucocorticoid receptors and Nur factors. We examined whether
Tpit/PitxRE and NurRE are involved in CRH/cAMP-induced activation and Gc-induced 
repression of POMC gene expression by reporter assay in AtT-20 corticotropic
cells. Deletion and mutation of Tpit/PitxRE markedly reduced basal activity of
the promoter, and those of NurRE decreased the levels of the CRH/cAMP-induced
activation. Nifedipine, KN-62, and W-7, specific inhibitors of the L-type calcium
channel, calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, and calmodulin respectively,
attenuated CRH/cAMP-induced activation of promoters with three copies of either
Tpit/PitxRE or NurRE, indicating that both Tpit/PitxRE and NurRE mediate
CRH-induced activation of POMC gene expression in a calcium-dependent manner.
Deletion and mutation of Tpit/PitxRE abolished dexamethasone (DEX)-induced
repression of POMC gene expression, while those of NurRE did not, indicating that
Tpit/PitxRE predominantly mediates Gc-induced repression of POMC transcription.
However, DEX treatment attenuated activities of promoters with three copies of
either Tpit/PitxRE or NurRE, suggesting that Gcs act at NurRE as well as
Tpit/PitxRE to repress POMC gene expression. We conclude that Tpit/PitxRE is an
important element by which CRH and Gcs regulate the POMC gene expression.

PMID: 17470519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Ann Med. 2006;38(8):560-77.

The role of transcription factors implicated in anterior pituitary development in
the aetiology of congenital hypopituitarism.

Kelberman D(1), Dattani MT.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Endocrinology and Metabolism Unit, Institute for Child Health,
London, UK.

The anterior pituitary gland is a central regulator of growth, reproduction and
homeostasis, and is the end-product of a carefully orchestrated pattern of
expression of signalling molecules and transcription factors leading to the
development of this complex organ secreting six hormones from five different cell
types. Naturally occurring and transgenic murine models have demonstrated a role 
for many of these molecules in the aetiology of combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD). These include the transcription factors HESX1, PROP1, POU1FI, 
LHX3, LHX4, TBX19 (TPIT), SOX3 and SOX2. The expression pattern of these
transcription factors, their interaction with co-factors and their impact on
target genes dictate the phenotype that results when the gene encoding the
relevant transcription factor is mutated. The highly variable phenotype may
consist of isolated hypopituitarism, or more complex disorders such as
septo-optic dysplasia (SOD) and holoprosencephaly. Since mutations in any one
transcription factor are uncommon, and since the overall incidence of mutations
in known transcription factors is low in patients with CPHD, it is clear that
many genes remain to be identified, and characterization of these will further
elucidate the pathogenesis of these complex conditions, and also shed light on
normal pituitary development.

PMID: 17438671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncol Rep. 2006 Dec;16(6):1245-52.

Molecular mechanisms underlying the tumorigenesis of colorectal adenomas:
correlation to activated K-ras oncogene.

Wang JY(1), Wang YH, Jao SW, Lu CY, Kuo CH, Hu HM, Hsieh JS, Chong IW, Cheng TL, 
Lin SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, College of Medicine, and Kaohsiung
Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Mutations of K-ras gene have been demonstrated in 40-50% of colorectal cancer and
large adenoma (>1 cm). This study was intended to clarify the correlation between
the existence of K-ras oncogene and the pathological features of colorectal
adenomas using our recently developed membrane arrays. Moreover, the downstream
genes regulated by K-ras oncogene were explored to serve as potential biomarkers 
in the early diagnosis and risk assessment of patients with colorectal adenoma.
Specimens were collected from 70 patients with colorectal adenoma. The
alterations of K-ras oncogene were analyzed by direct sequencing and our
constructed membrane arrays, respectively. The results of direct sequencing
showed that 21 of 70 samples (30%) had K-ras gene mutations. The most frequently 
mutated sites included codons 12, 13, 15 and 18. Furthermore, activated K-ras
oncogene was identified in 18 of 70 (25.7%) adenoma by membrane arrays.
Statistical analyses showed that the membrane array had the accuracy of 90.0%,
sensitivity of 88.9%, and specificity of 90.4%. The frequency of the mutational
sites of K-ras gene was located as follows: codon 12, 100% (4/4); codon 13, 100% 
(4/4); codon 15, 75% (6/8); and codon 18, 100% (2/2). The analysis of the
correlation between the experimental data and pathological characteristics of
adenoma showed that activated K-ras oncogenes were significantly associated with 
the size, number and histology of adenomas (all P<0.001). Finally, we found the
downstream genes activated by K-ras oncogene, including B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2
(BCL2), Homo sapiens H2A histone family, member Z (H2AFZ), Homo sapiens RAP1B,
member of RAS oncogene family (RAP1B), Homo sapiens T-box 19 (TBX19), Homo
sapiens E2F transcription factor 4, p107/p130-binding (E2F4) and matrix
metallopeptidase 1 (MMP1), of which were overexpressed in most of all examined
adenomas. These genes were then suggested to have functions involved in cell
growth. The preliminary results indicated that the accuracy of membrane arrays
was comparable to conventional DNA sequencing in the detection of activated K-ras
oncogenes. Therefore, we propose that activated K-ras oncogene in colorectal
adenomas may play an important role in the subsequent colorectal carcinogenesis
through a group of K-ras-related molecular targets.

PMID: 17089045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Genes Brain Behav. 2007 Jun;6(4):321-8. Epub 2006 Aug 7.

Genetic variation in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis regulatory
factor, T-box 19, and the angry/hostility personality trait.

Wasserman D(1), Geijer T, Sokolowski M, Rozanov V, Wasserman J.

Author information: 
(1)The National and the Stockholm County Centre for Suicide Research and
Prevention of Mental Ill-Health (NASP) at the Department of Public Health
Sciences, Karolinska Institute (KI), Stockholm, Sweden. danuta.wasserman@ki.se

Neurotic personality traits are important factors in several psychiatric
disorders and suicidal behavior. Here, we have investigated the existence of
potential relationships between neurotic personality traits and genetic
variation. Non-suicidal parents derived from trios (suicide attempter and both
parents) and non-suicidal volunteers, examined by the Neuroticism, Extraversion
and Openness (NEO) Personality Inventory - Revised (NEO PI-R), were divided into 
screening and replication samples. The screening sample (n= 127) was used to
select potential relationships between neurotic personality traits and genetic
variation among 130 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Screening (analysis
of variance) with regard to the personality dimension neuroticism indicated
potential relationships at three different loci. More detailed analysis of these 
three SNPs at NEO PI-R facet level indicated four potential relationships. T-test
analysis in the replication sample (n= 617) was used to retest the relationships 
indicated during screening. One of those relationships was confirmed in the
replication sample (P= 0.0052; Bonferroni correction), indicating that genetic
variation at the human T-box 19 (TBX19) locus is related to the personality trait
angry/hostility. Furthermore, using analysis of haplotypes among trios by
transmission disequilibrium test and its extension, the family-based association 
test, overtransmission of a haplotype GAC at the TBX19 locus was associated with 
increased angry/hostility scores among suicide attempters (P= 0.009; Bonferroni
correction). This is to our knowledge the first report on the association of the 
angry hostility personality trait with genetic variation at the TBX19 locus, an
important regulator of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis.

PMID: 16899054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Neuroendocrinol. 2006 Sep;18(9):633-42.

Pituitary transcription factors: from congenital deficiencies to gene therapy.

Quentien MH(1), Barlier A, Franc JL, Pellegrini I, Brue T, Enjalbert A.

Author information: 
(1)ICNE-UMR6544-CNRS-Université de la Méditerranée, Institut Jean Roche,
Marseille, France. quentien.m@jean-roche.univ-mrs.fr

Despite the existence of interspecies phenotypic variability, animal models have 
yielded valuable insights into human pituitary diseases. Studies on Snell and
Jackson mice known to have growth hormone, prolactin and thyroid-stimulating
hormone deficiencies involving the hypoplastic pituitary gland have led to
identifying alterations of the pituitary specific POU homeodomain Pit-1
transcription factor gene. The human phenotype associated with rare mutations in 
this gene was found to be similar to that of these mice mutants. Terminal
differentiation of lactotroph cells and direct regulation of the prolactin gene
both require interactions between Pit-1 and cell type specific partners,
including panpituitary transcriptional regulators such as Pitx1 and Pitx2.
Synergistic activation of the prolactin promoter by Pitx factors and Pit-1 is
involved not only in basal condition, but also in responsiveness to forskolin,
thyrotrophin-releasing-hormone and epidermal growth factor. In corticotroph
cells, Pitx1 interacts with Tpit. Tpit mutations have turned out to be the main
molecular cause of neonatal isolated adrenocorticotrophin deficiency. This
finding supports the idea that Tpit plays an essential role in the
differentiation of the pro-opiomelanocortin pituitary lineage. The effects of
Pit-1 are not restricted to hormone gene regulation because this factor also
contributes to cell division and protects the cell from programmed cell death.
Lentiviral vectors expressing a Pit-1 dominant negative mutant induced time- and 
dose-dependent cell death in somatotroph and lactotroph adenomas in vitro. Gene
transfer by lentiviral vectors should provide a promising step towards developing
an efficient specific therapeutic approach by which a gene therapy programme for 
treating human pituitary adenomas could be based.

PMID: 16879162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 May 28;Suppl 1:58-62.

[Isolated ACTH deficiency].

[Article in Japanese]

Nigawara T(1), Suda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Infectious Diseases, Hirosaki
University School of Medicine.

PMID: 16776093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Endocrinol Invest. 2005 Dec;28(11):1015-8.

No mutations in TPIT, a corticotroph-specific gene, in human tumoral pituitary
ACTH-secreting cells.

Bucciarelli LG(1), Pecori Giraldi F, Cavagnini F.

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Endocrinology, University of Milan, Ospedale San Luca, Istituto
Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: TPIT is a recently identified transcription factor specific to
proopiomelanocortin (POMC)-expressing cells within the pituitary and plays a
pivotal role in the embryonal development of POMC lineage. As with other
transcription factors, TPIT could theoretically also be involved in corticotroph 
adenomatous transformation and ACTH hypersecretion and published data indicate
that TPIT is present in normal and adenomatous human corticotrophs.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to corroborate this finding and to
seek evidence for mutations in the TPIT coding sequence in human tumoral
corticotrophs.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Eight human ACTH-secreting pituitary adenomas were collected 
during surgery, mRNA extracted from primary cultures and reverse transcribed. PCR
was performed using 8 different sets of overlapping intron-spanning primers
comprising the entire coding sequence of the gene and PCR products analyzed by
sequencing.
RESULTS: TPIT mRNA was detected in all 8 ACTH-secreting pituitary adenomas
without apparent mRNA variants. The entire coding sequence was accounted for, as 
attested by amplification with all sets of primers. Lastly, sequencing did not
reveal differences in the nucleotide arrangement compared with the published
sequence.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant TPIT is unlikely to play a role in corticotroph tumoral
trasformation, ie, Cushing's disease, as the entire coding sequence is expressed 
without any mutation by human pituitary ACTH-secreting adenomas. Conversely, the 
significance of this transcription factor in tumoral ACTH hypersecretion remains 
to be clarified.

PMID: 16483181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Pediatrics. 2006 Feb;117(2):e322-7. Epub 2006 Jan 3.

Low estriol levels in the maternal triple-marker screen as a predictor of
isolated adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency caused by a new mutation in the
TPIT gene.

Weintrob N(1), Drouin J, Vallette-Kasic S, Taub E, Marom D, Lebenthal Y, Klinger 
G, Bron-Harlev E, Shohat M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Endocrinology and Diabetes, Schneider Children's Medical Center 
of Israel, Petah Tiqwa 49202, Israel. nweintrob@clalit.org.il

Isolated adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) deficiency (IAD) is a rare cause of
adrenocortical insufficiency, especially in children, and may be an
underestimated cause of neonatal death. Early postnatal diagnosis may prevent
hypoglycemic seizures, Addisonian crises, and death. There are also occasional
reports of prenatal diagnosis of IAD by findings on the maternal triple-marker
screen (TMST), a combined serum analyte test that measures levels of
alpha-fetoprotein, human chorionic gonadotropin, and unconjugated estriol for the
detection of Down syndrome and open neural-tube defects. An isolated low estriol 
level is usually correlated with compromised uteroplacental perfusion and
frequently associated with fetal death. A low estriol level in the context of
normal fetal sonography and growth, after exclusion of placental sulfatase
deficiency and Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, should raise the suspicion of
deficient fetal steroidogenesis, which leads to decreased production of adrenal
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate. We describe 2 brothers with adrenal insufficiency
resulting from IAD. The parents are first cousins whose first son is healthy.
During the pregnancy of the second son, who died at the age of 7 weeks as a
result of presumed cardiomyopathy, a low estriol level on the TMST was ignored
because of a normal fetal ultrasound. In the third pregnancy, a low level was
found again, and the mother was referred to our tertiary center. Ultrasonography 
revealed no abnormalities, and karyotype was normal. Normal levels of steroid
sulfatase activity and 7-dehydrocholesterol ruled out X-linked ichthyosis and
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, respectively. Postnatally, basal and stimulated
cortisol and ACTH levels were low. Other pituitary functions were normal,
suggesting the diagnosis of IAD. The patient was treated with a stress dose of
hydrocortisone on day 2 of life, which was tapered to a maintenance dose. At the 
time of this writing, he was 7 months old, with normal growth and development.
Recently, loss-of-function mutations in the human TPIT gene were detected in
autosomal recessive IAD. TPIT is a cell-restricted T-box transcription factor
that is important for the terminal differentiation of pituitary corticotrophs.
Therefore, we performed molecular analysis of the TPIT gene, which revealed a new
mutation (IVS4+1G>A) that affects the first nucleotide of the splice site at the 
5' end of the fourth intron. This stop codon probably leads to loss of TPIT
function by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, as it does for other TPIT nonsense
mutations. We recommend that pregnant women with an isolated low estriol level of
unexplained etiology be referred for additional evaluation by a multidisciplinary
team that includes a geneticist and pediatric endocrinologist. Prompt ACTH
testing in the first postnatal days will allow for early diagnosis. The immediate
institution of glucocorticoid therapy, with proper instructions for stress
management, can prevent unnecessary neonatal death secondary to an easily
treatable disease.

PMID: 16390921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Endocrinology. 2006 Apr;147(4):1654-63. Epub 2005 Dec 29.

Role of prophet of Pit1 (PROP1) in gonadotrope differentiation and puberty.

Vesper AH(1), Raetzman LT, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 48109-0618,
USA.

The prophet of Pit1 (PROP1) gene is essential for normal gonadotropin production 
in both humans and mice. Transgenic mice that overexpress PROP1 in gonadotropes
and thyrotropes have transient hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and increased risk
of pituitary adenomas. Here we report a temporal study of pituitary gonadotrope
terminal differentiation and hypogonadism, delayed onset of puberty, and
transient growth insufficiency in the transgenic males. The Prop1 transgenic mice
recover from their abnormalities and exhibit normal size and fertility at 3
months. The relatively normal expression pattern of GnRH receptor (Gnrhr)
suggests that the pituitary gonadotrope cell lineage is appropriately specified, 
but the ability to synthesize LH and FSH is impaired by excess PROP1. We report
no obvious abnormalities in expression of the transcription factors early growth 
response 1, NR5A1, GATA2, TBX19, and NR0B1, or the TGFbeta pathway members
including activin, inhibin, and activin receptors. Thus, overexpression of PROP1 
may influence gonadotrope development by a novel mechanism. Microarray analysis
identified the inhibitory transmembrane receptor gene Klrg1 and the protease gene
Prss28 as candidates for involvement in this process. We hypothesize that
variation in PROP1 expression could affect the growth spurt and the onset of
puberty in humans.

PMID: 16384867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Eur J Endocrinol. 2006 Jan;154(1):159-66.

RT-PCR analysis of corticotroph-associated genes expression in carcinoid tumours 
in the ectopic-ACTH syndrome.

Messager M(1), Carrière C, Bertagna X, de Keyzer Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, INSERM U567-CNRS UMR8107, 24 rue du faubourg Saint Jacques,
75014, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: ACTH is frequently produced in non-pituitary tumours, leading to the
ectopic-ACTH syndrome, but the molecular mechanisms of its expression remain
obscure. This study was aimed at understanding the transcription mechanisms of
the ACTH-precursor gene in carcinoid tumours of the lung or thymus.
DESIGN: Transcripts coding for a series of corticotroph-associated transcription 
factor genes were detected, together with markers of the corticotroph phenotype. 
We studied a series of 41 carcinoid tumours including 15 with proven ectopic-ACTH
syndrome.
METHODS: Specific RT-PCR reactions were designed for each gene including
alternatively spliced isoforms.
RESULTS: The markers of the corticotroph phenotype were detected in all
ACTH-positive tumours. Expression of the Tpit and Pitx1 genes were not restricted
to ACTH-positive tumours but were also detected in many ACTH-negative carcinoids.
Only a subset of ACTH-negative tumours expressed NAK-1/Nur77, and NeuroD1
expression was detected in approximately 50% of the tumours regardless of their
secretory status. The glucocorticoid receptor alpha was detected in every tumour 
in contrast to its beta isoform detectable in a few tumours only. Chicken
ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor 1 (COUP-TF1) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) gamma2 were expressed in 50% of the
tumours of each group whereas PPARgamma1 was expressed in almost every tumour.
CONCLUSIONS: ACTH-positive carcinoids do not share a characteristic expression
pattern of the corticotroph-associated transcription factor genes, suggesting
that the transcriptional mechanisms of the ACTH-precursor gene differ from those 
in normal pituitary corticotrophs. Expression of Tpit and Pitx1 genes in most
carcinoids suggests that some aspects of the pituitary corticotroph phenotype may
belong to general carcinoid differentiation.

PMID: 16382005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Endocr Pathol. 2005 Fall;16(3):187-94.

Double adenomas of the pituitary: transcription factors Pit-1, T-pit, and SF-1
identify cytogenesis and differentiation.

Jastania RA(1), Alsaad KO, Al-Shraim M, Kovacs K, Asa SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Health Network & Toronto Medical
Laboratories, and Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University 
of Toronto.

The diagnosis of double adenomas of the pituitary can be very complex and is
usually suspected on histological assessment of a specimen and confirmed by
immunohistochemical and ultrastructural studies. The most commonly applied
technique is currently immunohistochemical staining to localize the six pituitary
hormones. Application of this technique may fail to identify double adenomas when
hormone immunoreactivity is weak or absent in one or both cell populations. We
examined specimens from eight patients diagnosed with double adenomas over a
15-yr period. We tested the ability to detect the difference in the two adenomas 
in each case using three immunostains for the pituitary transcription factors
Pit-1, T-pit, and SF-1. We conclude that immunohistochemical localization of the 
transcription factors Pit-1, T-pit, and SF-1 accurately detects and classifies
the distinct cytodifferentiation of double adenomas of the pituitary.

PMID: 16299401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 May;19(5):1329-42. Epub 2005 Feb 3.

Bone morphogenic protein (Smad)-mediated repression of proopiomelanocortin
transcription by interference with Pitx/Tpit activity.

Nudi M(1), Ouimette JF, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, 110 avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W 1R7.

The signaling molecules bone morphogenic protein (BMP) 4 and 2 have been
implicated in early organogenesis and cell differentiation of the pituitary.
However, the use of different experimental paradigms has led to conflicting
interpretations with regard to the action of these factors on differentiation of 
corticotroph cells and on expression of the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene. We
have now directly assessed the action of BMP signaling on POMC expression and
found that BMP4 represses POMC mRNA levels and promoter activity. This repression
appears to be dependent on the classical BMP signaling pathway that involves the 
activin-like kinase 3/6 receptors and the Smad1/4 transcription factors. The
repression is reversed by overexpression of the inhibitory Smads, Smad6 or Smad7.
Collectively, the evidence suggests that autocrine BMP signaling may be acting
upon AtT-20 cells to set the level of POMC expression. Upon BMP4 stimulation,
activated phospho-Smad1 is recruited to the POMC promoter, where it apparently
acts through interactions with the Pitx and Tpit transcription factors. It is
postulated that these interactions interfere with the transcriptional activity of
Pitx and/or Tpit, thus resulting in transcriptional repression.

PMID: 15695370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Endocr Res. 2004 Nov;30(4):943-4.

A neonatal form of isolated ACTH deficiency frequently associated with Tpit gene 
mutations.

Vallette-Kasic S(1), Pulichino AM, Gueydan M, Barlier A, David M, Malpuech G,
Deal C, Van Vliet G, de Vroede M, Riepe F, Partsch CJ, Sippell W, Berberoglu M,
Atasay B, de Zegher F, Kyllo J, Donohoue P, Dechelotte P, Fassnacht M, Noordam K,
Dunkel L, Pigeon B, Weill J, Yigit S, Brauner R, Leger J, Heinrich JJ, Enjalbert 
A, Brue T, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

PMID: 15666849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Endocr Res. 2004 Nov;30(4):551-2.

Tpit-/-NeuroD1-/- mice reveal novel aspects of corticotroph development.

Pulichino AM(1), Lamolet B, Vallette-Kasic S, Poulin G, Chu K, Gillemot F, Tsai
MJ, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, Montréal H2W 1R7, Quebec, Canada.

PMID: 15666791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Mar;90(3):1323-31. Epub 2004 Dec 21.

Congenital isolated adrenocorticotropin deficiency: an underestimated cause of
neonatal death, explained by TPIT gene mutations.

Vallette-Kasic S(1), Brue T, Pulichino AM, Gueydan M, Barlier A, David M,
Nicolino M, Malpuech G, Déchelotte P, Deal C, Van Vliet G, De Vroede M, Riepe FG,
Partsch CJ, Sippell WG, Berberoglu M, Atasay B, de Zegher F, Beckers D, Kyllo J, 
Donohoue P, Fassnacht M, Hahner S, Allolio B, Noordam C, Dunkel L, Hero M, Pigeon
B, Weill J, Yigit S, Brauner R, Heinrich JJ, Cummings E, Riddell C, Enjalbert A, 
Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, 110 avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Tpit is a T box transcription factor important for terminal differentiation of
pituitary proopiomelanocortin-expressing cells. We demonstrated that human and
mouse mutations of the TPIT gene cause a neonatal-onset form of congenital
isolated ACTH deficiency (IAD). In the absence of glucocorticoid replacement, IAD
can lead to neonatal death by acute adrenal insufficiency. This clinical entity
was not previously well characterized because of the small number of published
cases. Since identification of the first TPIT mutations, we have enlarged our
series of neonatal IAD patients to 27 patients from 21 unrelated families. We
found TPIT mutations in 17 of 27 patients. We identified 10 different TPIT
mutations, with one mutation found in five unrelated families. All patients
appeared to be homozygous or compound heterozygous for TPIT mutations, and their 
unaffected parents are heterozygous carriers, confirming a recessive mode of
transmission. We compared the clinical and biological phenotype of the 17 IAD
patients carrying a TPIT mutation with the 10 IAD patients with normal
TPIT-coding sequences. This series of neonatal IAD patients revealed a highly
homogeneous clinical presentation, suggesting that this disease may be an
underestimated cause of neonatal death. Identification of TPIT gene mutations as 
the principal molecular cause of neonatal IAD permits prenatal diagnosis for
families at risk for the purpose of early glucocorticoid replacement therapy.

PMID: 15613420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Med Sci (Paris). 2004 Nov;20(11):1009-13.

[Tpit mutations reveal a new model of pituitary differentiation and account for
isolated ACTH deficiency].

[Article in French]

Pulichino AM(1), Vallette-Kasic S, Couture C, Brue T, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique moléculaire, Institut de Recherches cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM), Montréal, Québec, H2W 1R7 Canada.

Pituitary hormone-producing cells differentiate sequentially from a common
epithelial primordium, Rathke's pouch, under the combinatorial action of a subset
of tissue- and cell-restricted transcription factors. Some factors have been
implicated in early events of pituitary induction and morphogenesis while other
factors like Pit-1 and SF-1 have been associated with differentiation of
particular lineages. In POMC-expressing cells, Pitx1, NeuroD1 and Tpit were shown
to be important for cell specific transcription of the POMC gene. Since Tpit is
exclusively expressed in pituitary POMC-expressing lineages, the corticotrophs
and melanotrophs, we investigated the TPIT gene coding sequences in 17 patients
presenting with congenital isolated ACTH deficiency (IAD). We demonstrated that
human TPIT gene mutations cause a neonatal onset form of IAD (8/11), but not
juvenile forms of this deficiency (0/6). In the absence of glucocorticoid
replacement, IAD can lead to neonatal death by acute adrenal insufficiency. To
assess the importance of Tpit in pituitary differentiation and function, we
produced Tpit-null mice. Concordant with the human phenotype, Tpit-null mice have
IAD : plasma ACTH is greatly reduced in these mice, their plasma corticosterone
is undetectable and the adrenals are hypoplastic. Analysis of the pituitary in
Tpit-null mice revealed multiple roles of this factor in cell differentiation.
First, Tpit is a positive regulator for POMC cell differentiation. Tpit is also a
negative regulator of the pituitary gonadotroph fate. Thus, Tpit operates as a
molecular switch to orient differentiation of a common precursor towards either
POMC or gonadotroph fate. A binary choice model of pituitary cell differentiation
is presented.

PMID: 15525497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Eur J Endocrinol. 2004 Oct;151(4):463-5.

TPIT mutations are associated with early-onset, but not late-onset isolated ACTH 
deficiency.

Metherell LA(1), Savage MO, Dattani M, Walker J, Clayton PE, Farooqi IS, Clark
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Barts and the London, Queen Mary University of
London, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Congenital isolated ACTH deficiency (IAD) is a rare inherited disorder
that is clinically and genetically heterogeneous. Patients are characterised by
low or absent cortisol production secondary to low plasma ACTH despite normal
secretion of other pituitary hormones and the absence of structural pituitary
defects. Onset may occur in the neonatal period, but may first be observed in
later childhood. Recently, mutations in the TPIT gene, a T-box factor selectively
expressed in developing corticotroph cells, have been found in cases of
early-onset IAD.
DESIGN: Here we report the screening of the TPIT gene in seven patients with IAD,
four of whom had neonatal onset.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted and the sequences of the 8 TPIT exons and
their intron/exon junctions were determined by automated sequencing.
RESULTS: Two siblings with early-onset IAD were both compound heterozygotes for
mutations in exons 2 and 6. The missense mutation (Met86Arg) in exon 2 within the
T-box (or DNA binding domain) is predicted to disrupt DNA binding. A frameshift
mutation in exon 6 (782delA) introduces a premature stop codon and is likely to
lead to a non-functional truncated protein. No nucleotide changes were observed
in exonic sequences in the other two early- or the three later-onset cases.
Fifteen single nucleotide polymorphisms that were not predicted to change the
TPIT transcript were also detected.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide a further illustration of the genetic
heterogeneity of IAD and are highly suggestive of one or more other genes being
implicated in this disorder.

PMID: 15476446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jul;17(7):1017-20.

Congenital early onset isolated adrenocorticotropin deficiency associated with a 
TPIT gene mutation.

Atasay B(1), Aycan Z, Evliyaoglu O, Adiyaman P, Günlemez A, Unal S, Arsan S, Ocal
G, Berberoglu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatalogy, Ankara University, School of Medicine, Ankara,
Turkey. begumatasay@hotmail.com

TPIT is a highly cell-restricted transcription factor that is required for the
expression of the propiomelanocortin (POMC) gene and for terminal differentiation
of the pituitary corticotroph lineage. Its exclusive expression in pituitary
POMC-expressing cells has suggested that its mutation may cause isolated
deficiency of pituitary ACTH. We present a neonate with the diagnosis of
congenital early onset isolated ACTH deficiency (IAD) associated with a loss of
POMC function as a result of a missense mutation in the TPIT gene. A 5 day-old
male infant was admitted for hypoglycemia, limpness and conjugated
hyperbilirubinemia. Laboratory investigations indicated low plasma cortisol
concentration (0.1 microg/dl) accompanying a very low ACTH (<5 pg/ml)
concentration. An increase in plasma cortisol concentration following stimulation
with low dose exogenous ACTH was observed. On replacement therapy with
hydrocortisone (15 mg/m2/day orally), cholestatic jaundice and hypoglycemia
resolved and subsequent normal growth (weight, height and head circumference,
25th, 10th and 50th percentile, respectively) and development was achieved
without recurrence of hypoglycemic episodes.

PMID: 15301051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2004 Mar;5(1):5-13.

From panhypopituitarism to combined pituitary deficiencies: do we need the
anterior pituitary?

Carrière C(1), Gleiberman A, Lin CR, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Diego, 9500
Gilman Drive, LaJolla, CA, USA.

PMID: 14966385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Endocr Pathol. 2003 Winter;14(4):363-8.

"Honeycomb Golgi" in pituitary adenomas: not a marker of gonadotroph adenomas.

Sano T(1), Mader R, Asa SL, Qian ZR, Hino A, Yamada S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Tokushima School of Medicine,
Tokushima, Japan. sano@basic.med.tokushima-u.ac.jp

The vacuolar change in Golgi complexes known as "honeycomb Golgi" has been
described as the ultrastructural hallmark of a specific tumor that has been
called the "female gonadotroph" adenoma of the human pituitary. Recently, a few
adenomas presenting with Cushing's disease have been reported to exhibit this
feature. To clarify the significance of a "honeycomb Golgi" in the classification
of pituitary adenomas, we studied clinically nonfunctioning adenomas with or
without "honeycomb Golgi" using immunohistochemistry for adenohypophysial
hormones and RT-PCR for the cell-specific transcription factors Tpit that
identifies corticotrophs and SF-1 that identifies gonadotrophs. All adenomas were
from women. Among 20 adenomas with complete "honeycomb Golgi" change,
gonadotrophin subunits were totally immunonegative, but ACTH was positive in a
few cells of 12 adenomas. Among eight adenomas with partial vacuolar change of
the Golgi complex, five were positive for gonadotrophins and two were positive
for ACTH. A subgroup of these lesions were examined by RT-PCR and among eight
adenomas with typical "honeycomb Golgi" one case expressed both Tpit and SF-1,
probably due to contamination with normal pituitary and another expressed neither
Tpit nor SF-1. Of the remaining six cases, Tpit was expressed in two cases and
SF-1 in four. These findings indicate that "honeycomb Golgi" change can been seen
in corticotroph adenomas as well as gonadotroph adenomas. The reason why this
vacuolar change occurs only in females remains to be clarified.

PMID: 14739492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Apr;18(4):995-1003. Epub 2004 Jan 15.

Tpit-independent function of NeuroD1(BETA2) in pituitary corticotroph
differentiation.

Lamolet B(1), Poulin G, Chu K, Guillemot F, Tsai MJ, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W 1R7.

NeuroD1(BETA2) and Tpit are cell-specific activators of pituitary
proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene transcription. Expression of both factors
slightly precedes that of POMC at embryonic d 12.5 of mouse pituitary
development. We now report that NeuroD1(BETA2) is required for early corticotroph
differentiation. In agreement with the transcriptional synergism observed between
Tpit and basic helix-loop-helix dimers containing NeuroD1(BETA2), POMC expression
is delayed in NeuroD1-deficient mice. However, this differentiation defect does
not reflect a change of corticotroph commitment as revealed by Tpit expression.
The delay of corticotroph terminal differentiation is transient and coincides
with the developmental window of NeuroD1 expression in corticotrophs. In contrast
to their requirement in other NeuroD1-expressing cells, the neurogenin genes do
not appear to be necessary for corticotroph differentiation. Taken together with 
a similar requirement of Tpit for corticotroph differentiation but not for
commitment, the present data indicate that the POMC promoter is a point of
convergence for independent corticotroph differentiating signals.

PMID: 14726486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46523-32. Epub 2003 Sep 11.

The T-box factor Tpit recruits SRC/p160 co-activators and mediates hormone
action.

Maira M(1), Couture C, Le Martelot G, Pulichino AM, Bilodeau S, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, 110 avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, Québec H2W 1R7, Canada.

Tpit (Tbx19) is a transcription factor belonging to the T-box family, and it is
essential for late differentiation of pituitary pro-opiomelanocortin
(POMC)-expressing corticotroph and melanotroph cells. Tpit is also required, both
in humans and mice, for cell-specific expression of the POMC gene in cooperation 
with the homeoprotein Pitx1. Despite their important roles as developmental
regulators, the molecular mechanisms underpinning the functions of T-box factors 
in general, and of Tpit in particular, are still poorly defined. We now report
that Tpit functions as an activator of transcription by recruiting SRC/p160
co-activators to its cognate DNA target in the POMC promoter, the Tpit/Pitx-RE.
We also show that Tpit is a mediator of hormone signaling and that the
Tpit/Pitx-RE is responsive to signals elicited by hypothalamic
corticotropin-releasing hormone. These signals are mediated by the cAMP-dependent
protein kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways, and activation of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase also enhances Tpit and SRC-dependent transcription.
We have previously shown that corticotropin-releasing hormone action is also
exerted at the POMC promoter through the orphan nuclear receptor NGFI-B and its
recruitment of SRC co-activators. Given that Tpit exhibits transcriptional
synergy with NGFI-B, our results suggest that Tpit, along with NGFI-B and SRC-2, 
is part of a transcription regulatory complex assembled on the POMC promoter in
response to hormonal stimulation.

PMID: 12970370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Jul;88(7):3050-6.

Differential regulation of proopiomelanocortin and pituitary-restricted
transcription factor (TPIT), a new marker of normal and adenomatous human
corticotrophs.

Vallette-Kasic S(1), Figarella-Branger D, Grino M, Pulichino AM, Dufour H,
Grisoli F, Enjalbert A, Drouin J, Brue T.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Mixte de Recherche 6544, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Université de la Méditerranée, Institut Fédératif de Recherche Jean-Roche,
Faculté de Médecine Nord, 13926 Marseille, France.

Since the identification of the pituitary-restricted transcription factor Tpit, a
novel T-box factor that is only present in mouse in the two pituitary
proopiomelanocortin (POMC)-expressing lineages, no information was available on
its pattern of expression in human pituitary. We investigated by
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization the expression of TPIT in normal
human anterior pituitary tissue and in several types of human pituitary adenomas 
(n = 52). TPIT expression was restricted to the nucleus of normal or adenomatous 
human corticotroph cells. No specific TPIT immunostaining was detectable in all
prolactin (PRL)-, GH-, or gonadotropin-secreting adenomas. In situ hybridization 
studies demonstrated that TPIT transcripts were coexpressed with POMC mRNA in
both secreting and silent corticotroph adenomas, and in normal corticotrophs,
whereas TPIT mRNA was not detectable in other types of pituitary adenomas. Unlike
POMC, TPIT was not up-regulated by adrenalectomy in rats and did not seem
down-regulated in the normal pituitary adjacent to human corticotroph
microadenomas. TPIT is the only currently known transcription factor selectively 
expressed in human normal and adenomatous corticotrophs. In human and
experimental models, TPIT and its target gene POMC were thus differentially
regulated by glucocorticoids. Moreover, TPIT represents a new marker of
POMC-expressing pituitary cells.

PMID: 12843142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Apr 1;12 Spec No 1:R37-44.

T-box genes in human disorders.

Packham EA(1), Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham, NG7 2UH, UK.

The T-box gene family encodes a large family of transcription factors with more
than 20 members identified in humans so far, and homologues in many other
organisms. A number of human disorders have been linked to mutations in T-box
genes, confirming their medical importance. They include Holt- Oram
syndrome/TBX5, Ulnar-Mammary syndrome/TBX3, and more recently DiGeorge
syndrome/TBX1, ACTH deficiency/TBX19 and cleft palate with ankyloglossia/TBX22.
This review describes the key features of these disorders and the involvement of 
T-box genes in their phenotype.

PMID: 12668595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Genes Dev. 2003 Mar 15;17(6):738-47.

Tpit determines alternate fates during pituitary cell differentiation.

Pulichino AM(1), Vallette-Kasic S, Tsai JP, Couture C, Gauthier Y, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique moléculaire, Institut de recherches cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM), Montréal, Quebec, Canada H2W 1R7.

The T-box transcription factor Tpit was identified as a cell-specific factor for 
expression of the pituitary proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene. Expression of this
factor is exclusively restricted to the pituitary POMC-expressing lineages, the
corticotrophs and melanotrophs. We have now determined the role of this factor in
pituitary cell differentiation. Tpit is a positive regulator for late POMC cell
differentiation and POMC expression, but it is not essential for lineage
commitment. The pituitary intermediate lobe normally contains only
Tpit-expressing melanotrophs. Inactivation of the Tpit gene results in almost
complete loss of POMC-expressing cells in this tissue, which now has a large
number of gonadotrophs and a few clusters of Pit-1-independent thyrotrophs. The
role of Tpit as a negative regulator of gonadotroph differentiation was confirmed
in transgenic gain-of-function experiments. One mechanism to account for the
negative role of Tpit in differentiation may be trans-repression between Tpit and
the gonadotroph-restricted factor SF1. These data suggest that antagonism between
Tpit and SF1 may play a role in establishment of POMC and gonadotroph lineages
and that these lineages may arise from common precursors.

PMCID: PMC196016
PMID: 12651892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Genes Dev. 2003 Mar 15;17(6):711-6.

Human and mouse TPIT gene mutations cause early onset pituitary ACTH deficiency.

Pulichino AM(1), Vallette-Kasic S, Couture C, Gauthier Y, Brue T, David M,
Malpuech G, Deal C, Van Vliet G, De Vroede M, Riepe FG, Partsch CJ, Sippell WG,
Berberoglu M, Atasay B, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique moléculaire, Institut de recherches cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM), Montréal, Quebec, H2W 1R7 Canada.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2003 Mar 15;17(6):677-82.

Tpit is a highly cell-restricted transcription factor that is required for
expression of the pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gene and for terminal
differentiation of the pituitary corticotroph lineage. Its exclusive expression
in pituitary POMC-expressing cells has suggested that its mutation may cause
isolated deficiency of pituitary adrenocorticotropin (ACTH). We now show that
Tpit-deficient mice constitute a model of isolated ACTH deficiency (IAD) that is 
very similar to human IAD patients carrying TPIT gene mutations. Through genetic 
analysis of a panel of IAD patients, we show that TPIT gene mutations are
associated at high frequency with early onset IAD, but not with juvenile forms of
this deficiency. We identified seven different TPIT mutations, including
nonsense, missense, point deletion, and a genomic deletion. This work defines
congenital early onset IAD as a relatively homogeneous clinical entity caused by 
recessive transmission of loss-of-function mutations in the TPIT gene.

PMCID: PMC196015
PMID: 12651888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Genes Dev. 2003 Mar 15;17(6):677-82.

Mouse knockout solves endocrine puzzle and promotes new pituitary lineage model.

Keegan CE(1), Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-0638, USA. keeganc@med.umich.edu

Comment on
    Genes Dev. 2003 Mar 15;17(6):711-6.

PMID: 12651886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Ann Med. 2002;34(3):179-91.

Genetic defects in the development and function of the anterior pituitary gland.

Cushman LJ(1), Showalter AD, Rhodes SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis,
46202-5132, USA.

Genetic defects affecting the hypothalamic-pituitary-target organ axes can cause 
a variety of diseases involving restricted or broad disruptions of human
development and physiology. At the level of the anterior pituitary gland,
mutations in the genes encoding key transcription factors, hypothalamic releasing
and inhibiting hormone receptors, and the pituitary hormones themselves, can all 
result in the loss of action of one or more of the specialized hormone-secreting 
cell types. This article focuses on the effects of inherited and sporadic
mutations on the development and function of the anterior pituitary. Mutations in
the genes encoding the HESX1, PITX2, LHX3, LHX4, PROP1, PIT1, SF1, and TPIT
developmental transcription factors are associated with combined pituitary
hormone deficiency diseases. By contrast, deleterious alterations in the genes
that encode hypothalamic releasing hormone receptors or pituitary hormones, such 
as the growth hormone releasing hormone receptor or growth hormone genes, usually
result in phenotypes that reflect specific defects in the hormone-secreting
capacities of individual anterior pituitary cell types.

PMID: 12173688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Eur J Endocrinol. 2002 Apr;146(4):463-5.

T-box and isolated ACTH deficiency.

Asteria C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Endocrine Sciences, University of Milan, Ospedale Maggiore,
Milan, Italy. carmela.asteria@unimi.it

PMID: 11916612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 17;98(15):8674-9. Epub 2001 Jul 10.

Tbx19, a tissue-selective regulator of POMC gene expression.

Liu J(1), Lin C, Gleiberman A, Ohgi KA, Herman T, Huang HP, Tsai MJ, Rosenfeld
MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, School and Department of Medicine, University
of California at San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, Cellular and Molecular Medicine
West, Room 345, La Jolla, CA 92093-0648, USA.

Pituitary cell types arise in a temporally and spatially specific fashion, in
response to combinatorial actions of transcription factors induced by transient
signaling gradients. The critical transcriptional determinants of the two
pituitary cell types that express the pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gene, the
anterior lobe corticotropes, producing adrenocorticotropin, and the intermediate 
lobe melanotropes, producing melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH alpha), have
remained unknown. Here, we report that a member of the T-box gene family, Tbx19, 
which is expressed only in the rostral ventral diencephalon and pituitary gland, 
commencing on e11.5, marks pituitary cells that will subsequently express the
POMC gene and is capable of altering progression of ventral cell types and
inducing adrenocorticotropin in rostral tip cells. It is suggested that Tbx19,
depending on the presence of synergizing transcription factors, can activate POMC
gene expression and repress the alpha glycoprotein subunit and
thyroid-stimulating hormone beta promoters.

PMCID: PMC37494
PMID: 11447259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cell. 2001 Mar 23;104(6):849-59.

A pituitary cell-restricted T box factor, Tpit, activates POMC transcription in
cooperation with Pitx homeoproteins.

Lamolet B(1), Pulichino AM, Lamonerie T, Gauthier Y, Brue T, Enjalbert A, Drouin 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, 110 des Pins Ouest, Montreal QC, Canada H2W 1R7.

The pituitary gland has provided unique insight into molecular mechanisms and
regulatory factors controlling both differentiation and gene transcription. We
identified Tpit, a novel T box factor only present in the two pituitary
POMC-expressing lineages, the corticotrophs and melanotrophs, and apparently in
no other tissue, including hypothalamic POMC neurons. In pituitary cells, Tpit
activation of POMC gene transcription requires cooperation with Pitx1, the two
factors binding to contiguous sites within the same regulatory element. In
gain-of-function experiments, Tpit induces POMC expression in undifferentiated
pituitary cells, indicating that it can initiate differentiation into
POMC-expressing lineages. TPIT gene mutations were found in patients with
isolated deficiency of pituitary POMC-derived ACTH, in support of an essential
role of Tpit for differentiation of the pituitary POMC lineage.

PMID: 11290323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genomics. 1999 Jan 1;55(1):10-20.

Identification, mapping, and phylogenomic analysis of four new human members of
the T-box gene family: EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19.

Yi CH(1), Terrett JA, Li QY, Ellington K, Packham EA, Armstrong-Buisseret L,
McClure P, Slingsby T, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Nottingham, Queen's
Medical Centre, Nottingham, NG7 2UH.

Brachyury(T) is a mouse mutation, first described over 70 years ago, that causes 
defects in mesoderm formation. Recently several related genes, the T-box gene
family, that encode a similar N-terminal DNA binding domain, the T-box, and that 
play critical roles in human embryonic development have been identified. It has
been shown that human TBX5 and TBX3, if mutated, cause developmental disorders,
Holt-Oram syndrome (OMIM 142900) and ulnar-mammary syndrome (OMIM 181450),
respectively. We have identified four new human members of the T-box gene family,
EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19, and these genes have been mapped to different
chromosomal regions by radiation hybrid mapping. The four T-box genes were
classified into four different subfamilies and have also been subjected to
phylogenomic analysis. Human EOMES maps at 3p21.3-p21.2. This Tbr1-subfamily gene
is likely to play a significant role in early embryogenesis similar to that
described for Xenopus eomesodermin. Human TBX6 maps at 16p12-q12. This
Tbx6-subfamily gene is likely to participate in paraxial mesoderm formation and
somitogenesis in human embryo. TBX18 is a novel member of the Tbx1 subfamily that
maps at 6q14-q15. Two subgroups, TBX1/10 and TBX15/18 subgroups, could be
distinguished within the Tbx1 subfamily. TBX19 is an orthologue of chick TbxT and
maps at 1q23-q24. The genomic organization of TBX19 is highly similar to that of 
human T(Brachyury), another human member of the same subfamily.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9888994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


