
1. Cereb Cortex. 2016 Mar 21. pii: bhw076. [Epub ahead of print]

Cortical Development Requires Mesodermal Expression of Tbx1, a Gene
Haploinsufficient in 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome.

Flore G(1), Cioffi S(2), Bilio M(1), Illingworth E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics "ABT", CNR, 80131 Naples, Italy.
(2)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics "ABT", CNR, 80131 Naples, Italy Bio-Ker
srl, c/o Institute of Genetics and Biophysics "ABT", CNR, 80131 Naples, Italy.
(3)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics "ABT", CNR, 80131 Naples, Italy
Department of Chemistry and Biology, University of Salerno, 84084 Fisciano,
Italy.

In mammals, proper temporal control of neurogenesis and neural migration during
embryonic development ensures correct formation of the cerebral cortex. Changes
in the distribution of cortical projection neurons and interneurons are
associated with behavioral disorders and psychiatric diseases, including
schizophrenia and autism, suggesting that disrupted cortical connectivity
contributes to the brain pathology.TBX1is the major candidate gene for 22q11.2
deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS), a chromosomal deletion disorder characterized by a
greatly increased risk for schizophrenia. We have previously shown
thatTbx1heterozygous mice have reduced prepulse inhibition, a behavioral
abnormality that is associated with 22q11.2DS and nonsyndromic schizophrenia.
Here, we show that loss ofTbx1disrupts corticogenesis in mice by promoting
premature neuronal differentiation in the medio-lateral embryonic cortex, which
gives rise to the somatosensory cortex (S1). In addition, we found altered
polarity in both radially migrating excitatory neurons and tangentially migrating
inhibitory interneurons. Together, these abnormalities lead to altered lamination
in the S1 at the terminal stages of corticogenesis inTbx1null mice and similar
anomalies inTbx1heterozygous adult mice. Finally, we show that mesoderm-specific 
inactivation ofTbx1is sufficient to recapitulate the brain phenotype indicating
thatTbx1exerts a cell nonautonomous role in cortical development from the
mesoderm.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 27005988  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Stem Cells. 2016 Jan 29. doi: 10.1002/stem.2301. [Epub ahead of print]

Foxc1 Regulates Early Cardiomyogenesis and Functional Properties of Embryonic
Stem Cell Derived Cardiomyocytes.

Lambers E(1), Arnone B(1), Fatima A(1), Qin G(1), Wasserstrom JA(1), Kume T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs) hold great potential for regeneration of damaged
myocardium, however the molecular circuitry that guides ESC differentiation into 
cardiomyocytes remains poorly understood. This is exemplified by the elusive role
of the transcription factor, Foxc1, during cardiac development. The only known
Foxc1 target during heart development is Tbx1. Because Foxc1 null mice contain
heart mutations that are far more severe than Tbx1 null mice, it is likely that
Foxc1 has additional regulatory roles during heart development. The goal of our
study was to test whether Foxc1 is critical for ESC differentiation into
functional cardiomyocytes through proper regulation of specific downstream gene
networks. Converging evidence from Foxc1 deficient and overexpression ESC models 
reveals a close relationship between Foxc1 levels and early cardiomyogenic
factors Isl1, Mef2c, and Nkx2.5 and also the production of functional
cardiomyocytes. We show Foxc1 regulates early cardiomyogenesis during a specific 
window of differentiation, D4-D6. Through whole transcriptome RNA-sequencing
analysis, we report pathways regulated by Foxc1 involved in cardiac function
including actin cytoskeleton, cell adhesion, tight and gap junctions, and calcium
signaling. Our data indicate a novel Foxc1 direct gene target, Myh7, which
encodes the predominant myosin heavy chain isoform, MHCß, expressed during
cardiac development. These data lead us to conclude that Foxc1 regulates both
early cardiomyogenesis and the functional properties of ESC-derived
cardiomyocytes. Our findings shed light on the molecular circuitry governing
cardiomyogenesis that may lead to the development of better translational
strategies for the use of pluripotent stem cells in regenerative medicine towards
repairing damaged myocardium. This article is protected by copyright. All rights 
reserved.

© 2016 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26824887  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Development. 2016 Feb 15;143(4):582-8. doi: 10.1242/dev.126573. Epub 2016 Jan 11.

Disruption of CXCR4 signaling in pharyngeal neural crest cells causes DiGeorge
syndrome-like malformations.

Escot S(1), Blavet C(1), Faure E(2), Zaffran S(2), Duband JL(3),
Fournier-Thibault C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement,
Paris 75252 Cedex 5, France CNRS, Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement, Paris
75252 Cedex 5, France. (2)Aix Marseille Université, GMGF UMRS910, Faculté de
Médecine, 27 Bd Jean Moulin, Marseille 13385, France Inserm U910, Faculté de
Médecine, 27 Bd Jean Moulin, Marseille 13005, France. (3)Université Pierre et
Marie Curie, Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement, Paris 75252 Cedex 5,
France CNRS, Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement, Paris 75252 Cedex 5,
France claire.thibault@upmc.fr jean-loup.duband@inserm.fr.

DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) is a congenital disease causing cardiac outflow tract
anomalies, craniofacial dysmorphogenesis, thymus hypoplasia, and mental
disorders. It results from defective development of neural crest cells (NCs) that
colonize the pharyngeal arches and contribute to lower jaw, neck and heart
tissues. Although TBX1 has been identified as the main gene accounting for the
defects observed in human patients and mouse models, the molecular mechanisms
underlying DGS etiology are poorly identified. The recent demonstrations that the
SDF1/CXCR4 axis is implicated in NC chemotactic guidance and impaired in cortical
interneurons of mouse DGS models prompted us to search for genetic interactions
between Tbx1, Sdf1 (Cxcl12) and Cxcr4 in pharyngeal NCs and to investigate the
effect of altering CXCR4 signaling on the ontogeny of their derivatives, which
are affected in DGS. Here, we provide evidence that Cxcr4 and Sdf1 are
genetically downstream of Tbx1 during pharyngeal NC development and that
reduction of CXCR4 signaling causes misrouting of pharyngeal NCs in chick and
dramatic morphological alterations in the mandibular skeleton, thymus and cranial
sensory ganglia. Our results therefore support the possibility of a pivotal role 
for the SDF1/CXCR4 axis in DGS etiology.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26755698  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Cell Physiol. 2016 Jan 5. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25299. [Epub ahead of print]

Cell-Autonomous Brown-Like Adipogenesis of Preadipocytes from Retinoblastoma
Haploinsufficient Mice.

Petro PD(1), Palou A(1), Bonet ML(1), Ribot J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Nutrition and Biotechnology-Nutrigenomics,
Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, and CIBER Fisiopatología de 
la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Spain.

Mechanisms behind the emergence of brown adipocyte-like (brite or beige)
adipocytes within white adipose tissue (WAT) are of interest. Retinoblastoma
protein gene (Rb) haploinsufficiency associates in mice with improved metabolic
regulation linked to a greater capacity for fatty acid oxidation and
thermogenesis in WAT. We aimed to explain a feasible mechanism of WAT-to-BAT
remodeling in this model. Differentiated primary adipocytes and Sca1-positive
preadipocytes derived from adipose depots of Rb(+/-) mice and wild-type siblings 
were compared. Primary white Rb(+/-) adipocytes displayed under basal conditions 
increased glucose uptake and an enhanced expression of brown adipocyte-related
genes (Pparg, Ppargc1a, Ppargc1b, Prdm16, Cpt1b), but not of purported
beige/brite transcriptional markers (Cd137, Tmem26, Tbx1, Slc27a1, Hoxc9, Shox2).
Lack of induction of beige markers phenocopied results in WAT of adult Rb(+/-)
mice. Flow cytometry analysis evidenced an increased number of preadipocytes in
WAT depots of Rb(+/-) mice. Sca1(+) preadipocytes from WAT of Rb(+/-) mice
displayed increased gene expression of several transcription factors common to
the brown and beige adipogenic programs (Prdm16, Pparg, Ppargc1a) and of
receptors of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs); however, amongst the recently
proposed beige markers, only Tbx1 was upregulated. Adult Rb(+/-) mice had
increased circulating levels of BMP7. These results indicate that preadipose
cells resident in WAT depots of Rb(+/-) mice retain an increased capacity for
brown-like adipogenesis that appears to be different from beige adipogenesis, and
suggest that the contribution of these precursors to the Rb(+/-) adipose
phenotype is driven, at least in part, by interaction with BMP7 pathways. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26727985  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Dev Dyn. 2016 Apr;245(4):445-59. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24380. Epub 2016 Jan 19.

Coronary stem development in wild-type and Tbx1 null mouse hearts.

Théveniau-Ruissy M(1), Pérez-Pomares JM(2,)(3), Parisot P(1), Baldini A(4),
Miquerol L(1), Kelly RG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aix-Marseille University, CNRS, IBDM UMR 7288, Marseille, France.
(2)Department of Animal Biology, Instituto de Investigación Biomedica de Málaga
(IBIMA), Faculty of Science, University of Málaga, Málaga, Spain. (3)Andalusian
Centre for Nanomedicine and Biotechnology (BIONAND), Málaga, Spain. (4)Institute 
of Genetics and Biophysics, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Coronary artery (CA) stems connect the ventricular coronary tree with
the aorta. Defects in proximal CA patterning are a cause of sudden cardiac death.
In mice lacking Tbx1, common arterial trunk is associated with an abnormal
trajectory of the proximal left CA. Here we investigate CA stem development in
wild-type and Tbx1 null embryos.
RESULTS: Genetic lineage tracing reveals that limited outgrowth of aortic
endothelium contributes to proximal CA stems. Immunohistochemistry and
fluorescent tracer injections identify a periarterial vascular plexus present at 
the onset of CA stem development. Transplantation experiments in avian embryos
indicate that the periarterial plexus originates in mesenchyme distal to the
outflow tract. Tbx1 is required for the patterning but not timing of CA stem
development and a Tbx1 reporter allele is expressed in myocardium adjacent to the
left but not right CA stem. This expression domain is maintained in Sema3c(-/-)
hearts with a common arterial trunk and leftward positioned CA. Ectopic
myocardial differentiation is observed on the left side of the Tbx1(-/-) common
arterial trunk.
CONCLUSIONS: A periarterial plexus bridges limited outgrowth of the aortic
endothelium with the ventricular plexus during CA stem development. Molecular
differences associated with left and right CA stems provide new insights into the
etiology of CA patterning defects. Developmental Dynamics 245:445-459, 2016. ©
2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26708418  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Anat. 2016 Mar;228(3):464-73. doi: 10.1111/joa.12425. Epub 2015 Dec 22.

Mapping cellular processes in the mesenchyme during palatal development in the
absence of Tbx1 reveals complex proliferation changes and perturbed cell packing 
and polarity.

Brock LJ(1), Economou AD(1), Cobourne MT(1), Green JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development and Stem Cell Biology, King's College
London, London, UK.

The 22q11 deletion syndromes represent a spectrum of overlapping conditions
including cardiac defects and craniofacial malformations. Amongst the
craniofacial anomalies that are seen, cleft of the secondary palate is a common
feature. Haploinsufficiency of TBX1 is believed to be a major contributor toward 
many of the developmental structural anomalies that occur in these syndromes, and
targeted deletion of Tbx1 in the mouse reproduces many of these malformations,
including cleft palate. However, the cellular basis of this defect is only poorly
understood. Here, palatal development in the absence of Tbx1 has been analysed,
focusing on cellular properties within the whole mesenchymal volume of the
palatal shelves. Novel image analyses and data presentation tools were applied to
quantify cell proliferation rates, including regions of elevated as well as
reduced proliferation, and cell packing in the mesenchyme. Also, cell
orientations (nucleus-Golgi axis) were mapped as a potential marker of
directional cell movement. Proliferation differed only subtly between wild-type
and mutant until embryonic day (E)15.5 when proliferation in the mutant was
significantly lower. Tbx1(-/-) palatal shelves had slightly different cell
packing than wild-type, somewhat lower before elevation and higher at E15.5 when 
the wild-type palate has elevated and fused. Cell orientation is biased towards
the shelf distal edge in the mid-palate of wild-type embryos but is essentially
random in the Tbx1(-/-) mutant shelves, suggesting that polarised processes such 
as directed cell rearrangement might be causal for the cleft phenotype. The
implications of these findings in the context of further understanding Tbx1
function during palatogenesis and of these methods for the more general analysis 
of genotype-phenotype functional relationships are discussed.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Anatomy published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on
behalf of Anatomical Society.

PMID: 26689739  [PubMed - in process]


7. Clin Immunol. 2016 Feb;163:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2015.12.004. Epub 2015 Dec
10.

B cell development in chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.

Derfalvi B(1), Maurer K(2), McDonald McGinn DM(3), Zackai E(3), Meng W(4), Luning
Prak ET(4), Sullivan KE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie University/IWK Health Centre, Halifax,
Canada. (2)Division of Allergy Immunology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (3)Division of Genetics, The Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (4)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (5)Division of Allergy Immunology, The Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address:
sullivak@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is a common immune deficiency associated
with thymic hypoplasia. Most patients did not survive until the mid-1980s and now
there is a growing adult population. B cell and immunoglobulin defects have been 
described and appear to be increased in the adult population. We used flow
cytometry, B cell stimulation and repertoire analysis to understand B cell
function. B cell production at early stages appeared to be normal in patients but
adult patients exhibited a deficit of switched memory B cells. Follicular helper 
T cells were present at higher percentages in patients and they exhibited a more 
activated phenotype in patients compared to controls. In spite of that, somatic
hypermutation was decreased in patients compared to controls at all ages. Fewer
mutations per clone were seen, strongly implicating aberrant T cell help.
Therefore, patients with chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome have a progressive 
decrease in switched memory B cells and evidence of compromised T cell help. In
children, evidence of compromised T cell help is limited to decreased somatic
hypermutation. With age, greater manifestations become apparent even though a
minority of patients have hypogammaglobulinemia. As this population ages, this
has important implications for management.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26689329  [PubMed - in process]


8. Dev Dyn. 2016 Mar;245(3):342-50. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24378. Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Development of the shoulder girdle musculature.

Pu Q(1), Huang R(2), Brand-Saberi B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, Department of Anatomy and Molecular Embryology,
Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany. (2)Institute of Anatomy, Department of
Neuroanatomy, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University of Bonn, Germany.

The muscles of the shoulder region are important for movements of the upper limbs
and for stabilizing the girdle elements by connecting them to the trunk. They
have a triple embryonic origin. First, the branchiomeric shoulder girdle muscles 
(sternocleidomastoideus and trapezius muscles) develop from the occipital lateral
plate mesoderm using Tbx1 over the course of this development. The second
population of cells constitutes the superficial shoulder girdle muscles (pectoral
and latissimus dorsi muscles), which are derived from the wing premuscle mass.
This muscle group undergoes a two-step development, referred to as the "in-out"
mechanism. Myogenic precursor cells first migrate anterogradely into the wing
bud. Subsequently, they migrate in a retrograde manner from the wing premuscle
mass to the trunk. SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling is involved in this outward migration. A
third group of shoulder muscles are the rhomboidei and serratus anterior muscles,
which are referred to as deep shoulder girdle muscles; they are thought to be
derived from the myotomes. It is, however, not clear how myotome cells make
contact to the scapula to form these two muscles. In this review, we discuss the 
development of the shoulder girdle muscle in relation to the different muscle
groups. Developmental Dynamics 245:342-350, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26676088  [PubMed - in process]


9. Mol Psychiatry. 2015 Dec 15. doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.190. [Epub ahead of print]

Structure and function of neonatal social communication in a genetic mouse model 
of autism.

Takahashi T(1), Okabe S(2), Broin PÓ(3), Nishi A(1,)(4), Ye K(5), Beckert MV(6), 
Izumi T(1,)(7), Machida A(2), Kang G(1), Abe S(1), Pena JL(6), Golden A(3,)(8),
Kikusui T(2), Hiroi N(1,)(3,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA. (2)Department of Animal Science and Biotechnology,
Azabu University, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan. (3)Department of Genetics, Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA. (4)Department of Psychiatry, Course
of Integrated Brain Sciences and Medical Informatics, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Tokushima University Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan. (5)Department
of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, NY, USA. (6)Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA. (7)Department of Neuropharmacology,
Graduate School of Hokkaido University College of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
(8)Department of Mathematical Sciences, Yeshiva University, New York, NY, USA.

A critical step toward understanding autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is to
identify both genetic and environmental risk factors. A number of rare copy
number variants (CNVs) have emerged as robust genetic risk factors for ASD, but
not all CNV carriers exhibit ASD and the severity of ASD symptoms varies among
CNV carriers. Although evidence exists that various environmental factors
modulate symptomatic severity, the precise mechanisms by which these factors
determine the ultimate severity of ASD are still poorly understood. Here, using a
mouse heterozygous for Tbx1 (a gene encoded in 22q11.2 CNV), we demonstrate that 
a genetically triggered neonatal phenotype in vocalization generates a negative
environmental loop in pup-mother social communication. Wild-type pups used
individually diverse sequences of simple and complicated call types, but
heterozygous pups used individually invariable call sequences with less
complicated call types. When played back, representative wild-type call sequences
elicited maternal approach, but heterozygous call sequences were ineffective.
When the representative wild-type call sequences were randomized, they were
ineffective in eliciting vigorous maternal approach behavior. These data
demonstrate that an ASD risk gene alters the neonatal call sequence of its
carriers and this pup phenotype in turn diminishes maternal care through atypical
social communication. Thus, an ASD risk gene induces, through atypical neonatal
call sequences, less than optimal maternal care as a negative neonatal
environmental factor.Molecular Psychiatry advance online publication, 15 December
2015; doi:10.1038/mp.2015.190.

PMID: 26666205  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Indian J Pediatr. 2015 Dec 4. [Epub ahead of print]

Mutation Analysis of TBX1 in Children with Conotruncal Heart Anomalies.

Koshy T(1), Venkatesan V(1), Gowrishankar K(2), Perumal V(1), Mohan S(1), Paul
SF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Sri Ramachandra University, Porur, Chennai, 600 
116, India. (2)Department of Medical Genetics, Childs Trust Medical Research
Foundation, Nungambakkam, Chennai, India. (3)Department of Human Genetics, Sri
Ramachandra University, Porur, Chennai, 600 116, India. wise_soly@yahoo.com.

PMID: 26634261  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Genet Couns. 2015;26(3):313-20.

ESOPHAGEAL ATRESIA WITH RECURRENT TRACHEOESOPHAGEAL FISTULAS AND MICRODUPLICATION
22q11.23.

Puvabanditsin S, Garrow E, February M, Yen E, Mehta R.

The microduplication 22q11.2 syndrome has a wide range of clinical
manifestations. The phenotype ranges from normal to mental retardation and
congenital anomalies. Esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) has
recently been linked with the Tbx1 gene mutation located on the long arm of
chromosome 22(22q11.21). We report a case with 1.4 Mb 22q11.23 duplication
detected by array-CGH. The father of this infant has the same interstitial
microduplication but with a normal phenotype. The phenotype seen in our case is
type C (3B) esophageal atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula, and ventricular septal
defect. Our patient underwent primary repair of OA/TEF malformations, which was
later complicated by pneumonia and a recurrent TEF.

PMID: 26625662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Hum Genet. 2016 Feb;61(2):157-62. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.126. Epub 2015 Oct 22.

Genetic mutation analysis in Japanese patients with non-syndromic congenital
heart disease.

Yoshida A(1,)(2), Morisaki H(1,)(2,)(3), Nakaji M(1,)(3), Kitano M(4), Kim KS(5),
Sagawa K(6), Ishikawa S(6), Satokata I(7), Mitani Y(8), Kato H(5), Hamaoka K(9), 
Echigo S(4), Shiraishi I(4), Morisaki T(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Genetics, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular
Center Research Institute, Suita, Japan. (2)Department of Medical Genetics,
National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan. (3)Department of
Molecular Pathophysiology, Osaka University Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Suita, Japan. (4)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, National Cerebral 
and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan. (5)Division of Cardiology, National
Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Pediatric
Cardiology, Fukuoka Children's Hospital Medical Center, Fukuoka, Japan.
(7)Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata,
Japan. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tsu, Japan. (9)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Nephrology, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyoto,
Japan.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defect occurring in
humans and some transcriptional factors have been identified as causative.
However, additional mutation analysis of these genes is necessary to develop
effective diagnostic and medical treatment methods. We conducted sequence
analysis of the coding regions of NKX2.5, GATA4, TBX1, TBX5, TBX20, CFC1 and ZIC3
in 111 Japanese patients with non-syndromic CHD and 9 of their relatives. All
patient samples were also analyzed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification using probes involved in chromosome deletion related to CHD. Five
novel variations of TBX5, GATA4 and TBX20 were detected in 6 of the patients,
whereas none were found in 200 controls. The TBX5 variation p.Pro108Thr, located 
in the T-box domain, was identified in a patient with tricuspid atresia, an
exon-intron boundary variation of GATA4 (IVS4+5G>A) was detected in a Tetralogy
of Fallot patient and an 8p23 microdeletion was detected in one patient with
atrioventricular septal defect and psychomotor delay. A total of seven
non-synonymous polymorphisms were found in the patients and controls.
Accumulation of novel variations of genes involving the cardiac development may
be required for better understanding of CHD.

PMID: 26490186  [PubMed - in process]


13. Mol Cancer Res. 2016 Jan;14(1):78-92. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-15-0151. Epub
2015 Oct 13.

Increased Expression of Beige/Brown Adipose Markers from Host and Breast Cancer
Cells Influence Xenograft Formation in Mice.

Singh R(1), Parveen M(2), Basgen JM(2), Fazel S(2), Meshesha MF(2), Thames EC(3),
Moore B(2), Martinez L(2), Howard CB(4), Vergnes L(5), Reue K(5), Pervin S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science, Los Angeles, California.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA,
Los Angeles, California. Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center at UCLA, Los
Angeles, California. (2)Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science, Los
Angeles, California. (3)Columbia University, New York, New York. (4)Jackson State
University, Jackson, Mississippi. (5)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California. (6)Charles R. Drew
University of Medicine and Science, Los Angeles, California. Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California. Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center at UCLA, Los Angeles, California.
shehlapervin@cdrewu.edu spervin@mednet.ucla.edu.

The initiation and progression of breast cancer is a complex process that is
influenced by heterogeneous cell populations within the tumor microenvironment.
Although adipocytes have been shown to promote breast cancer development,
adipocyte characteristics involved in this process remain poorly understood. In
this study, we demonstrate enrichment of beige/brown adipose markers, contributed
from the host as well as tumor cells, in the xenografts from breast cancer cell
lines. In addition to uncoupling protein-1 (UCP1) that is exclusively expressed
in beige/brown adipocytes, gene expression for classical brown (MYF5, EVA1, and
OPLAH) as well as beige (CD137/TNFRSF9 and TBX1) adipocyte markers was also
elevated in the xenografts. Enrichment of beige/brown characteristics in the
xenografts was independent of the site of implantation of the breast tumor cells.
Early stages of xenografts showed an expansion of a subset of mammary cancer stem
cells that expressed PRDM16, a master regulator of brown adipocyte
differentiation. Depletion of UCP1(+) or Myf5(+) cells significantly reduced
tumor development. There was increased COX2 (MT-CO2) expression, which is known
to stimulate formation of beige adipocytes in early xenografts and treatment with
a COX2 inhibitor (SC236) reduced tumor growth. In contrast, treatment with
factors that induce brown adipocyte differentiation in vitro led to larger tumors
in vivo. A panel of xenografts derived from established breast tumor cells as
well as patient tumor tissues were generated that expressed key brown adipose
tissue-related markers and contained cells that morphologically resembled brown
adipocytes.IMPLICATIONS: This is the first report demonstrating that beige/brown 
adipocyte characteristics could play an important role in breast tumor
development and suggest a potential target for therapeutic drug design. Mol
Cancer Res; 14(1); 78-92. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4749269 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26464213  [PubMed - in process]


14. Dev Biol. 2015 Nov 15;407(2):195-210. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.09.016. Epub 2015
Oct 3.

Fibronectin signals through integrin a5ß1 to regulate cardiovascular development 
in a cell type-specific manner.

Chen D(1), Wang X(2), Liang D(2), Gordon J(3), Mittal A(2), Manley N(3),
Degenhardt K(4), Astrof S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University, Department of
Medicine, Center for Translational Medicine, 1020 Locust Street, Philadelphia, PA
19107, USA; Cell and Developmental Biology graduate program, Sidney Kimmel
Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
(2)Sidney Kimmel Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University, Department of
Medicine, Center for Translational Medicine, 1020 Locust Street, Philadelphia, PA
19107, USA. (3)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602,
USA. (4)Children's Hospital of Pennsylvania, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. (5)Sidney Kimmel Medical College of Thomas Jefferson
University, Department of Medicine, Center for Translational Medicine, 1020
Locust Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA; Cell and Developmental Biology
graduate program, Sidney Kimmel Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. Electronic address: sophie.astrof@jefferson.edu.

Fibronectin (Fn1) is an evolutionarily conserved extracellular matrix
glycoprotein essential for embryonic development. Global deletion of Fn1 leads to
mid-gestation lethality from cardiovascular defects. However, severe
morphogenetic defects that occur early in embryogenesis in these embryos
precluded assigning a direct role for Fn1 in cardiovascular development. We
noticed that Fn1 is expressed in strikingly non-uniform patterns during mouse
embryogenesis, and that its expression is particularly enriched in the pharyngeal
region corresponding with the pharyngeal arches 3, 4, and 6. This region bears a 
special importance for the developing cardiovascular system, and we hypothesized 
that the localized enrichment of Fn1 in the pharyngeal region may be essential
for cardiovascular morphogenesis. To test this hypothesis, we ablated Fn1 using
the Isl1(Cre) knock-in strain of mice. Deletion of Fn1 using the Isl1(Cre) strain
resulted in defective formation of the 4th pharyngeal arch arteries (PAAs),
aberrant development of the cardiac outflow tract (OFT), and ventricular septum
defects. To determine the cell types responding to Fn1 signaling during
cardiovascular development, we deleted a major Fn1 receptor, integrin a5 using
the Isl1(Cre) strain, and observed the same spectrum of abnormalities seen in the
Fn1 conditional mutants. Additional conditional mutagenesis studies designed to
ablate integrin a5 in distinct cell types within the Isl1(+) tissues and their
derivatives, suggested that the expression of integrin a5 in the pharyngeal arch 
mesoderm, endothelium, surface ectoderm and the neural crest were not required
for PAA formation. Our studies suggest that an (as yet unknown) integrin
a5-dependent signal extrinsic to the pharyngeal endothelium mediates the
formation of the 4th PAAs.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26434918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Dev Cell. 2015 Sep 28;34(6):694-704. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.07.003. Epub 2015
Sep 17.

A Cranial Mesoderm Origin for Esophagus Striated Muscles.

Gopalakrishnan S(1), Comai G(1), Sambasivan R(2), Francou A(3), Kelly RG(3),
Tajbakhsh S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental & Stem Cell Biology, Institut Pasteur, Stem Cells 
& Development, CNRS URA 2578, 25 Rue du Dr. Roux, 75015 Paris, France.
(2)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, GKVK P.O., Bellary 
Road, Bangalore 560065, India. (3)Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, IBDM UMR 7288, 
13288 Marseille, France. (4)Department of Developmental & Stem Cell Biology,
Institut Pasteur, Stem Cells & Development, CNRS URA 2578, 25 Rue du Dr. Roux,
75015 Paris, France. Electronic address: shahragim.tajbakhsh@pasteur.fr.

The esophagus links the oral cavity to the stomach and facilitates the transfer
of bolus. Using genetic tracing and mouse mutants, we demonstrate that esophagus 
striated muscles (ESMs) are not derived from somites but are of cranial origin.
Tbx1 and Isl1 act as key regulators of ESMs, which we now identify as a third
derivative of cardiopharyngeal mesoderm that contributes to second heart field
derivatives and head muscles. Isl1-derived ESM progenitors colonize the mouse
esophagus in an anterior-posterior direction but are absent in the developing
chick esophagus, thus providing evolutionary insight into the lack of ESMs in
avians. Strikingly, different from other myogenic regions, in which embryonic
myogenesis establishes a scaffold for fetal fiber formation, ESMs are established
directly by fetal myofibers. We propose that ESM progenitors use smooth muscle as
a scaffold, thereby bypassing the embryonic program. These findings have
important implications in understanding esophageal dysfunctions, including
dysphagia, and congenital disorders, such as DiGeorge syndrome.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26387456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 18;10(9):e0138525. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138525.
eCollection 2015.

TBX1 Represses Vegfr2 Gene Expression and Enhances the Cardiac Fate of VEGFR2+
Cells.

Lania G(1), Ferrentino R(1), Baldini A(2).

Author information: 
(1)CNR Institute of Genetics and Biophysics Adriano Buzzati Traverso, Via Pietro 
Castellino 111, 80131 Napoli, Italy. (2)CNR Institute of Genetics and Biophysics 
Adriano Buzzati Traverso, Via Pietro Castellino 111, 80131 Napoli, Italy; Dept.
of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples Federico
II, 80131, Napoli, Italy.

The T-box transcription factor TBX1 has critical roles in maintaining
proliferation and inhibiting differentiation of cardiac progenitor cells of the
second heart field (SHF). Haploinsufficiency of the gene that encodes it is a
cause of congenital heart disease. Here, we developed an embryonic stem (ES)
cell-based model in which Tbx1 expression can be modulated by tetracycline. Using
this model, we found that TBX1 down regulates the expression of VEGFR2, and we
confirmed this finding in vivo during embryonic development. In addition, we
found a Vegfr2 domain of expression, not previously described, in the posterior
SHF and this expression is extended by loss of Tbx1. VEGFR2 has been previously
described as a marker of a subpopulation of cardiac progenitors. Clonal analysis 
of ES-derived VEGFR2+ cells indicated that 12.5% of clones expressed three
markers of cardiac lineage (cardiomyocyte, smooth muscle and endothelium).
However, a pulse of Tbx1 expression was sufficient to increase the percentage to 
20.8%. In addition, the percentage of clones expressing markers of multiple
cardiac lineages increased from 41.6% to 79.1% after Tbx1 pulse. These results
suggest that TBX1 plays a role in maintaining a progenitor state in VEGFR2+
cells.

PMCID: PMC4575176
PMID: 26382615  [PubMed - in process]


17. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 17;10(9):e0135799. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135799.
eCollection 2015.

Meta-Analysis of Microarray Data of Rainbow Trout Fry Gonad Differentiation
Modulated by Ethynylestradiol.

Depiereux S(1), Le Gac F(2), De Meulder B(3), Pierre M(3), Helaers R(3), Guiguen 
Y(2), Kestemont P(1), Depiereux E(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Namur (UNamur), Research Unit in Environmental and Evolutionary 
Biology (URBE-NARILIS), 61 rue de Bruxelles, B-5000, Namur, Belgium. (2)Institut 
National de la Recherche Agronomique, INRA-LPGP, UPR1037, Campus de Beaulieu,
35042, Rennes, France. (3)University of Namur (UNamur), Research Unit in
Molecular Biology (URBM-NARILIS), 61 rue de Bruxelles, B-5000, Namur, Belgium.

Sex differentiation in fish is a highly labile process easily reversed by the use
of exogenous hormonal treatment and has led to environmental concerns since low
doses of estrogenic molecules can adversely impact fish reproduction. The goal of
this study was to identify pathways altered by treatment with ethynylestradiol
(EE2) in developing fish and to find new target genes to be tested further for
their possible role in male-to-female sex transdifferentiation. To this end, we
have successfully adapted a previously developed bioinformatics workflow to a
meta-analysis of two datasets studying sex reversal following exposure to EE2 in 
juvenile rainbow trout. The meta-analysis consisted of retrieving the
intersection of the top gene lists generated for both datasets, performed at
different levels of stringency. The intersecting gene lists, enriched in true
positive differentially expressed genes (DEGs), were subjected to
over-representation analysis (ORA) which allowed identifying several
statistically significant enriched pathways altered by EE2 treatment and several 
new candidate pathways, such as progesterone-mediated oocyte maturation and PPAR 
signalling. Moreover, several relevant key genes potentially implicated in the
early transdifferentiation process were selected. Altogether, the results show
that EE2 has a great effect on gene expression in juvenile rainbow trout. The
feminization process seems to result from the altered transcription of genes
implicated in normal female gonad differentiation, resulting in expression
similar to that observed in normal females (i.e. the repression of key testicular
markers cyp17a1, cyp11b, tbx1), as well as from other genes (including
transcription factors) that respond specifically to the EE2 treatment. The
results also showed that the bioinformatics workflow can be applied to different 
types of microarray platforms and could be generalized to (eco)toxicogenomics
studies for environmental risk assessment purposes.

PMCID: PMC4574709
PMID: 26379055  [PubMed - in process]


18. Prenat Diagn. 2015 Dec;35(13):1278-86. doi: 10.1002/pd.4687. Epub 2015 Oct 30.

Increased nuchal translucency origins from abnormal lymphatic development and is 
independent of the presence of a cardiac defect.

Burger NB(1), Bekker MN(2), Kok E(3), De Groot CJ(1), Martin JF(4), Shou W(5),
Scambler PJ(6), Lee Y(7), Christoffels VM(3), Haak MC(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Anatomy,
Embryology and Physiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. (5)Riley Heart Research Center, Division of Pediatric
Cardiology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Medicine, UCL Institute of Child Health, London,
United Kingdom. (7)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. (8)Department of Obstetrics, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether cardiac failure, because of cardiac defects, and
abnormal jugular lymphatic development are involved in nuchal edema (NE) - the
morphological equivalent of increased nuchal translucency - in various euploid
mutant mouse models.
METHOD: Mouse embryos with lymphatic abnormalities and NE (Ccbe1(-/-) ), with
cardiac defects and NE (Fkbp12(-/-) , Tbx1(-/-) , Chd7(fl/fl) ;Mesp1Cre,
Jarid2(-/-NE+) ) and with cardiac malformations without NE (Tbx2(-/-) ,
Pitx2(-/-) , Fgf10(-/-) , Jarid2(-/-NE-) ) were examined. Embryos were analyzed
from embryonic day 11.5 to 15.5. Markers for lymphatic vessels, endothelium,
smooth muscle cells and nerves were used to study the nuchal region.
Hematoxylin-Azophloxine staining was performed to examine cardiac morphology.
RESULTS: Mouse embryos with lymphatic abnormalities and NE (Ccbe1(-/-) ) showed
no formation of the jugular lymphatic sac but normal cardiac morphology. In mouse
embryos with cardiac defects and NE (Fkbp12(-/-) , Tbx1(-/-) , Chd7(fl/fl)
;Mesp1Cre, Jarid2(-/-NE+) ) enlarged jugular lymphatic sacs or large nuchal
cavities within the NE were found. In mouse embryos with a cardiac malformation
without NE (Tbx2(-/-) , Pitx2(-/-) , Fgf10(-/-) , Jarid2(-/-NE-) ) normal jugular
lymphatic sacs were observed.
CONCLUSION: NE consistently coincides with abnormal jugular lymphatic development
in euploid mouse embryos, independent of cardiac anatomy. NE is unlikely to be
caused by temporary cardiac failure solely because of a cardiac defect. © 2015
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26338284  [PubMed - in process]


19. World J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 26;6(3):121-38. doi: 10.4331/wjbc.v6.i3.121.

Molecular basis of cleft palates in mice.

Funato N(1), Nakamura M(1), Yanagisawa H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Noriko Funato, Masataka Nakamura, Research Center for Medical and Dental
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

Cleft palate, including complete or incomplete cleft palates, soft palate clefts,
and submucosal cleft palates, is the most frequent congenital craniofacial
anomaly in humans. Multifactorial conditions, including genetic and environmental
factors, induce the formation of cleft palates. The process of palatogenesis is
temporospatially regulated by transcription factors, growth factors,
extracellular matrix proteins, and membranous molecules; a single ablation of
these molecules can result in a cleft palate in vivo. Studies on knockout mice
were reviewed in order to identify genetic errors that lead to cleft palates. In 
this review, we systematically describe these mutant mice and discuss the
molecular mechanisms of palatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4549757
PMID: 26322171  [PubMed]


20. J Diabetes Res. 2015;2015:905042. doi: 10.1155/2015/905042. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

Adipose Tissues Characteristics of Normal, Obesity, and Type 2 Diabetes in Uygurs
Population.

Zhang J(1), Zhang Z(1), Ding Y(1), Xu P(1), Wang T(1), Xu W(1), Lu H(1), Li J(2),
Wang Y(3), Li S(1), Liu Z(1), An N(4), Yang L(1), Xie J(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Shihezi University, Shihezi, Xinjiang 832000, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, First Affiliated Hospital, Shihezi
University School of Medicine, Shihezi, Xinjiang 832002, China. (3)Endocrinology 
Department of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region People's Hospital, Urumqi,
Xinjiang 830001, China. (4)Department of Endocrinology, Fifth Affiliated
Hospital, Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830011, China.

Our results showed that, at the same BMI level, Uygurs have greater WHR values,
abdominal visceral fat content, and diabetes risks than Kazaks. In addition,
values of HDL-C in Uygur subjects were lower than those in Kazak subjects, and
values of creatinine, uric acid, diastolic blood pressure, blood glucose, and
fructosamine in Uygur male subjects were lower than those in Kazak male subjects.
In contrast, systolic blood pressure values in Uygur subjects were greater than
those in Kazak subjects, and blood glucose values were greater in Uygur female
subjects than in Kazak female subjects. Additionally, in Uygurs, visceral adipose
tissue expression levels of TBX1 and TCF21 were greater in obesity group than in 
normal and T2DM groups and lower in T2DM group than in normal group (P < 0.01).
The visceral adipose tissue expression levels of APN in normal group was greater 
than those in obesity and T2DM groups, and visceral adipose tissue expression
levels of TNF-a and MCP-1 in normal group were lower than those in obesity and
T2DM groups (P < 0.01). In conclusion, T2DM in Uygurs was mainly associated with 
not only distribution of adipose tissue in body, but also change in metabolic
activity and adipocytokines secretion of adipose tissue.

PMCID: PMC4530283
PMID: 26273678  [PubMed - in process]


21. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2015 Dec;168(8):649-59. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32349. Epub 2015 Jul 21.

Genome-wide association study of schizophrenia in Ashkenazi Jews.

Goes FS(1), McGrath J(1), Avramopoulos D(1,)(2), Wolyniec P(1), Pirooznia M(1),
Ruczinski I(3), Nestadt G(1), Kenny EE(4,)(5,)(6,)(7), Vacic V(8), Peters I(5),
Lencz T(9,)(10,)(11,)(12,)(13), Darvasi A(14), Mulle JG(15), Warren ST(16),
Pulver AE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (2)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland. (3)Department of Biostatistics,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland. (4)The Charles Bronfman
Institute of Personalized Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York City, New York. (5)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York City, New York. (6)Institute of Genomics and
Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York City, New
York. (7)Center of Statistical Genetics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York City, New York. (8)New York Genome Center, New York City, New York.
(9)Division of Research, Department of Psychiatry, The Zucker Hillside Hospital
Division of the North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System, Glen Oaks, New
York. (10)Center for Psychiatric Neuroscience, The Feinstein Institute for
Medical Research, Manhasset, New York. (11)Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University,
Bronx, New York. (12)Department of Psychiatry, Hofstra University School of
Medicine, Hempstead, New York. (13)Department of Molecular Medicine, Hofstra
University School of Medicine, Hempstead, New York. (14)Department of Genetics,
The Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Givat Ram,
Jerusalem, Israel. (15)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public
Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia. (16)Departments of Human Genetics,
Pediatrics and Biochemistry, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.

Schizophrenia is a common, clinically heterogeneous disorder associated with
lifelong morbidity and early mortality. Several genetic variants associated with 
schizophrenia have been identified, but the majority of the heritability remains 
unknown. In this study, we report on a case-control sample of Ashkenazi Jews
(AJ), a founder population that may provide additional insights into genetic
etiology of schizophrenia. We performed a genome-wide association analysis (GWAS)
of 592 cases and 505 controls of AJ ancestry ascertained in the US. Subsequently,
we performed a meta-analysis with an Israeli AJ sample of 913 cases and 1640
controls, followed by a meta-analysis and polygenic risk scoring using summary
results from Psychiatric GWAS Consortium 2 schizophrenia study. The U.S. AJ
sample showed strong evidence of polygenic inheritance (pseudo-R(2) ~9.7%) and a 
SNP-heritability estimate of 0.39 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.00046). We found no genome-wide
significant associations in the U.S. sample or in the combined US/Israeli AJ
meta-analysis of 1505 cases and 2145 controls. The strongest AJ specific
associations (P-values in 10(-6) -10(-7) range) were in the 22q 11.2 deletion
region and included the genes TBX1, GLN1, and COMT. Supportive evidence (meta
P<U+2009><<U+2009>1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4) ) was also found for several previously identified genome-wide
significant findings, including the HLA region, CNTN4, IMMP2L, and GRIN2A. The
meta-analysis of the U.S. sample with the PGC2 results provided initial
genome-wide significant evidence for six new loci. Among the novel potential
susceptibility genes is PEPD, a gene involved in proline metabolism, which is
associated with a Mendelian disorder characterized by developmental delay and
cognitive deficits.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26198764  [PubMed - in process]


22. J Neurodev Disord. 2015;7(1):18. doi: 10.1186/s11689-015-9113-x. Epub 2015 Jul 1.

Comparative mapping of the 22q11.2 deletion region and the potential of simple
model organisms.

Guna A(1), Butcher NJ(2), Bassett AS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Research Program and Campbell Family Mental Health Research 
Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON Canada.
(2)Clinical Genetics Research Program and Campbell Family Mental Health Research 
Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON Canada ; Institute
of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON Canada. (3)Clinical
Genetics Research Program and Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute,
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON Canada ; Institute of Medical
Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON Canada ; Dalglish Family Hearts and
Minds Clinic for Adults with 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome, Division of Cardiology,
Department of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, and Toronto General Research
Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, ON Canada ; Department of
Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON Canada ; Centre for Addiction and 
Mental Health, 33 Russell Street, Room 1100, M5S 2S1 Toronto, ON Canada.

BACKGROUND: 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) is the most common
micro-deletion syndrome. The associated 22q11.2 deletion conveys the strongest
known molecular risk for schizophrenia. Neurodevelopmental phenotypes, including 
intellectual disability, are also prominent though variable in severity. Other
developmental features include congenital cardiac and craniofacial anomalies.
Whereas existing mouse models have been helpful in determining the role of some
genes overlapped by the hemizygous 22q11.2 deletion in phenotypic expression,
much remains unknown. Simple model organisms remain largely unexploited in
exploring these genotype-phenotype relationships.
METHODS: We first developed a comprehensive map of the human 22q11.2 deletion
region, delineating gene content, and brain expression. To identify putative
orthologs, standard methods were used to interrogate the proteomes of the
zebrafish (D. rerio), fruit fly (D. melanogaster), and worm (C. elegans), in
addition to the mouse. Spatial locations of conserved homologues were mapped to
examine syntenic relationships. We systematically cataloged available knockout
and knockdown models of all conserved genes across these organisms, including a
comprehensive review of associated phenotypes.
RESULTS: There are 90 genes overlapped by the typical 2.5 Mb deletion 22q11.2
region. Of the 46 protein-coding genes, 41 (89.1 %) have documented expression in
the human brain. Identified homologues in the zebrafish (n = 37, 80.4 %) were
comparable to those in the mouse (n = 40, 86.9 %) and included some conserved
gene cluster structures. There were 22 (47.8 %) putative homologues in the fruit 
fly and 17 (37.0 %) in the worm involving multiple chromosomes. Individual gene
knockdown mutants were available for the simple model organisms, but not for
mouse. Although phenotypic data were relatively limited for knockout and
knockdown models of the 17 genes conserved across all species, there was some
evidence for roles in neurodevelopmental phenotypes, including four of the six
mitochondrial genes in the 22q11.2 deletion region.
CONCLUSIONS: Simple model organisms represent a powerful but underutilized means 
of investigating the molecular mechanisms underlying the elevated risk for
neurodevelopmental disorders in 22q11.2DS. This comparative multi-species study
provides novel resources and support for the potential utility of non-mouse
models in expression studies and high-throughput drug screening. The approach has
implications for other recurrent copy number variations associated with
neurodevelopmental phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC4487986
PMID: 26137170  [PubMed]


23. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Oct;167A(10):2319-26. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37177. Epub 2015
Jun 8.

SNP microarray abnormalities in a cohort of 28 infants with congenital
diaphragmatic hernia.

Stark Z(1), Behrsin J(2), Burgess T(1,)(3), Ritchie A(1), Yeung A(1), Tan
TY(1,)(3), Brown NJ(1,)(3), Savarirayan R(1,)(3), Patel N(2).

Author information: 
(1)VictorianClinicalGenetics Service and Murdoch Children Institute, Melbourne,
Australia. (2)Newborn Intensive Care Unit, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 
Australia. (3)University of Melbourne Department of Paediatrics, Melbourne,
Australia.

Chromosomal abnormalities are an important factor in the pathogenesis of
congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), a relatively common congenital defect
associated with high morbidity and mortality. The adoption of array-based
platforms for chromosome analysis has resulted in the identification of numerous 
copy number variants (CNVs) in infants with CDH, highlighting the potential
pathogenic role of many novel genes. We identified a retrospective cohort of 28
infants treated for CDH at a single institution who had microarray testing to
determine the proportion of microarray abnormalities and whether these were
contributory to CDH pathogenesis. Eight patients (29%) had microarray
abnormality. Seven (25%) were considered likely contributory to CDH pathogenesis,
including two mosaic trisomy 9s, a 9q22.31q22.32 microduplication, two atypical
22q11.21 microdeletions, a 2q35q36.1 microdeletion, and a 15q11.2 microdeletion, 
offering insights into the genetic mechanisms underlying CDH development.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26059276  [PubMed - in process]


24. Appl Clin Genet. 2015 May 18;8:123-32. doi: 10.2147/TACG.S82105. eCollection
2015.

22q11 deletion syndrome: current perspective.

Hacihamdioglu B(1), Hacihamdioglu D(2), Delil K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Marmara University, School of Medicine,
Istanbul, Turkey. (2)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, GATA Haydarpasa Training
Hospital, Marmara University, School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. (3)Department
of Medical Genetics, Marmara University, School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.

Chromosome 22q11 is characterized by the presence of chromosome-specific low-copy
repeats or segmental duplications. This region of the chromosome is very unstable
and susceptible to mutations. The misalignment of low-copy repeats during
nonallelic homologous recombination leads to the deletion of the 22q11.2 region, 
which results in 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS). The 22q11.2 deletion is
associated with a wide variety of phenotypes. The term 22q11DS is an umbrella
term that is used to encompass all 22q11.2 deletion-associated phenotypes. The
haploinsufficiency of genes located at 22q11.2 affects the early morphogenesis of
the pharyngeal arches, heart, skeleton, and brain. TBX1 is the most important
gene for 22q11DS. This syndrome can ultimately affect many organs or systems;
therefore, it has a very wide phenotypic spectrum. An increasing amount of
information is available related to the pathogenesis, clinical phenotypes, and
management of this syndrome in recent years. This review summarizes the current
clinical and genetic status related to 22q11DS.

PMCID: PMC4445702
PMID: 26056486  [PubMed]


25. Pediatr Cardiol. 2015 Dec;36(8):1642-6. doi: 10.1007/s00246-015-1210-9. Epub 2015
Jun 3.

Identification of Copy Number Variations in Isolated Tetralogy of Fallot.

Aguayo-Gómez A(1), Arteaga-Vázquez J(2), Svyryd Y(1), Calderón-Colmenero J(3),
Zamora-González C(4), Vargas-Alarcón G(5), Mutchinick OM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición
"Salvador Zubirán", Mexico, D.F., Mexico. (2)Department of Genetics, Instituto
Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición "Salvador Zubirán", Mexico, D.F.,
Mexico. jazminarteaga@hotmail.com. (3)Department of Pediatric Cardiology,
Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, Mexico, D.F., Mexico.
(4)Congenital Heart Defects Adults Clinic, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología
Ignacio Chávez, Mexico, D.F., Mexico. (5)Department of Molecular Biology,
Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, Mexico, D.F., Mexico.
(6)Department of Genetics, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición
"Salvador Zubirán", Mexico, D.F., Mexico. osvaldo@unam.mx.

Tetralogy of Fallot (ToF) is one of the most common and severe congenital heart
defects (CHD). Recently, unbalanced structural genomic variants or copy number
variations (CNVs) were proposed to be involved in the etiology of many complex
diseases, including CHDs. The aim of this study was to investigate the frequency 
of CNVs in a region with a high density of CNVs, 22q11.2, and other regions with 
CHD-related genes in a sample of 52 Mexican mestizo patients with isolated ToF
and negative fluorescence in situ hybridization staining for 22q11. CNVs were
studied using two multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) kits,
SALSA P250-B1® (DiGeorge gene region) and SALSA MLPA P311-A1® CHD-related gene
regions (GATA4, NKX2-5, TBX5, BMP4, and CRELD1). The MLPA assay detected a de
novo CNV deletion of the probes located in exons 2 and 7 of the TBX1 gene in one 
of the 52 patients studied; this result was confirmed by real-time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction. This deletion was not present in the patient's parents
and 104 chromosomes from healthy control subjects. Our results clearly suggest a 
possible etiologic association between the TBX1 deletion and the ToF in our
patient.

PMID: 26036351  [PubMed - in process]


26. Dev Dyn. 2015 Jul;244(7):874-87. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24289. Epub 2015 Jun 18.

Pharyngeal arch deficiencies affect taste bud development in the circumvallate
papilla with aberrant glossopharyngeal nerve formation.

Okubo T(1), Takada S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Animal Science, Kitasato University School of
Medicine, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Japan. (2)Okazaki Institute for Integrative
Bioscience, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Okazaki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The pharyngeal arches (PAs) generate cranial organs including the
tongue. The taste placodes, formed in particular locations on the embryonic
tongue surface, differentiate into taste buds harbored in distinct gustatory
papillae. The developing tongue also has a complex supply of cranial nerves
through each PA. However, the relationship between the PAs and taste bud
development is not fully understood.
RESULTS: Ripply3 homozygous mutant mice, which have impaired third/fourth PAs,
display a hypoplastic circumvallate papilla and lack taste buds, although the
taste placode is normally formed. Formation of the glossopharyngeal ganglia is
defective and innervation toward the posterior tongue is completely missing in
Ripply3 mutant embryos at E12.5. Moreover, the distribution of neuroblasts
derived from the epibranchial placode is severely, but not completely, atenuated,
and the neural crest cells are diminished in the third PA region of Ripply3
mutant embryos at E9.5-E10.5. In Tbx1 homozygous mutant embryos, which exhibit
another type of deficiency in PA development, the hypoplastic circumvallate
papilla is observed along with abnormal formation of the glossopharyngeal ganglia
and severely impaired innervation.
CONCLUSIONS: PA deficiencies affect multiple aspects of taste bud development,
including formation of the cranial ganglia and innervation to the posterior
tongue.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25997579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Hum Mutat. 2015 Aug;36(8):797-807. doi: 10.1002/humu.22814. Epub 2015 Jul 2.

Whole-Genome Sequencing and Integrative Genomic Analysis Approach on Two 22q11.2 
Deletion Syndrome Family Trios for Genotype to Phenotype Correlations.

Chung JH(1), Cai J(2), Suskin BG(3), Zhang Z(1), Coleman K(4), Morrow BE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York. 
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York. (3)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Women's Health, Montefiore
Medical Center, Bronx, New York. (4)Children's Healthcare of Atlanta at Egleston,
Atlanta, Georgia.

The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) affects 1:4,000 live births and presents 
with highly variable phenotype expressivity. In this study, we developed an
analytical approach utilizing whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and integrative
analysis to discover genetic modifiers. Our pipeline combined available tools in 
order to prioritize rare, predicted deleterious, coding and noncoding
single-nucleotide variants (SNVs), and insertion/deletions from WGS. We sequenced
two unrelated probands with 22q11DS, with contrasting clinical findings, and
their unaffected parents. Proband P1 had cognitive impairment, psychotic
episodes, anxiety, and tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), whereas proband P2 had juvenile
rheumatoid arthritis but no other major clinical findings. In P1, we identified
common variants in COMT and PRODH on 22q11.2 as well as rare potentially
deleterious DNA variants in other behavioral/neurocognitive genes. We also
identified a de novo SNV in ADNP2 (NM_014913.3:c.2243G>C), encoding a
neuroprotective protein that may be involved in behavioral disorders. In P2, we
identified a novel nonsynonymous SNV in ZFPM2 (NM_012082.3:c.1576C>T), a known
causative gene for TOF, which may act as a protective variant downstream of TBX1,
haploinsufficiency of which is responsible for congenital heart disease in
individuals with 22q11DS.

© 2015 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC4514564 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25981510  [PubMed - in process]


28. Dev Biol. 2015 Jul 1;403(1):22-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.04.011. Epub 2015 Apr
23.

Mesodermal expression of Moz is necessary for cardiac septum development.

Vanyai HK(1), Thomas T(2), Voss AK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne 3052, Victoria,
Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne 
3052, Victoria, Australia. (2)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne 3052, Victoria, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne 3052, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address:
tthomas@wehi.edu.au. (3)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Melbourne 3052, Victoria, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne 3052, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address:
avoss@wehi.edu.au.

Ventricular septal defects (VSDs) are the most commonly occurring congenital
heart defect. They are regularly associated with complex syndromes, including
DiGeorge syndrome and Holt-Oram syndrome, which are characterised by
haploinsufficiency for the T-box transcription factors TBX1 and TBX5,
respectively. The histone acetyltransferase monocytic leukaemia zinc finger
protein, MOZ (MYST3/KAT6A), is required for the expression of the Tbx1 and Tbx5
genes. Homozygous loss of MOZ results in DiGeorge syndrome-like defects including
VSD. The Moz gene is expressed in the ectodermal, mesodermal and endodermal
aspects of the developing pharyngeal apparatus and heart; however it is unclear
in which of these tissues MOZ is required for heart development. The role of MOZ 
in the activation of Tbx1 would suggest a requirement for MOZ in the mesoderm,
because deletion of Tbx1 in the mesoderm causes VSDs. Here, we investigated the
tissue-specific requirements for MOZ in the mesoderm. We demonstrate that
Mesp1-cre-mediated deletion of Moz results in high penetrance of VSDs and
overriding aorta and a significant decrease in MOZ-dependant Tbx1 and Tbx5
expression. Together, our data suggest that the molecular pathogenesis of VSDs in
Moz germline mutant mice is due to loss of MOZ-dependant activation of mesodermal
Tbx1 and Tbx5 expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25912687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jun 15;308(12):E1085-105. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00023.2015. Epub 2015 Apr 21.

A stringent validation of mouse adipose tissue identity markers.

de Jong JM(1), Larsson O(2), Cannon B(1), Nedergaard J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm
University, Stockholm, Sweden; and. (2)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Cancer
Center Karolinska, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Department of
Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm University,
Stockholm, Sweden; and jan@metabol.su.se.

The nature of brown adipose tissue in humans is presently debated: whether it is 
classical brown or of brite/beige nature. The dissimilar developmental origins
and proposed distinct functions of the brown and brite/beige tissues make it
essential to ascertain the identity of human depots with the perspective of
recruiting and activating them for the treatment of obesity and type 2 diabetes. 
For identification of the tissues, a number of marker genes have been proposed,
but the validity of the markers has not been well documented. We used established
brown (interscapular), brite (inguinal), and white (epididymal) mouse adipose
tissues and corresponding primary cell cultures as validators and examined the
informative value of a series of suggested markers earlier used in the discussion
considering the nature of human brown adipose tissue. Most of these markers
unexpectedly turned out to be noninformative concerning tissue classification
(Car4, Cited1, Ebf3, Eva1, Fbxo31, Fgf21, Lhx8, Hoxc8, and Hoxc9). Only Zic1
(brown), Cd137, Epsti1, Tbx1, Tmem26 (brite), and Tcf21 (white) proved to be
informative in these three tissues. However, the expression of the brite markers 
was not maintained in cell culture. In a more extensive set of adipose depots,
these validated markers provide new information about depot identity. Principal
component analysis supported our single-gene conclusions. Furthermore, Zic1,
Hoxc8, Hoxc9, and Tcf21 displayed anteroposterior expression patterns, indicating
a relationship between anatomic localization and adipose tissue identity (and
possibly function). Together, the observed expression patterns of these validated
marker genes necessitates reconsideration of adipose depot identity in mice and
humans.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 25898951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Pediatr Cardiol. 2015 Oct;36(7):1400-10. doi: 10.1007/s00246-015-1173-x. Epub
2015 Apr 10.

A Novel TBX1 Loss-of-Function Mutation Associated with Congenital Heart Disease.

Pan Y(1), Wang ZG(1), Liu XY(2), Zhao H(1), Zhou N(1), Zheng GF(1), Qiu XB(3), Li
RG(3), Yuan F(3), Shi HY(3), Hou XM(3), Yang YQ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, 200065, China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, 
Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200065, China.
xingyuanliu69@163.com. (3)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200030, China. (4)Department of
Cardiology, Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, and Central Laboratory, Shanghai 
Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 241 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai,
200030, China. dryyq@tongji.edu.cn.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most prevalent type of birth defect in
humans and is the leading non-infectious cause of infant death worldwide. There
is a growing body of evidence demonstrating that genetic defects play an
important role in the pathogenesis of CHD. However, CHD is a genetically
heterogeneous disease and the genetic basis underpinning CHD in an overwhelming
majority of patients remains unclear. In this study, the coding exons and splice 
junction sites of the TBX1 gene, which encodes a T-box homeodomain transcription 
factor essential for proper cardiovascular morphogenesis, were sequenced in 230
unrelated children with CHD. The available family members of the index patient
carrying an identified mutation and 200 unrelated ethnically matched healthy
individuals used as controls were subsequently genotyped for TBX1. The functional
effect of the TBX1 mutation was predicted by online program MutationTaster and
characterized by using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, a
novel heterozygous TBX1 mutation, p.Q277X, was identified in an index patient
with double outlet right ventricle (DORV) and ventricular septal defect (VSD).
Genetic analysis of the proband's available relatives showed that the mutation
co-segregated with CHD transmitted in an autosomal dominant pattern with complete
penetrance. The nonsense mutation, which was absent in 400 control chromosomes,
altered the amino acid that was completely conserved evolutionarily across
species and was predicted to be disease-causing by MutationTaster. Biochemical
analysis revealed that Q277X-mutant TBX1 lost transcriptional activating function
when compared with its wild-type counterpart. This study firstly associates TBX1 
loss-of-function mutation with enhanced susceptibility to DORV and VSD in humans,
which provides novel insight into the molecular mechanism underlying CHD and
suggests potential implications for the development of new preventive and
therapeutic strategies for CHD.

PMID: 25860641  [PubMed - in process]


31. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2015 Jun;32:119-28. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2015.02.008. Epub
2015 Mar 25.

Regulation and evolution of cardiopharyngeal cell identity and behavior: insights
from simple chordates.

Kaplan N(1), Razy-Krajka F(1), Christiaen L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Genetics, Department of Biology, New York University,
New York, NY 10003, USA. (2)Center for Developmental Genetics, Department of
Biology, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA. Electronic address:
lc121@nyu.edu.

The vertebrate heart arises from distinct first and second heart fields. The
latter also share a common origin with branchiomeric muscles in the pharyngeal
mesoderm and transcription regulators, such as Nkx2-5, Tbx1 and Islet1. Despite
significant progress, the complexity of vertebrate embryos has hindered the
identification of multipotent cardiopharyngeal progenitors. Here, we summarize
recent insights in cardiopharyngeal development gained from ascidian models,
among the closest relatives to vertebrates. In a simplified cellular context,
progressive fate specification of the ascidian cardiopharyngeal precursors
presents striking similarities with their vertebrate counterparts. Multipotent
cardiopharyngeal progenitors are primed to activate both the early cardiac and
pharyngeal muscles programs, which segregate following asymmetric cells divisions
as a result of regulatory cross-antagonisms involving Tbx1 and Nkx2-5 homologs.
Activation of Ebf in pharyngeal muscle founder cells triggers both Myogenic
Regulatory Factor-associated differentiation and Notch-mediated maintenance of an
undifferentiated state in distinct precursors. Cross-species comparisons revealed
the deep conservation of the cardiopharyngeal developmental sequence in spite of 
extreme genome sequence divergence, gene network rewiring and specific
morphogenetic differences. Finally, analyses are beginning to uncover the
influence of surrounding tissues in determining cardiopharyngeal cell identity
and behavior. Thus, ascidian embryos offer a unique opportunity to study gene
regulation and cell behaviors at the cellular level throughout cardiopharyngeal
morphogenesis and evolution.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4470797 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25819888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Prenat Diagn. 2015 Jun;35(6):517-28. doi: 10.1002/pd.4586. Epub 2015 May 19.

Why increased nuchal translucency is associated with congenital heart disease: a 
systematic review on genetic mechanisms.

Burger NB(1), Bekker MN(2), de Groot CJ(1), Christoffels VM(3), Haak MC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Anatomy,
Embryology & Physiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Obstetrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

This overview provides insight into the underlying genetic mechanism of the high 
incidence of cardiac defects in fetuses with increased nuchal translucency (NT). 
Nuchal edema, the morphological equivalent of increased NT, is likely to result
from abnormal lymphatic development and is strongly related to cardiac defects.
The underlying genetic pathways are, however, unknown. This study aims to present
a systematic overview of genes involved in both cardiac and lymphatic development
in mouse embryos. A search of PubMed and the Mammalian Phenotype Browser was
performed. Fifteen candidate genes involved in both cardiac and lymphatic
development were identified: Adrenomedullin; Chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter-transcription factor 2 (COUP-TFII); Cyp51; Ephrin-B2; Forkhead box
protein C2 (Foxc2); Nuclear factor of activated T cells, cytoplasmic 1 (Nfatc1); 
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (Nf1); Phosphoinositide 3-kinase encoding isoform p110a 
(Pik3ca); Podoplanin; Prospero-related homeobox 1 (Prox1); T-box 1 (Tbx1);
Tyrosine kinase with immunoglobulin-like and endothelial growth factor-like
domains 1 (Tie1); vascular endothelial growth factor (Vegf)-A; Vegf receptor-3
(Vegfr-3); and Vascular endothelial zinc finger 1 (Vezf1). Mutations in all but
one gene (Pik3ca) resulted in both a cardiac defect and nuchal edema. Candidate
genes - mainly encoding for endothelium - are involved in both cardiac and
lymphatic development. Alterations in candidate genes are associated with the
strong relation between increased NT and cardiac defects.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25728762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Genetika. 2014 May;50(5):602-10.

[Genetic and clinical characteristics of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome].

[Article in Russian]

Kozlova IuO, Zabnenkova VV, Shilova NV, Min'zhenkova ME, Antonenko VG, Kotlukova 
NP, Simonova LV, Kazanceva IA, Levchenko EG, Bombardirova TD, Zolotukhina TV,
Poliakov AV.

In a group of 140 patients with typical phenotype, the 22q11.2 microdeletion was 
detected in 43 patients (32%) using FISH and MLPA methods. There were no
deletions of other chromosomal loci leading to phenotypes similar to the 22q11.2 
deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS). Sequencing of the TBX1 gene did not detect any
mutations, except for some common neutral polymorphisms. For the first time in
the Russian Federation, the diagnostic efficiency of 22q11.2DS appeared to be
32%, as a result of the application of a combination of genetic approaches for a 
large group of patients with suspected 22q11.2DS.

PMID: 25715476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Med Genet. 2015 May;52(5):322-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-102992. Epub 2015 
Feb 23.

Positional mapping of PRKD1, NRP1 and PRDM1 as novel candidate disease genes in
truncus arteriosus.

Shaheen R(1), Al Hashem A(2), Alghamdi MH(3), Seidahmad MZ(4), Wakil SM(1),
Dagriri K(5), Keavney B(6), Goodship J(7), Alyousif S(4), Al-Habshan FM(8),
Alhussein K(4), Almoisheer A(1), Ibrahim N(1), Alkuraya FS(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military Medical
City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of
Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (3)Department of Cardiac
Sciences, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Security Forces Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Prince Sultan Cardiac Center, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. (6)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK. (7)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle
upon Tyne, UK. (8)Department of Cardiology, King Saud bin Abdulaziz University
for Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (9)Department of Genetics, King Faisal
Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia Department of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Truncus arteriosus (TA) is characterised by failure of septation of
the outflow tract into aortic and pulmonary trunks and is associated with high
morbidity and mortality. Although ranked among the least common congenital heart 
defects, TA provides an excellent model for the role of individual genes in
cardiac morphogenesis as exemplified by TBX1 deficiency caused by point mutations
or, more commonly, hemizygosity as part of the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. The
latter genetic lesion, however, is only observed in a proportion of patients with
TA, which suggests the presence of additional disease genes.
OBJECTIVE: To identify novel genes that cause Mendelian forms of TA.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We exploited the occurrence of monogenic forms of TA in the 
Saudi population, which is characterised by high consanguinity, a feature
conducive to the occurrence of Mendelian phenocopies of complex phenotypes as we 
and others have shown. Indeed, we demonstrate in two multiplex consanguineous
families that we are able to map TA to regions of autozygosity in which
whole-exome sequencing revealed homozygous truncating mutations in PRKD1
(encoding a kinase derepressor of MAF2) and NRP1 (encoding a coreceptor of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGFA)). Previous work has demonstrated that 
Prkd1(-/-) is embryonic lethal and that its tissue-specific deletion results in
abnormal heart remodelling, whereas Nrp1(-/-) develops TA. Surprisingly,
molecular karyotyping to exclude 22q11.2 deletion syndrome in the replication
cohort of 17 simplex TA cases revealed a de novo hemizygous deletion that
encompasses PRDM1, deficiency of which also results in TA phenotype in mouse.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results expand the repertoire of molecular lesions in chromatin 
remodelling and transcription factors that are implicated in the pathogenesis of 
congenital heart disease in humans and attest to the power of monogenic forms of 
congenital heart diseases as a complementary approach to dissect the genetics of 
these complex phenotypes.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25713110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 23;10(2):e0117841. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117841.
eCollection 2015.

Direct evidence of brown adipocytes in different fat depots in children.

Rockstroh D(1), Landgraf K(1), Wagner IV(2), Gesing J(2), Tauscher R(2), Lakowa
N(3), Kiess W(2), Bühligen U(4), Wojan M(5), Till H(6), Blüher M(3), Körner A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pediatric Research Leipzig, University Hospital for Children &
Adolescents, Department of Women's and Child Health, University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany; Integrated Research and Treatment Center (IFB), University of
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (2)Center for Pediatric Research Leipzig, University
Hospital for Children & Adolescents, Department of Women's and Child Health,
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (3)Integrated Research and Treatment
Center (IFB), University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany; Department of Medicine,
Division of Endocrinology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (4)Department
of Pediatric Surgery, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (5)Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (6)Integrated
Research and Treatment Center (IFB), University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany;
Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Surgery, Medical University Graz, Graz,
Austria.

Recent studies suggested the persistence of brown adipocytes in adult humans, as 
opposed to being exclusively present in infancy. In this study, we investigated
the presence of brown-like adipocytes in adipose tissue (AT) samples of children 
and adolescents aged 0 to 18 years and evaluated the association with age,
location, and obesity. For this, we analysed AT samples from 131 children and 23 
adults by histological, immunohistochemical and expression analyses. We detected 
brown-like and UCP1 positive adipocytes in 10.3% of 87 lean children (aged 0.3 to
10.7 years) and in one overweight infant, whereas we did not find brown
adipocytes in obese children or adults. In our samples, the brown-like adipocytes
were interspersed within white AT of perirenal, visceral and also subcutaneous
depots. Samples with brown-like adipocytes showed an increased expression of UCP1
(>200fold), PRDM16 (2.8fold), PGC1a and CIDEA while other brown/beige selective
markers, such as PAT2, P2RX5, ZIC1, LHX8, TMEM26, HOXC9 and TBX1 were not
significantly different between UCP1 positive and negative samples. We identified
a positive correlation between UCP1 and PRDM16 within UCP1 positive samples, but 
not with any other brown/beige marker. In addition, we observed significantly
increased PRDM16 and PAT2 expression in subcutaneous and visceral AT samples with
high UCP1 expression in adults. Our data indicate that brown-like adipocytes are 
present well beyond infancy in subcutaneous depots of non-obese children. The
presence was not restricted to typical perirenal locations, but they were also
interspersed within WAT of visceral and subcutaneous depots.

PMCID: PMC4338084
PMID: 25706927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Evodevo. 2014 Oct 9;5(1):36. doi: 10.1186/2041-9139-5-36. eCollection 2014.

Roles of retinoic acid and Tbx1/10 in pharyngeal segmentation: amphioxus and the 
ancestral chordate condition.

Koop D(1), Chen J(2), Theodosiou M(2), Carvalho JE(3), Alvarez S(4), de Lera
AR(4), Holland LZ(1), Schubert M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biology Research Division, Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0202 USA. (2)Institut de
Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon (CNRS UMR 5242, UCBL, ENS, INRA 1288), Ecole
Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 69364 Lyon, Cedex 07, France. (3)Sorbonne
Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, CNRS, UMR 7009, Laboratoire de Biologie du
Développement de Villefranche-sur-Mer, Observatoire Océanologique de
Villefranche-sur-Mer, 06230 Villefranche-sur-Mer, France ; CNRS, UMR 7009,
Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement de Villefranche-sur-Mer, Observatoire
Océanologique de Villefranche-sur-Mer, 06230 Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.
(4)Departamento de Química Orgánica, Universidade de Vigo, 33610 Vigo, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Although chordates descend from a segmented ancestor, the evolution
of head segmentation has been very controversial for over 150 years. Chordates
generally possess a segmented pharynx, but even though anatomical evidence and
gene expression analyses suggest homologies between the pharyngeal apparatus of
invertebrate chordates, such as the cephalochordate amphioxus, and vertebrates,
these homologies remain contested. We, therefore, decided to study the evolution 
of the chordate head by examining the molecular mechanisms underlying pharyngeal 
morphogenesis in amphioxus, an animal lacking definitive neural crest.
RESULTS: Focusing on the role of retinoic acid (RA) in post-gastrulation
pharyngeal morphogenesis, we found that during gastrulation, RA signaling in the 
endoderm is required for defining pharyngeal and non-pharyngeal domains and that 
this process involves active degradation of RA anteriorly in the embryo.
Subsequent extension of the pharyngeal territory depends on the creation of a low
RA environment and is coupled to body elongation. RA further functions in
pharyngeal segmentation in a regulatory network involving the mutual inhibition
of RA- and Tbx1/10-dependent signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that the involvement of RA signaling and its 
interactions with Tbx1/10 in head segmentation preceded the evolution of neural
crest and were thus likely present in the ancestral chordate. Furthermore,
developmental comparisons between different deuterostome models suggest that the 
genetic mechanisms for pharyngeal segmentation are evolutionary ancient and very 
likely predate the origin of chordates.

PMCID: PMC4320481
PMID: 25664163  [PubMed]


37. Curr Biol. 2015 Feb 16;25(4):488-94. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.12.029. Epub 2015
Feb 5.

Org-1-dependent lineage reprogramming generates the ventral longitudinal
musculature of the Drosophila heart.

Schaub C(1), März J(1), Reim I(1), Frasch M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Division of Developmental Biology, Friedrich-Alexander 
University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Staudtstraße 5, 91058 Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Department of Biology, Division of Developmental Biology, Friedrich-Alexander 
University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Staudtstraße 5, 91058 Erlangen, Germany.
Electronic address: manfred.frasch@fau.de.

Only few examples of transdifferentiation, which denotes the conversion of one
differentiated cell type to another, are known to occur during normal
development, and more often, it is associated with regeneration processes. With
respect to muscles, dedifferentiation/redifferentiation processes have been
documented during post-traumatic muscle regeneration in blastema of newts as well
as during myocardial regeneration. As shown herein, the ventral longitudinal
muscles of the adult Drosophila heart arise from specific larval alary muscles in
a process that represents the first known example of syncytial muscle
transdifferentiation via dedifferentiation into mononucleate myoblasts during
normal development. We demonstrate that this unique process depends on the
reinitiation of a transcriptional program previously employed for embryonic alary
muscle development, in which the factors Org-1 (Drosophila Tbx1) and Tailup
(Drosophila Islet1) are key components. During metamorphosis, the action of these
factors is combined with cell-autonomous inputs from the ecdysone steroid and the
Hox gene Ultrabithorax, which provide temporal and spatial specificity to the
transdifferentiation events. Following muscle dedifferentiation, inductive cues, 
particularly from the remodeling heart tube, are required for the
redifferentiation of myoblasts into ventral longitudinal muscles. Our results
provide new insights into mechanisms of lineage commitment and cell-fate
plasticity during development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25660543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Feb 5;96(2):235-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.12.025.

Mouse and human CRKL is dosage sensitive for cardiac outflow tract formation.

Racedo SE(1), McDonald-McGinn DM(2), Chung JH(1), Goldmuntz E(3), Zackai E(2),
Emanuel BS(2), Zhou B(1), Funke B(4), Morrow BE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Yeshiva
University, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. (2)Division of Genetics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (3)Division of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (4)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, 
Partners HealthCare Center for Personalized Genetic Medicine, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA. (5)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Yeshiva University, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. Electronic address:
bernice.morrow@einstein.yu.edu.

The human chromosome 22q11.2 region is susceptible to rearrangements during
meiosis leading to velo-cardio-facial/DiGeorge/22q11.2 deletion syndrome
(22q11DS) characterized by conotruncal heart defects (CTDs) and other congenital 
anomalies. The majority of individuals have a 3 Mb deletion whose proximal region
contains the presumed disease-associated gene TBX1 (T-box 1). Although a small
subset have proximal nested deletions including TBX1, individuals with distal
deletions that exclude TBX1 have also been identified. The deletions are flanked 
by low-copy repeats (LCR22A, B, C, D). We describe cardiac phenotypes in 25
individuals with atypical distal nested deletions within the 3 Mb region that do 
not include TBX1 including 20 with LCR22B to LCR22D deletions and 5 with nested
LCR22C to LCR22D deletions. Together with previous reports, 12 of 37 (32%) with
LCR22B-D deletions and 5 of 34 (15%) individuals with LCR22C-D deletions had CTDs
including tetralogy of Fallot. In the absence of TBX1, we hypothesized that CRKL 
(Crk-like), mapping to the LCR22C-D region, might contribute to the cardiac
phenotype in these individuals. We created an allelic series in mice of Crkl,
including a hypomorphic allele, to test for gene expression effects on phenotype.
We found that the spectrum of heart defects depends on Crkl expression, occurring
with analogous malformations to that in human individuals, suggesting that
haploinsufficiency of CRKL could be responsible for the etiology of CTDs in
individuals with nested distal deletions and might act as a genetic modifier of
individuals with the typical 3 Mb deletion.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4320261
PMID: 25658046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 3;112(5):1446-51. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1424538112. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

Clonal analysis reveals a common origin between nonsomite-derived neck muscles
and heart myocardium.

Lescroart F(1), Hamou W(1), Francou A(2), Théveniau-Ruissy M(2), Kelly RG(2),
Buckingham M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Moléculaire du Développement, CNRS Unité de Recherche
Associée 2578, Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France; and. (2)Aix-Marseille
Université, Institut de Biologie du Développement de Marseille, CNRS Unité Mixte 
de Recherche 7288, 13288 Marseille, France. (3)Unité de Génétique Moléculaire du 
Développement, CNRS Unité de Recherche Associée 2578, Institut Pasteur, 75015
Paris, France; and margaret.buckingham@pasteur.fr.

Neck muscles constitute a transition zone between somite-derived skeletal muscles
of the trunk and limbs, and muscles of the head, which derive from cranial
mesoderm. The trapezius and sternocleidomastoid neck muscles are formed from
progenitor cells that have expressed markers of cranial pharyngeal mesoderm,
whereas other muscles in the neck arise from Pax3-expressing cells in the
somites. Mef2c-AHF-Cre genetic tracing experiments and Tbx1 mutant analysis show 
that nonsomitic neck muscles share a gene regulatory network with cardiac
progenitor cells in pharyngeal mesoderm of the second heart field (SHF) and
branchial arch-derived head muscles. Retrospective clonal analysis shows that
this group of neck muscles includes laryngeal muscles and a component of the
splenius muscle, of mixed somitic and nonsomitic origin. We demonstrate that the 
trapezius muscle group is clonally related to myocardium at the venous pole of
the heart, which derives from the posterior SHF. The left clonal sublineage
includes myocardium of the pulmonary trunk at the arterial pole of the heart.
Although muscles derived from the first and second branchial arches also share a 
clonal relationship with different SHF-derived parts of the heart, neck muscles
are clonally distinct from these muscles and define a third clonal population of 
common skeletal and cardiac muscle progenitor cells within cardiopharyngeal
mesoderm. By linking neck muscle and heart development, our findings highlight
the importance of cardiopharyngeal mesoderm in the evolution of the vertebrate
heart and neck and in the pathophysiology of human congenital disease.

PMCID: PMC4321263
PMID: 25605943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2014 Dec;1(12):982-95. doi: 10.1002/acn3.142. Epub 2014
Nov 18.

Human brain arteriovenous malformations express lymphatic-associated genes.

Shoemaker LD(1), Fuentes LF(1), Santiago SM(1), Allen BM(1), Cook DJ(2),
Steinberg GK(1), Chang SD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford Neuromolecular Innovation Program,
Stanford University 300 Pasteur Drive, Stanford, California, 94305. (2)Centre for
Neuroscience Studies and the Department of Surgery, Queen's University Kingston, 
Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Brain arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are devastating,
hemorrhage-prone, cerebrovascular lesions characterized by well-defined feeding
arteries, draining vein(s) and the absence of a capillary bed. The endothelial
cells (ECs) that comprise AVMs exhibit a loss of arterial and venous
specification. Given the role of the transcription factor COUP-TFII in vascular
development, EC specification, and pathological angiogenesis, we examined human
AVM tissue to determine if COUP-FTII may have a role in AVM disease biology.
METHODS: We examined 40 human brain AVMs by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
qRT-PCR for the expression of COUP-TFII as well as other genes involved in venous
and lymphatic development, maintenance, and signaling. We also examined
proliferation and EC tube formation with human umbilical ECs (HUVEC) following
COUP-TFII overexpression.
RESULTS: We report that AVMs expressed COUP-TFII, SOX18, PROX1, NFATC1, FOXC2,
TBX1, LYVE1, Podoplanin, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-C,
contained Ki67-positive cells and heterogeneously expressed genes involved in
Hedgehog, Notch, Wnt, and VEGF signaling pathways. Overexpression of COUP-TFII
alone in vitro resulted in increased EC proliferation and dilated tubes in an EC 
tube formation assay in HUVEC.
INTERPRETATION: This suggests AVM ECs are further losing their arterial/venous
specificity and acquiring a partial lymphatic molecular phenotype. There was
significant correlation of gene expression with presence of clinical edema and
acute hemorrhage. While the precise role of these genes in the formation,
stabilization, growth and risk of hemorrhage of AVMs remains unclear, these
findings have potentially important implications for patient management and
treatment choice, and opens new avenues for future work on AVM disease
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4284124
PMID: 25574473  [PubMed]


41. Mol Syndromol. 2014 Dec;5(6):276-86. doi: 10.1159/000368865. Epub 2014 Nov 8.

A mouse splice-site mutant and individuals with atypical chromosome 22q11.2
deletions demonstrate the crucial role for crkl in craniofacial and pharyngeal
development.

Miller KA(1), Tan TY(2), Welfare MF(1), White SM(3), Stark Z(3), Savarirayan
R(2), Burgess T(4), Heggie AA(5), Caruana G(6), Bertram JF(6), Bateman JF(7),
Farlie PG(8).

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Department of Plastic and Maxillofacial 
Surgery, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Vic., Australia. (2)Murdoch
Childrens Research Institute, Department of Plastic and Maxillofacial Surgery,
Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Vic., Australia ; Victorian Clinical
Genetics Services, Department of Plastic and Maxillofacial Surgery, Royal
Children's Hospital, Parkville, Vic., Australia ; Department of Paediatrics,
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic., Australia. (3)Murdoch Childrens
Research Institute, Department of Plastic and Maxillofacial Surgery, Royal
Children's Hospital, Parkville, Vic., Australia ; Victorian Clinical Genetics
Services, Department of Plastic and Maxillofacial Surgery, Royal Children's
Hospital, Parkville, Vic., Australia. (4)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services,
Department of Plastic and Maxillofacial Surgery, Royal Children's Hospital,
Parkville, Vic., Australia. (5)Section of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery,
Department of Plastic and Maxillofacial Surgery, Royal Children's Hospital,
Parkville, Vic., Australia ; Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Vic., Australia. (6)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology,
School of Biomedical Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Vic., Australia.
(7)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Department of Plastic and Maxillofacial 
Surgery, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Vic., Australia ; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic.,
Australia. (8)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Department of Plastic and
Maxillofacial Surgery, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Vic., Australia ;
Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic., Australia.

The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) is thought to be a contiguous gene
syndrome caused by haploinsufficiency for a variable number of genes with
overlapping function during the development of the craniofacial, pharyngeal and
cardiac structures. The complexity of genetic and developmental anomalies
resulting in 22q11DS has made attributing causation to specific genes difficult. 
The CRKL gene resides within the common 3-Mb region, most frequently affected in 
22q11DS, and has been shown to play an essential role in the development of
tissues affected in 22q11DS. Here, we report the characterisation of a mouse
strain we named 'snoopy', harbouring a novel Crkl splice-site mutation that
results in a loss of Crkl expression. The snoopy strain exhibits a variable
phenotype that includes micrognathia, pharyngeal occlusion, aglossia and
holoprosencephaly, and altered retinoic acid and endothelin signalling. Together,
these features are reminiscent of malformations occurring in auriculocondylar
syndrome and agnathia-otocephaly complex, 2 conditions not previously associated 
with the CRKL function. Comparison of the features of a cohort of patients
harbouring small 22q11.2 deletions centred over the CRKL gene, but sparing TBX1, 
highlights the role of CRKL in contributing to the craniofacial features of
22q11DS. These analyses demonstrate the central role of Crkl in regulating
signalling events in the developing oropharyngeal complex and its potential to
contribute to dysmorphology.

PMCID: PMC4281577
PMID: 25565927  [PubMed]


42. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Apr 15;24(8):2330-48. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu750. Epub 2015 Jan 
2.

TBX1 protein interactions and microRNA-96-5p regulation controls cell
proliferation during craniofacial and dental development: implications for
22q11.2 deletion syndrome.

Gao S(1), Moreno M(2), Eliason S(2), Cao H(1), Li X(2), Yu W(2), Bidlack FB(3),
Margolis HC(4), Baldini A(5), Amendt BA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Texas A&M University Health Science Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, Craniofacial Anomalies Research Center, The University 
of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (3)Department of Mineralized Tissue Biology.
(4)Center for Biomineralization, Department of Applied Oral Sciences, The Forsyth
Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA and. (5)Department of Molecular Medicine and
Medical Biotechnology, University Federico II and the Institute of Genetics and
Biophysics CNR, Naples, Italy. (6)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
Craniofacial Anomalies Research Center, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA,
USA, brad-amendt@uiowa.edu.

T-box transcription factor TBX1 is the major candidate gene for 22q11.2 deletion 
syndrome (22q11.2DS, DiGeorge syndrome/Velo-cardio-facial syndrome), whose
phenotypes include craniofacial malformations such as dental defects and cleft
palate. In this study, Tbx1 was conditionally deleted or over-expressed in the
oral and dental epithelium to establish its role in odontogenesis and
craniofacial developmental. Tbx1 lineage tracing experiments demonstrated a
specific region of Tbx1-positive cells in the labial cervical loop (LaCL, stem
cell niche). We found that Tbx1 conditional knockout (Tbx1(cKO)) mice featured
microdontia, which coincides with decreased stem cell proliferation in the LaCL
of Tbx1(cKO) mice. In contrast, Tbx1 over-expression increased dental epithelial 
progenitor cells in the LaCL. Furthermore, microRNA-96 (miR-96) repressed Tbx1
expression and Tbx1 repressed miR-96 expression, suggesting that miR-96 and Tbx1 
work in a regulatory loop to maintain the correct levels of Tbx1. Cleft palate
was observed in both conditional knockout and over-expression mice, consistent
with the craniofacial/tooth defects associated with TBX1 deletion and the gene
duplication that leads to 22q11.2DS. The biochemical analyses of TBX1 human
mutations demonstrate functional differences in their transcriptional regulation 
of miR-96 and co-regulation of PITX2 activity. TBX1 interacts with PITX2 to
negatively regulate PITX2 transcriptional activity and the TBX1 N-terminus is
required for its repressive activity. Overall, our results indicate that Tbx1
regulates the proliferation of dental progenitor cells and craniofacial
development through miR-96-5p and PITX2. Together, these data suggest a new
molecular mechanism controlling pathogenesis of dental anomalies in human
22q11.2DS.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4380074 [Available on 2016-04-15]
PMID: 25556186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Mar;1851(3):273-81. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.12.013.
Epub 2014 Dec 24.

a-Lipoic acid treatment increases mitochondrial biogenesis and promotes beige
adipose features in subcutaneous adipocytes from overweight/obese subjects.

Fernández-Galilea M(1), Pérez-Matute P(2), Prieto-Hontoria PL(3), Houssier M(4), 
Burrell MA(5), Langin D(6), Martínez JA(7), Moreno-Aliaga MJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Food Science and Physiology, University of Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain. (2)HIV and Associated Metabolic Alterations Unit, Infectious
Diseases Department, Center for Biomedical Research of La Rioja (CIBIR), Logroño,
Spain. (3)Department of Nutrition, Food Science and Physiology, University of
Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; Faculty of Health and Physical Activity Science,
University SEK, Santiago, Chile. (4)INSERM, UMR1048, Obesity Research Laboratory,
Institute of Metabolic and Cardiovascular Diseases, Toulouse, France; University 
of Toulouse, UMR1048, Paul Sabatier University, Toulouse, France. (5)Department
of Histology and Pathology, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. (6)INSERM,
UMR1048, Obesity Research Laboratory, Institute of Metabolic and Cardiovascular
Diseases, Toulouse, France; University of Toulouse, UMR1048, Paul Sabatier
University, Toulouse, France; Toulouse University Hospitals, Laboratory of
Clinical Biochemistry, Toulouse, France. (7)Department of Nutrition, Food Science
and Physiology, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; Center for Nutrition
Research, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; CIBER Fisiopatología de la
Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERObn), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Nutrition, Food Science and Physiology, University of Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain; Center for Nutrition Research, University of Navarra, Pamplona, 
Spain; CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERObn), Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: mjmoreno@unav.es.

a-Lipoic acid (a-Lip) is a natural occurring antioxidant with beneficial
anti-obesity properties. The aim of this study was to investigate the putative
effects of a-Lip on mitochondrial biogenesis and the acquirement of brown-like
characteristics by subcutaneous adipocytes from overweight/obese subjects. Thus, 
fully differentiated human subcutaneous adipocytes were treated with a-Lip (100
and 250µM) for 24h for studies on mitochondrial content and morphology,
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number, fatty acid oxidation enzymes and
brown/beige characteristic genes. The involvement of the Sirtuin1/Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma, coactivator 1 alpha (SIRT1/PGC-1a) pathway
was also evaluated. Our results showed that a-Lip increased mitochondrial content
in cultured human adipocytes as revealed by electron microscopy and by
mitotracker green labeling. Moreover, an enhancement in mtDNA content was
observed. This increase was accompanied by an up-regulation of SIRT1 protein
levels, a decrease in PGC-1a acetylation and up-regulation of Nuclear respiratory
factor 1 (Nrf1) and Mitochondrial transcription factor (Tfam) transcription
factors. Enhanced oxygen consumption and fatty acid oxidation enzymes, Carnitine 
palmitoyl transferase 1 and Acyl-coenzyme A oxidase (CPT-1 and ACOX) were also
observed. Mitochondria from a-Lip-treated adipocytes exhibited some morphological
characteristics of brown mitochondria, and a-Lip also induced up-regulation of
some brown/beige adipocytes markers such as cell death-inducing DFFA-like
effector a (Cidea) and T-box 1 (Tbx1). Moreover, a-Lip up-regulated PR domain
containing 16 (Prdm16) mRNA levels in treated adipocytes. Therefore, our study
suggests the ability of a-Lip to promote mitochondrial biogenesis and brown-like 
remodeling in cultured white subcutaneous adipocytes from overweight/obese
donors.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25542506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2015 Jan;324(1):30-40. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.22596.

The role of the Pax1/9 gene in the early development of amphioxus pharyngeal gill
slits.

Liu X(1), Li G, Liu X, Wang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.

The pharynx is a major characteristic of chordates. Compared with vertebrates,
amphioxus has an advantage for the study of pharynx development, as embryos lack 
neural crest, and the pharynx is mainly derived from endoderm cells. The Pax1/9
subfamily genes have essential roles in vertebrate pharyngeal patterning, but it 
is not known if the Pax1/9 gene has similar functions in amphioxus pharynx
development. To answer this question, we examined the Pax1/9 gene expression
pattern in amphioxus embryos at different developmental stages, and observed
morphological changes following Pax1/9 knockdown. RT-qPCR analysis indicated that
Pax1/9 expression was initiated during early neurula stage and rapidly peaked
during mid-neurula stage. Furthermore, in situ hybridization analysis showed that
Pax1/9 transcripts were localized exclusively in the most endodermal region of
the developing pharynx in early neurula stage embryos; however, Pax1/9 expression
was strikingly down-regulated in the region where gill slits would form from the 
fusion of endoderm and ectoderm in subsequent developmental stages and was
maintained in the border regions between adjacent gill slits. Knockdown of Pax1/9
function using both morpholino and siRNA approaches led to embryonic defects in
the first three gill slits, and fusion of the first two gill slits. Moreover, the
expression levels of the pharyngeal marker genes Six1/2 and Tbx1/10 were reduced 
in Pax1/9 knockdown embryos. From these observations, we concluded that the
Pax1/9 gene has an important role in the initial differentiation of amphioxus
pharyngeal endoderm and in the formation of gill slits, most likely via
modulation of Six1/2 and Tbx1/10 expression.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25504927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS Genet. 2014 Dec 4;10(12):e1004858. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004858.
eCollection 2014.

RA and FGF signalling are required in the zebrafish otic vesicle to pattern and
maintain ventral otic identities.

Maier EC(1), Whitfield TT(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, Bateson Centre and
Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United
Kingdom.

During development of the zebrafish inner ear, regional patterning in the ventral
half of the otic vesicle establishes zones of gene expression that correspond to 
neurogenic, sensory and non-neural cell fates. FGF and Retinoic acid (RA)
signalling from surrounding tissues are known to have an early role in otic
placode induction and otic axial patterning, but how external signalling cues are
translated into intrinsic patterning during otic vesicle (OV) stages is not yet
understood. FGF and RA signalling pathway members are expressed in and around the
OV, suggesting important roles in later patterning or maintenance events. We have
analysed the temporal requirement of FGF and RA signalling for otic development
at stages after initial anteroposterior patterning has occurred. We show that
high level FGF signalling acts to restrict sensory fates, whereas low levels
favour sensory hair cell development; in addition, FGF is both required and
sufficient to promote the expression of the non-neural marker otx1b in the OV. RA
signalling has opposite roles: it promotes sensory fates, and restricts otx1b
expression and the development of non-neural fates. This is surprisingly
different from the earlier requirement for RA signalling in specification of
non-neural fates via tbx1 expression, and highlights the shift in regulation that
takes place between otic placode and vesicle stages in zebrafish. Both FGF and RA
signalling are required for the development of the otic neurogenic domain and the
generation of otic neuroblasts. In addition, our results indicate that FGF and RA
signalling act in a feedback loop in the anterior OV, crucial for pattern
refinement.

PMCID: PMC4256275
PMID: 25473832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Apr 1;24(7):1869-82. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu604. Epub 2014 Dec
1.

A defect in early myogenesis causes Otitis media in two mouse models of 22q11.2
Deletion Syndrome.

Fuchs JC(1), Linden JF(2), Baldini A(3), Tucker AS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development and Stem Cell Biology, King's College
London, London SE1 9RT, UK. (2)Ear Institute and Department of Neuroscience,
Physiology and Pharmacology, University College London, London WC1E 8XX, UK.
(3)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, National Research Council, and
Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University Federico
II, Naples 80138, Italy. (4)Department of Craniofacial Development and Stem Cell 
Biology, King's College London, London SE1 9RT, UK, abigail.tucker@kcl.ac.uk.

Otitis media (OM), the inflammation of the middle ear, is the most common disease
and cause for surgery in infants worldwide. Chronic Otitis media with effusion
(OME) often leads to conductive hearing loss and is a common feature of a number 
of craniofacial syndromes, such as 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome (22q11.2DS). OM is
more common in children because the more horizontal position of the Eustachian
tube (ET) in infants limits or delays clearance of middle ear effusions. Some
mouse models with OM have shown alterations in the morphology and angle of the
ET. Here, we present a novel mechanism in which OM is caused not by a defect in
the ET itself but in the muscles that control its function. Our results show that
in two mouse models of 22q11.2DS (Df1/+ and Tbx1(+/-)) presenting with bi- or
unilateral OME, the fourth pharyngeal arch-derived levator veli palatini muscles 
were hypoplastic, which was associated with an earlier altered pattern of MyoD
expression. Importantly, in mice with unilateral OME, the side with the
inflammation was associated with significantly smaller muscles than the
contralateral unaffected ear. Functional tests examining ET patency confirmed a
reduced clearing ability in the heterozygous mice. Our findings are also of
clinical relevance as targeting hypoplastic muscles might present a novel
preventative measure for reducing the high rates of OM in 22q11.2DS patients.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4355021
PMID: 25452432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Mar 15;24(6):1704-16. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu584. Epub 2014 Nov 
19.

Loss of Wnt5a disrupts second heart field cell deployment and may contribute to
OFT malformations in DiGeorge syndrome.

Sinha T(1), Li D(1), Théveniau-Ruissy M(2), Hutson MR(3), Kelly RG(2), Wang J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama, USA. (2)Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, IBDM UMR 
7288, Marseille 13288, France. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina. (4)Department of Cell, Developmental 
and Integrative Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama, USA,
j18wang@uab.edu.

Outflow tract (OFT) malformation accounts for ~30% of human congenital heart
defects and manifests frequently in TBX1 haplo-insufficiency associated DiGeorge 
(22q11.2 deletion) syndrome. OFT myocardium originates from second heart field
(SHF) progenitors in the pharyngeal and splanchnic mesoderm (SpM), but how these 
progenitors are deployed to the OFT is unclear. We find that SHF progenitors in
the SpM gradually gain epithelial character and are deployed to the OFT as a
cohesive sheet. Wnt5a, a non-canonical Wnt, is expressed specifically in the
caudal SpM and may regulate oriented cell intercalation to incorporate SHF
progenitors into an epithelial-like sheet, thereby generating the pushing force
to deploy SHF cells rostrally into the OFT. Using enhancer trap and Cre
transgenes, our lineage tracing experiments show that in Wnt5a null mice, SHF
progenitors are trapped in the SpM and fail to be deployed to the OFT
efficiently, resulting in a reduction in the inferior OFT myocardial wall and its
derivative, subpulmonary myocardium. Concomitantly, the superior OFT and
subaortic myocardium are expanded. Finally, in chick embryos, blocking the Wnt5a 
function in the caudal SpM perturbs polarized elongation of SHF progenitors, and 
compromises their deployment to the OFT. Collectively, our results highlight a
critical role for Wnt5a in deploying SHF progenitors from the SpM to the OFT.
Given that Wnt5a is a putative transcriptional target of Tbx1, and the similar
reduction of subpulmonary myocardium in Tbx1 mutant mice, our results suggest
that perturbing Wnt5a-mediated SHF deployment may be an important pathogenic
mechanism contributing to OFT malformations in DiGeorge syndrome.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4381755
PMID: 25410658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Development. 2014 Nov;141(22):4320-31. doi: 10.1242/dev.115022.

TBX1 regulates epithelial polarity and dynamic basal filopodia in the second
heart field.

Francou A(1), Saint-Michel E(1), Mesbah K(1), Kelly RG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, IBDM UMR 7288, Marseille 13288, France. (2)Aix
Marseille Université, CNRS, IBDM UMR 7288, Marseille 13288, France
Robert.Kelly@univ-amu.fr.

Elongation of the vertebrate heart occurs by progressive addition of second heart
field (SHF) cardiac progenitor cells from pharyngeal mesoderm to the poles of the
heart tube. The importance of these cells in the etiology of congenital heart
defects has led to extensive research into the regulation of SHF deployment by
signaling pathways and transcription factors. However, the basic cellular
features of these progenitor cells, including epithelial polarity, cell shape and
cell dynamics, remain poorly characterized. Here, using immunofluorescence, live 
imaging and embryo culture, we demonstrate that SHF cells constitute an atypical,
apicobasally polarized epithelium in the dorsal pericardial wall, characterized
by apical monocilia and dynamic actin-rich basal filopodia. We identify the
22q11.2 deletion syndrome gene Tbx1, required in the SHF for outflow tract
development, as a regulator of the epithelial properties of SHF cells. Cell shape
changes in mutant embryos include increased circularity, a reduced basolateral
membrane domain and impaired filopodial activity, and are associated with
elevated aPKC<U+03B6> levels. Activation of aPKC<U+03B6> in embryo culture similarly impairs
filopodia activity and phenocopies proliferative defects and ectopic
differentiation observed in the SHF of Tbx1 null embryos. Our results reveal that
epithelial and progenitor cell status are coupled in the SHF, identifying control
of cell shape as a regulatory step in heart tube elongation and outflow tract
morphogenesis.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25371366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Ann Med. 2014 Dec;46(8):640-52. doi: 10.3109/07853890.2014.959557. Epub 2014 Oct 
13.

Morphogenesis and molecular considerations on congenital cardiac septal defects.

Gittenberger-de Groot AC(1), Calkoen EE, Poelmann RE, Bartelings MM, Jongbloed
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center , Leiden , The
Netherlands.

The primary unseptated heart tube undergoes extensive remodeling including
septation at the atrial, atrioventricular, ventricular, and ventriculo-arterial
level. Alignment and fusion of the septal components is required to ensure full
septation of the heart. Deficiencies lead to septal defects at various levels.
Addition of myocardium and mesenchymal tissues from the second heart field (SHF) 
to the primary heart tube, as well as a population of neural crest cells,
provides the necessary cellular players. Surprisingly, the study of the molecular
background of these defects does not show a great diversity of responsible
transcription factors and downstream gene pathways. Epigenetic modulation and
mutations high up in several transcription factor pathways (e.g. NODAL and GATA4)
may lead to defects at all levels. Disturbance of modulating pathways, involving 
primarily the SHF-derived cell populations and the genes expressed therein,
results at the arterial pole (e.g. TBX1) in a spectrum of ventricular septal
defects located at the level of the outflow tract. At the venous pole (e.g.
TBX5), it can explain a variety of atrial septal defects. The various defects can
occur as isolated anomalies or within families. In this review developmental,
morphological, genetic, as well as epigenetic aspects of septal defects are
discussed.

PMID: 25307363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 7;16(5):450. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0450-6.

DNA methylation profiling in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study defines cancer
subclasses differing in clinicopathologic characteristics and survival.

Conway K, Edmiston SN, May R, Kuan PF, Chu H, Bryant C, Tse CK, Swift-Scanlan T, 
Geradts J, Troester MA, Millikan RC.

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, with several intrinsic
subtypes differing by hormone receptor (HR) status, molecular profiles, and
prognosis. However, the role of DNA methylation in breast cancer development and 
progression and its relationship with the intrinsic tumor subtypes are not fully 
understood.
METHODS: A microarray targeting promoters of cancer-related genes was used to
evaluate DNA methylation at 935 CpG sites in 517 breast tumors from the Carolina 
Breast Cancer Study, a population-based study of invasive breast cancer.
RESULTS: Consensus clustering using methylation (ß) values for the 167 most
variant CpG loci defined four clusters differing most distinctly in HR status,
intrinsic subtype (luminal versus basal-like), and p53 mutation status.
Supervised analyses for HR status, subtype, and p53 status identified 266
differentially methylated CpG loci with considerable overlap. Genes relatively
hypermethylated in HR+, luminal A, or p53 wild-type breast cancers included
FABP3, FGF2, FZD9, GAS7, HDAC9, HOXA11, MME, PAX6, POMC, PTGS2, RASSF1, RBP1, and
SCGB3A1, whereas those more highly methylated in HR-, basal-like, or p53 mutant
tumors included BCR, C4B, DAB2IP, MEST, RARA, SEPT5, TFF1, THY1, and SERPINA5.
Clustering also defined a hypermethylated luminal-enriched tumor cluster 3 that
gene ontology analysis revealed to be enriched for homeobox and other
developmental genes (ASCL2, DLK1, EYA4, GAS7, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB13, IHH, IPF1,
ISL1, PAX6, TBX1, SOX1, and SOX17). Although basal-enriched cluster 2 showed
worse short-term survival, the luminal-enriched cluster 3 showed worse long-term 
survival but was not independently prognostic in multivariate Cox proportional
hazard analysis, likely due to the mostly early stage cases in this dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that epigenetic patterns are strongly
associated with HR status, subtype, and p53 mutation status and may show
heterogeneity within tumor subclass. Among HR+ breast tumors, a subset exhibiting
a gene signature characterized by hypermethylation of developmental genes and
poorer clinicopathologic features may have prognostic value and requires further 
study. Genes differentially methylated between clinically important tumor subsets
have roles in differentiation, development, and tumor growth and may be critical 
to establishing and maintaining tumor phenotypes and clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC4303129
PMID: 25287138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2014 Oct 1;4(10). pii: a013946. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a013946.

Insights into the genetic structure of congenital heart disease from human and
murine studies on monogenic disorders.

Prendiville T(1), Jay PY(2), Pu WT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri 63110. (3)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115 Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

Study of monogenic congenital heart disease (CHD) has provided entry points to
gain new understanding of heart development and the molecular pathogenesis of
CHD. In this review, we discuss monogenic CHD caused by mutations of the cardiac 
transcription factor genes NKX2-5 and GATA4. Detailed investigation of these
genes in mice and humans has expanded our understanding of heart development,
shedding light on the complex genetic and environmental factors that influence
expression and penetrance of CHD gene mutations.

Copyright © 2014 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 25274754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Development. 2014 Oct;141(19):3697-708. doi: 10.1242/dev.110833. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Multiple roles for HOXA3 in regulating thymus and parathyroid differentiation and
morphogenesis in mouse.

Chojnowski JL(1), Masuda K(1), Trau HA(1), Thomas K(2), Capecchi M(3), Manley
NR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Paul D. Coverdell Center, 500 DW Brooks Drive,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA. (2)Division of Hematology and
Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, UT 84132, USA. (3)Department of Human Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. 
(4)Department of Genetics, Paul D. Coverdell Center, 500 DW Brooks Drive,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA nmanley@uga.edu.

Hoxa3 was the first Hox gene to be mutated by gene targeting in mice and is
required for the development of multiple endoderm and neural crest cell
(NCC)-derived structures in the pharyngeal region. Previous studies have shown
that the Hoxa3 null mutant lacks third pharyngeal pouch derivatives, the thymus
and parathyroids by E18.5, and organ-specific markers are absent or downregulated
during initial organogenesis. Our current analysis of the Hoxa3 null mutant shows
that organ-specific domains did undergo initial patterning, but the location and 
timing of key regional markers within the pouch, including Tbx1, Bmp4 and Fgf8,
were altered. Expression of the parathyroid marker Gcm2 was initiated but was
quickly downregulated and differentiation failed; by contrast, thymus markers
were delayed but achieved normal levels, concurrent with complete loss through
apoptosis. To determine the cell type-specific roles of Hoxa3 in third pharyngeal
pouch development, we analyzed tissue-specific mutants using endoderm and/or
NCC-specific Cre drivers. Simultaneous deletion with both drivers resulted in
athymia at E18.5, similar to the null. By contrast, the individual
tissue-specific Hoxa3 deletions resulted in small, ectopic thymi, although each
had a unique phenotype. Hoxa3 was primarily required in NCCs for morphogenesis.
In endoderm, Hoxa3 temporally regulated initiation of the thymus program and was 
required in a cell-autonomous manner for parathyroid differentiation.
Furthermore, Hoxa3 was required for survival of third pharyngeal pouch-derived
organs, but expression in either tissue was sufficient for this function. These
data show that Hoxa3 has multiple complex and tissue-specific functions during
patterning, differentiation and morphogenesis of the thymus and parathyroids.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197593
PMID: 25249461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2014 Sep;144(3):146.

[Haploinsufficiency of the T-box transcription factor Tbr1].

[Article in Japanese]

Ago Y.

PMID: 25213616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jan 15;24(2):424-35. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu458. Epub 2014 Sep
10.

Loss of Tbx1 induces bone phenotypes similar to cleidocranial dysplasia.

Funato N(1), Nakamura M(2), Richardson JA(3), Srivastava D(4), Yanagisawa H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Medical and Dental Sciences, Human Gene Sciences Research 
Division, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8510, Japan Department of Molecular Biology and. (2)Research Center for
Medical and Dental Sciences, Human Gene Sciences Research Division, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323
Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA and. (4)Gladstone Institute of
Cardiovascular Disease and Department of Pediatrics, University of California,
San Francisco, 1650 Owens Street, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (5)Department of 
Molecular Biology and hiromi.yanagisawa@utsouthwestern.edu.

T-box transcription factor, TBX1, is the major candidate gene for 22q11.2
deletion syndrome (DiGeorge/ Velo-cardio-facial syndrome) characterized by facial
defects, thymus hypoplasia, cardiovascular anomalies and cleft palates. Here, we 
report that the loss of Tbx1 in mouse (Tbx1(-/-)) results in skeletal
abnormalities similar to those of cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) in humans, which 
is an autosomal-dominant skeletal disease caused by mutations in RUNX2. Tbx1(-/-)
mice display short stature, absence of hyoid bone, failed closure of fontanelle, 
bifid xiphoid process and hypoplasia of clavicle and zygomatic arch. A
cell-type-specific deletion of Tbx1 in osteochondro-progenitor (Tbx1(OPKO)) or
mesodermal (Tbx1(MKO)) lineage partially recapitulates the Tbx1(-/-) bone
phenotypes. Although Tbx1 expression has not been previously reported in neural
crest, inactivation of Tbx1 in the neural crest lineage (Tbx1(NCKO)) leads to an 
absence of the body of hyoid bone and postnatal lethality, indicating an
unanticipated role of Tbx1 in neural crest development. Indeed, Tbx1 is expressed
in the neural crest-derived hyoid bone primordium, in addition to
mesoderm-derived osteochondral progenitors. Ablation of Tbx1 affected Runx2
expression in calvarial bones and overexpression of Tbx1 induced Runx2 expression
in vitro. Taken together, our current studies reveal that Tbx1 is required for
mesoderm- and neural crest-derived osteoblast differentiation and normal skeletal
development. TBX1 mutation could lead to CCD-like bone phenotypes in human.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25209980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Development. 2014 Oct;141(19):3761-71. doi: 10.1242/dev.111005. Epub 2014 Sep 10.

An Org-1-Tup transcriptional cascade reveals different types of alary muscles
connecting internal organs in Drosophila.

Boukhatmi H(1), Schaub C(2), Bataillé L(1), Reim I(2), Frendo JL(1), Frasch M(3),
Vincent A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse 3, Centre de Biologie du Développement, UMR 5547 CNRS
and FRBT, 118 route de Narbonne, Toulouse F-31062, Cedex 09, France.
(2)Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Department of Biology,
Division of Developmental Biology, Staudtstraße 5, Erlangen 91058, Germany.
(3)Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Department of Biology,
Division of Developmental Biology, Staudtstraße 5, Erlangen 91058, Germany
manfred.frasch@fau.de alain.vincent@univ-tlse3.fr. (4)Université de Toulouse 3,
Centre de Biologie du Développement, UMR 5547 CNRS and FRBT, 118 route de
Narbonne, Toulouse F-31062, Cedex 09, France manfred.frasch@fau.de
alain.vincent@univ-tlse3.fr.

The T-box transcription factor Tbx1 and the LIM-homeodomain transcription factor 
Islet1 are key components in regulatory circuits that generate myogenic and
cardiogenic lineage diversity in chordates. We show here that Org-1 and Tup, the 
Drosophila orthologs of Tbx1 and Islet1, are co-expressed and required for
formation of the heart-associated alary muscles (AMs) in the abdomen. The same
holds true for lineage-related muscles in the thorax that have not been described
previously, which we name thoracic alary-related muscles (TARMs). Lineage
analyses identified the progenitor cell for each AM and TARM. Three-dimensional
high-resolution analyses indicate that AMs and TARMs connect the exoskeleton to
the aorta/heart and to different regions of the midgut, respectively, and
surround-specific tracheal branches, pointing to an architectural role in the
internal anatomy of the larva. Org-1 controls tup expression in the AM/TARM
lineage by direct binding to two regulatory sites within an AM/TARM-specific
cis-regulatory module, tupAME. The contributions of Org-1 and Tup to the
specification of Drosophila AMs and TARMs provide new insights into the
transcriptional control of Drosophila larval muscle diversification and highlight
new parallels with gene regulatory networks involved in the specification of
cardiopharyngeal mesodermal derivatives in chordates.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25209244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 16;111(37):13385-90. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1401923111. Epub 2014 Sep 2.

p53 Suppression partially rescues the mutant phenotype in mouse models of
DiGeorge syndrome.

Caprio C(1), Baldini A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Open University PhD Program, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Institute of
Genetics and Biophysics Adriano Buzzati Traverso, 80131 Naples, Italy; and.
(2)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Institute of Genetics and Biophysics
Adriano Buzzati Traverso, 80131 Naples, Italy; and Department of Molecular
Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples Federico II, 80131
Naples, Italy antonio.baldini@igb.cnr.it.

T-box 1 (Tbx1), a gene encoding a T-box transcription factor, is required for
embryonic development in humans and mice. Half dosage of this gene in humans
causes most of the features of the DiGeorge or Velocardiofacial syndrome
phenotypes, including aortic arch and cardiac outflow tract abnormalities. Here
we found a strong genetic interaction between Tbx1 and transformation related
protein 53 (Trp53). Indeed, genetic ablation of Trp53, or pharmacological
inhibition of its protein product p53, rescues significantly the cardiovascular
defects of Tbx1 heterozygous and hypomorphic mutants. We found that the Tbx1 and 
p53 proteins do not interact directly but both occupy a genetic element of Gbx2, 
which is required for aortic arch and cardiac outflow tract development, and is a
known genetic interactor of Tbx1. We found that Gbx2 expression is down-regulated
in Tbx1(+/-) embryos and is restored to normal levels in Tbx1(+/-);Trp53(+/-)
embryos. In addition, we found that the genetic element that binds both Tbx1 and 
p53 is highly enriched in H3K27 trimethylation, and upon p53 suppression H3K27me3
levels are reduced, along with Ezh2 enrichment. This finding suggests that the
rescue of Gbx2 expression in Tbx1(+/-);Trp53(+/-) embryos is due to reduction of 
repressive chromatin marks. Overall our data identify unexpected genetic
interactions between Tbx1 and Trp53 and provide a proof of principle that
developmental defects associated with reduced dosage of Tbx1 can be rescued
pharmacologically.

PMCID: PMC4169961
PMID: 25197075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Circ Res. 2014 Oct 10;115(9):790-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.305020. Epub 2014
Sep 4.

Tbx1 coordinates addition of posterior second heart field progenitor cells to the
arterial and venous poles of the heart.

Rana MS(1), Théveniau-Ruissy M(1), De Bono C(1), Mesbah K(1), Francou A(1),
Rammah M(1), Domínguez JN(1), Roux M(1), Laforest B(1), Anderson RH(1), Mohun
T(1), Zaffran S(1), Christoffels VM(1), Kelly RG(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Anatomy, Embryology and Physiology, Heart Failure
Research Center, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands (M.S.R., V.M.C.); CNRS, IBDM UMR 7288 (M.T.-R., C.D.B., K.M., A.F.,
M.R., R.G.K.) and Inserm, GMGF UMR S910, Faculté de Médecine de la Timone (M.R., 
B.L., S.Z.), Aix Marseille Université, IBDM, CNRS UMR 7288 (M.T.-R., C.D.B.,
K.M., A.F., M.R., R.G.K) and GMGF Inserm URM S910 (M.R., B.L., S.Z.), Marseille, 
France; Department of Experimental Biology, University of Jaén, Jaén, Spain
(J.N.D.); Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon
Tyne, United Kingdom (R.H.A.); and MRC National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London, United Kingdom (T.M.). (2)From the Department of Anatomy,
Embryology and Physiology, Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (M.S.R., V.M.C.);
CNRS, IBDM UMR 7288 (M.T.-R., C.D.B., K.M., A.F., M.R., R.G.K.) and Inserm, GMGF 
UMR S910, Faculté de Médecine de la Timone (M.R., B.L., S.Z.), Aix Marseille
Université, IBDM, CNRS UMR 7288 (M.T.-R., C.D.B., K.M., A.F., M.R., R.G.K) and
GMGF Inserm URM S910 (M.R., B.L., S.Z.), Marseille, France; Department of
Experimental Biology, University of Jaén, Jaén, Spain (J.N.D.); Institute of
Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom
(R.H.A.); and MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London,
United Kingdom (T.M.). Robert.Kelly@univ-amu.fr.

RATIONALE: Cardiac progenitor cells from the second heart field (SHF) contribute 
to rapid growth of the embryonic heart, giving rise to right ventricular and
outflow tract (OFT) myocardium at the arterial pole of the heart, and atrial
myocardium at the venous pole. Recent clonal analysis and cell-tracing
experiments indicate that a common progenitor pool in the posterior region of the
SHF gives rise to both OFT and atrial myocytes. The mechanisms regulating
deployment of this progenitor pool remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of TBX1, the major gene implicated in congenital 
heart defects in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome patients, in posterior SHF
development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using transcriptome analysis, genetic tracing, and
fluorescent dye-labeling experiments, we show that Tbx1-dependent OFT myocardium 
originates in Hox-expressing cells in the posterior SHF. In Tbx1 null embryos,
OFT progenitor cells fail to segregate from this progenitor cell pool, leading to
failure to expand the dorsal pericardial wall and altered positioning of the
cardiac poles. Unexpectedly, addition of SHF cells to the venous pole of the
heart is also impaired, resulting in abnormal development of the dorsal
mesenchymal protrusion, and partially penetrant atrioventricular septal defects, 
including ostium primum defects.
CONCLUSIONS: Tbx1 is required for inflow as well as OFT morphogenesis by
regulating the segregation and deployment of progenitor cells in the posterior
SHF. Our results provide new insights into the pathogenesis of congenital heart
defects and 22q11.2 deletion syndrome phenotypes.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25190705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Gene. 2014 Nov 1;551(1):86-91. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.08.044. Epub 2014 Aug 26.

Pathway analysis of genome-wide association study on serum prostate-specific
antigen levels.

Ge YZ(1), Xu Z(1), Xu LW(1), Yu P(2), Zhao Y(3), Xin H(1), Wu R(1), Tan SJ(1),
Song Q(1), Wu JP(1), Li WC(1), Zhu JG(1), Jia RP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 68 
Changle Road, Nanjing 210006, China. (2)Department of Urology, The First Hospital
of Nanchang, Nanchang University, 128 Xiangshan North Road, Nanchang 330008,
China. (3)Department of Urology, Xuzhou Third People's Hospital, Jiangsu
University, 131 Huancheng Road, Xuzhou 221005, China. (4)Department of Urology,
Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 68 Changle Road, Nanjing
210006, China. Electronic address: urojiarp@126.com.

The wide application of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) has contributed to the
early diagnosis and improved management of prostate cancer (PCa). Accumulating
evidence has suggested the involvement of genetic components in regulating serum 
PSA levels, and several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been
identified by genome-wide association studies (GWASs). However, the GWASs'
results have the limited power to identify the causal variants and pathways.
After the quality control filters, a total of 330,540 genotyped SNPs from one
GWAS with 657 PCa-free Caucasian males were included for the identify candidate
causal SNPs and pathways (ICSNPathway) analysis. In addition, the
genotype-phenotype association analysis has been conducted with the data from
HapMap database. Overall, a total of four SNPs in three genes and six pathways
were identified by ICSNPathway analysis, which in total provided three
hypothetical mechanisms. First, CYP26B1 rs2241057 polymorphism (nonsynonymous
coding) which leads to a Leu-to-Ser amino acid shift at position 264, was
implicated in the pathways including meiosis, proximal/distal pattern formation, 
and M phase of meiotic cell cycle. Second, CLIC5 rs3734207 and rs11752816
polymorphisms (regulatory region) to the 2 iron, 2 sulfur cluster binding pathway
through regulating expression levels of CLIC5 mRNA. Third, rs4819522 polymorphism
(nonsynonymous coding) leads to a Thr-to-Met transition at position 350 of TBX1
and involves in the pathways about gland and endocrine system development. In
summary, our results demonstrated four candidate SNPs in three genes (CYP26B1
rs2241057, CISD1 rs2251039, rs2590370, and TBX1 rs4819522 polymorphisms), which
were involved in six potential pathways to influence serum PSA levels.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25168891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Development. 2014 Sep;141(18):3583-93. doi: 10.1242/dev.111740. Epub 2014 Aug 19.

Tbx1 controls the morphogenesis of pharyngeal pouch epithelia through mesodermal 
Wnt11r and Fgf8a.

Choe CP(1), Crump JG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Broad California Institute of Regenerative Medicine Center, Department of Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (2)Broad California Institute of
Regenerative Medicine Center, Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90033, USA gcrump@usc.edu.

The pharyngeal pouches are a segmental series of epithelial structures that
organize the embryonic vertebrate face. In mice and zebrafish that carry
mutations in homologs of the DiGeorge syndrome gene TBX1, a lack of pouches
correlates with severe craniofacial defects, yet how Tbx1 controls pouch
development remains unclear. Using mutant and transgenic rescue experiments in
zebrafish, we show that Tbx1 functions in the mesoderm to promote the
morphogenesis of pouch-forming endoderm through wnt11r and fgf8a expression.
Consistently, compound losses of wnt11r and fgf8a phenocopy tbx1 mutant pouch
defects, and mesoderm-specific restoration of Wnt11r and Fgf8a rescues tbx1
mutant pouches. Time-lapse imaging further reveals that Fgf8a acts as a
Wnt11r-dependent guidance cue for migrating pouch cells. We therefore propose a
two-step model in which Tbx1 coordinates the Wnt-dependent epithelial
destabilization of pouch-forming cells with their collective migration towards
Fgf8a-expressing mesodermal guideposts.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197720
PMID: 25142463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Sci Rep. 2014 Aug 15;4:6082. doi: 10.1038/srep06082.

Implications of the Wnt5a/CaMKII pathway in retinoic acid-induced myogenic tongue
abnormalities of developing mice.

Cong W(1), Liu B(1), Liu S(2), Sun M(3), Liu H(1), Yang Y(1), Wang R(4), Xiao
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, College of Stomatology, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian, Liaoning, 116044, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry,
Dalian Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning, 116044, China. (3)Department of
Biotechnology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning, 116044, China.
(4)Department of Stomatology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian, Liaoning, 116011, China.

Although proper tongue development is relevant to other structures in the
craniofacial region, the molecular details of muscle development in tongue remain
poorly understood. Here, we report that pregnant mice treated with retinoic acid 
(+RA) produce embryos with tongue malformation and a cleft palate. Histological
analyses revealed that at E14.5, the tongues of +RA fetuses failed to descend and
flatten. Ultrastructural analysis showed that at perinatal stage E18.5, the
myofilaments failed to form normal structures of sarcomeres, and arranged
disorderly in the genioglossus. The proliferation and levels of myogenic
determination markers (Myf5 and MyoD) and myosin in the genioglossus were
profoundly reduced. Wnt5a and Camk2d expressions were down-regulated, while
levels of Tbx1, Ror2, and PKCd were up-regulated in the tongues of +RA fetuses.
In mock- and Wnt5a-transfected C2C12 (Wnt5a-C2C12) cells, Wnt5a overexpression
impaired proliferation, and maintained Myf5 at a relative high level after RA
treatment. Furthermore, Wnt5a overexpression positively correlated with levels of
Camk2d and Ror2 in C2C12 cells after RA exposure. These data support the
hypothesis that the Wnt5a/CaMKII pathway is directly involved in RA-induced
hypoplasia and disorder of tongue muscles.

PMCID: PMC4133706
PMID: 25124193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Nov;164A(11):2707-23. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36711. Epub 2014
Aug 14.

Central 22q11.2 deletions.

Rump P(1), de Leeuw N, van Essen AJ, Verschuuren-Bemelmans CC, Veenstra-Knol HE, 
Swinkels ME, Oostdijk W, Ruivenkamp C, Reardon W, de Munnik S, Ruiter M, Frumkin 
A, Lev D, Evers C, Sikkema-Raddatz B, Dijkhuizen T, van Ravenswaaij-Arts CM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, Department of
Genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands.

22q11.2 deletion syndrome is one of the most common microdeletion syndromes. Most
patients have a deletion resulting from a recombination of low copy repeat blocks
LCR22-A and LCR22-D. Loss of the TBX1 gene is considered the most important cause
of the phenotype. A limited number of patients with smaller, overlapping
deletions distal to the TBX1 locus have been described in the literature. In
these patients, the CRKL gene is deleted. Haploinsufficiency of this gene has
also been implicated in the pathogenesis of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. To
distinguish these deletions (comprising the LCR22-B to LCR22-D region) from the
more distal 22q11.2 deletions (located beyond LCR22-D), we propose the term
"central 22q11.2 deletions". In the present study we report on 27 new patients
with such a deletion. Together with information on previously published cases, we
review the clinical findings of 52 patients. The prevalence of congenital heart
anomalies and the frequency of de novo deletions in patients with a central
deletion are substantially lower than in patients with a common or distal 22q11.2
deletion. Renal and urinary tract malformations, developmental delays, cognitive 
impairments and behavioral problems seem to be equally frequent as in patients
with a common deletion. None of the patients had a cleft palate. Patients with a 
deletion that also encompassed the MAPK1 gene, located just distal to LCR22-D,
have a different and more severe phenotype, characterized by a higher prevalence 
of congenital heart anomalies, growth restriction and microcephaly. Our results
further elucidate genotype-phenotype correlations in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome
spectrum.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25123976  [PubMed - in process]


62. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Nov;41(11):7491-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3639-y. Epub 2014
Aug 9.

Pax2 may play a role in kidney development by regulating the expression of TBX1.

Jiang H(1), Li L, Yang H, Bai Y, Jiang H, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, 110001, China, hkjiangpre@163.com.

Renal anomaly is commonly found among patients with loss of TBX1 gene, encoding
an important transcriptional factor implicated in numerous developmental
processes. Pax2 is a member of the "paired-box" (PAX) family of homeotic genes
that orchestrates the patterns of gene expression in specific cells during
nephrogenesis. In this study, we hypothesized that Pax2 might activate expression
of TBX1, a member of T-box family that closely involving in kidney development.
Immunohistochemical and immunofluorescence staining was performed to detect TBX1 
expression in E16.5 embryonic rat kidney, while luciferase assay, electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA), and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay were 
used to confirm the interaction between the Pax2 protein and TBX1 genes. TBX1 was
expressed in the cytoplasm of renal tubular epithelial cells in the cortex of
E16.5 fetal rat kidney. Inspection of the 5'-flanking sequence of the TBX1 gene
identified a putative Pax2 recognition motif (TBX1-577). Luciferase assay and
EMSA confirmed this novel promoter region of TBX1 that directly interacted with
Pax2, and a site mutation could abolish the transcriptional activation of the
TBX1 promoter by Pax2. ChIP assay of the Pax2-TBX1 promoter complex from human
kidney epithelial cells further confirmed that endogenous Pax2 interacted with
TBX1 promoter region. Thus, Pax2 directly regulates TBX1 expression in vivo.
These findings suggest that Pax2 may regulate the TBX1 expression through
specific binding to the TBX1 promoter, which may shed light on the potential
mechanism of Pax2 and TBX1 in nephrogenesis and renal malformations.

PMID: 25106525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 5;9(8):e95453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095453. eCollection 
2014.

Functionally significant, rare transcription factor variants in tetralogy of
Fallot.

Töpf A(1), Griffin HR(1), Glen E(1), Soemedi R(1), Brown DL(1), Hall D(1), Rahman
TJ(1), Eloranta JJ(2), Jüngst C(3), Stuart AG(4), O'Sullivan J(5), Keavney BD(6),
Goodship JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom. (2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Department of
Medicine II, Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg, Germany. (4)Bristol
Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, United Kingdom. (5)Paediatric Cardiology,
Freeman Hospital Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle
upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (6)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; Institute of Cardiovascular
Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: Rare variants in certain transcription factors involved in cardiac
development cause Mendelian forms of congenital heart disease. The purpose of
this study was to systematically assess the frequency of rare transcription
factor variants in sporadic patients with the cardiac outflow tract malformation 
tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We sequenced the coding, 5'UTR, and 3'UTR regions of twelve 
transcription factor genes implicated in cardiac outflow tract development
(NKX2.5, GATA4, ISL1, TBX20, MEF2C, BOP/SMYD1, HAND2, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXH, FOXA2
and TBX1) in 93 non-syndromic, non-Mendelian TOF cases. We also analysed Illumina
Human 660W-Quad SNP Array data for copy number variants in these genes; none were
detected. Four of the rare variants detected have previously been shown to affect
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays: FOXC1 p.P297S, FOXC2 p.Q444R, FOXH1 
p.S113T and TBX1 p.P43_G61del PPPPRYDPCAAAAPGAPGP. Two further rare variants,
HAND2 p.A25_A26insAA and FOXC1 p.G378_G380delGGG, A488_491delAAAA, affected
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays. Each of these six functionally
significant variants was present in a single patient in the heterozygous state;
each of the four for which parental samples were available were maternally
inherited. Thus in the 93 TOF cases we identified six functionally significant
mutations in the secondary heart field transcriptional network.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study indicates that rare genetic variants in the secondary
heart field transcriptional network with functional effects on protein function
occur in 3-13% of patients with TOF. This is the first report of a functionally
significant HAND2 mutation in a patient with congenital heart disease.

PMCID: PMC4122343
PMID: 25093829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Development. 2014 Aug;141(15):2950-8. doi: 10.1242/dev.111641.

Ectopic TBX1 suppresses thymic epithelial cell differentiation and proliferation 
during thymus organogenesis.

Reeh KA(1), Cardenas KT(1), Bain VE(1), Liu Z(2), Laurent M(1), Manley NR(2),
Richie ER(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Science Park Research Division, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Paul D. Coverdell Center, 500 DW Brooks Drive,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA. (3)Department of Molecular
Carcinogenesis, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park
Research Division, Smithville, TX 78957, USA erichie@mdanderson.org.

The thymus and parathyroid glands arise from a shared endodermal primordium in
the third pharyngeal pouch (3rd pp). Thymus fate is specified in the ventral 3rd 
pp between E9.5 and E11, whereas parathyroid fate is specified in the dorsal
domain. The molecular mechanisms that specify fate and regulate thymus and
parathyroid development are not fully delineated. Previous reports suggested that
Tbx1 is required for thymus organogenesis because loss of Tbx1 in individuals
with DiGeorge syndrome and in experimental Tbx1 deletion mutants is associated
with thymus aplasia or hypoplasia. However, the thymus phenotype is likely to be 
secondary to defects in pharyngeal pouch formation. Furthermore, the absence of
Tbx1 expression in the thymus-fated domain of the wild-type 3rd pp suggested that
Tbx1 is instead a negative regulator of thymus organogenesis. To test this
hypothesis, we generated a novel mouse strain in which expression of a
conditional Tbx1 allele was ectopically activated in the thymus-fated domain of
the 3rd pp. Ectopic Tbx1 expression severely repressed expression of Foxn1, a
transcription factor that marks the thymus-fated domain and is required for
differentiation and proliferation of thymic epithelial cell (TEC) progenitors. By
contrast, ectopic Tbx1 did not alter the expression pattern of Gcm2, a
transcription factor restricted to the parathyroid-fated domain and required for 
parathyroid development. Ectopic Tbx1 expression impaired TEC proliferation and
arrested TEC differentiation at an early progenitor stage. The results support
the hypothesis that Tbx1 negatively regulates TEC growth and differentiation, and
that extinction of Tbx1 expression in 3rd pp endoderm is a prerequisite for
thymus organogenesis.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197657
PMID: 25053428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. BMC Med Genet. 2014 Jul 6;15:78. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-15-78.

Novel TBX1 loss-of-function mutation causes isolated conotruncal heart defects in
Chinese patients without 22q11.2 deletion.

Xu YJ, Chen S, Zhang J, Fang SH, Guo QQ, Wang J, Fu QH, Li F, Xu R(1), Sun K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Xinhua hospital, Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 1665 Kongjiang Road, Shanghai 200092,
China. rang_xu@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: TBX1 and CRKL haploinsufficiency is thought to cause the cardiac
phenotype of the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. However, few unequivocal mutations of
TBX1 and CRKL have been discovered in isolated conotrucal heart defects (CTDs)
patients. The aim of the study was to screen the mutation of TBX1 and CRKL in
isolated CTDs Chinese patients without 22q11.2 deletion and identify the
pathomechanism of the missense mutations.
METHODS: We enrolled 199 non-22q11.2 deletion patients with CTDs and 139
unrelated healthy controls. Gene sequencing were performed for all of them. The
functional data of mutations were obtained by in vitro transfection and
luciferase experiments and computer modelling.
RESULTS: Screening of the TBX1 coding sequence identified a de novo missense
mutation (c.385G<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>A; p.E129K) and a known polymorphism (c.928G<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>A; p.G310S). In
vitro experiments demonstrate that the TBX1E129K variant almost lost
transactivation activity. The TBX1G310S variant seems to affect the interaction
of TBX1 with other factors. Computer molecular dynamics simulations showed the de
novo missense mutation is likely to affect TBX1-DNA interaction. No mutation of
CRKL gene was found.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations suggest that the TBX1 loss-of-function mutation
may be involved in the pathogenesis of isolated CTDs. This is the first human
missense mutation showing that TBX1 is a candidate causing isolated CTDs in
Chinese patients without 22q11.2 deletion.

PMCID: PMC4099205
PMID: 24998776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Oct 1;23(19):5087-101. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu232. Epub 2014 May
12.

Prdm1 functions in the mesoderm of the second heart field, where it interacts
genetically with Tbx1, during outflow tract morphogenesis in the mouse embryo.

Vincent SD(1), Mayeuf-Louchart A(2), Watanabe Y(2), Brzezinski JA 4th(3),
Miyagawa-Tomita S(4), Kelly RG(5), Buckingham M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental & Stem Cell Biology, Institut Pasteur, CNRS URA
2578, Paris, France, stephane.vincent@igbmc.fr. (2)Department of Developmental & 
Stem Cell Biology, Institut Pasteur, CNRS URA 2578, Paris, France. (3)Department 
of Structural Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. (4)Division of
Cardiovascular Development and Differentiation, Department of Pediatric
Cardiology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan and. (5)Aix-Marseille 
Université, Developmental Biology Institute of Marseille, CNRS UMR 7288, Campus
de Luminy, Marseille, France.

Congenital heart defects affect at least 0.8% of newborn children and are a major
cause of lethality prior to birth. Malformations of the arterial pole are
particularly frequent. The myocardium at the base of the pulmonary trunk and
aorta and the arterial tree associated with these great arteries are derived from
splanchnic mesoderm of the second heart field (SHF), an important source of
cardiac progenitor cells. These cells are controlled by a gene regulatory network
that includes Fgf8, Fgf10 and Tbx1. Prdm1 encodes a transcriptional repressor
that we show is also expressed in the SHF. In mouse embryos, mutation of Prdm1
affects branchial arch development and leads to persistent truncus arteriosus
(PTA), indicative of neural crest dysfunction. Using conditional mutants, we show
that this is not due to a direct function of Prdm1 in neural crest cells.
Mutation of Prdm1 in the SHF does not result in PTA, but leads to arterial pole
defects, characterized by mis-alignment or reduction of the aorta and pulmonary
trunk, and abnormalities in the arterial tree, defects that are preceded by a
reduction in outflow tract size and loss of caudal pharyngeal arch arteries.
These defects are associated with a reduction in proliferation of progenitor
cells in the SHF. We have investigated genetic interactions with Fgf8 and Tbx1,
and show that on a Tbx1 heterozygote background, conditional Prdm1 mutants have
more pronounced arterial pole defects, now including PTA. Our results identify
PRDM1 as a potential modifier of phenotypic severity in TBX1 haploinsufficient
DiGeorge syndrome patients.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24821700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Mar 15;7(4):1595-605. eCollection 2014.

Increased Tbx1 expression may play a role via TGFß-Smad2/3 signaling pathway in
acute kidney injury induced by gentamicin.

Jiang H(1), Li L(2), Li-Ling J(3), Qiu G(4), Niu Z(5), Jiang H(1), Li Y(2), Huang
Y(1), Sun K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University Shenyang 110001, China. (2)Department of Orthopedics, Shengjing
Hospital of China Medical University Shenyang 110004, China. (3)Sino-Dutch
Biomedical and Information Engineering School, Northeastern University Shenyang
110003, China ; Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Life Science, Joint Key 
Laboratory for Bio-resource Research and Utilization of Sichuan and Chongqing,
Sichuan University Chengdu 610064, China. (4)Department of Medical Genetics,
China Medical University Shenyang 110001, China. (5)Department of Pediatrics,
Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University Shenyang 110004, China.

T-box 1 (Tbx1) gene is closely involved in embryonic kidney development. To
explore the role of Tbx1 in acute kidney injury (AKI) and the underlying
mechanism, we detected the expression of Tbx1 and components of transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-ß) signaling pathways including TGF-ß, phosphorylated
Smad2/3 (p-Smad2/3) and phosphorylated Smad1/5/8 (p-Smad1/5/8) in kidney tissues 
derived from a rat model for AKI induced by gentamicin (GM). Apoptosis of renal
cells was assessed by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick
end-labeling (TUNEL), along with the expression of two essential genes involved
in apoptosis, caspase-3 and Bcl-2. Correlation between Tbx1 expression and the
number of TUNEL-positive cells was analyzed by a Spearman test. Expression of
TGF-ß, p-Smad2/3 and p-Smad1/5/8 in Tbx1-knockdown NRK cells was also analyzed by
real-time RT-PCR and Western blotting. Markedly increased Tbx1 expression was
found in the injured kidney tissues, which has activated the TGFß-Smad2/3 pathway
whilst suppressed Smad1/5/8 expression. Conversely, decreased TGF-ß and p-Smad2/3
levels, and elevated p-Smad1/5/8 levels were detected in Tbx1-knockdown NRK
cells. More apoptotic cells were detected in the injured kidneys, which has well 
correlated with the expression of Tbx1. Expression of caspase-3 was markedly
increased, while Bcl-2 was decreased in the injured kidney tissues. Above
findings suggested that activation of Tbx1 is involved in AKI through the
TGFß-Smad2/3 pathway. Tbx1 expression may therefore serve as a marker for AKI,
and Tbx1-blocking therapies may provide an option for treating GM-induced
nephropathy.

PMCID: PMC4014240
PMID: 24817956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dev Dyn. 2014 Sep;243(9):1143-51. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24147. Epub 2014 Jun 12.

Endoderm-specific deletion of Tbx1 reveals an FGF-independent role for Tbx1 in
pharyngeal apparatus morphogenesis.

Jackson A(1), Kasah S, Mansour SL, Morrow B, Basson MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development and Stem Cell Biology, King's College, 
London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The T-box transcription factor Tbx1, is essential for the normal
development of multiple organ systems in the embryo. One of the most striking
phenotypes in Tbx1-/- embryos is the failure of the caudal pharyngeal pouches to 
evaginate from the foregut endoderm. Despite considerable interest in the role of
Tbx1 in development, the mechanisms whereby Tbx1 controls caudal pouch formation 
have remained elusive. In particular, the question as to how Tbx1 expression in
the pharyngeal endoderm regulates pharyngeal pouch morphogenesis in the mouse
embryo is not known.
RESULTS: To address this question, we produced mouse embryos in which Tbx1 was
specifically deleted from the pharyngeal endoderm and, as expected, embryos
failed to form caudal pharyngeal pouches. To determine the molecular mechanism,
we examined expression of Fgf3 and Fgf8 ligands and downstream effectors.
Although Fgf8 expression is greatly reduced in Tbx1-deficient endoderm, FGF
signaling levels are unaffected. Furthermore, pouch morphogenesis is only
partially perturbed by the loss of both Fgf3 and Fgf8 from the endoderm,
indicating that neither are required for pouch formation.
CONCLUSIONS: Tbx1 deletion from the pharyngeal endoderm is sufficient to cause
caudal pharyngeal arch segmentation defects by FGF-independent effectors that
remain to be identified.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4349409
PMID: 24812002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS One. 2014 May 5;9(5):e95151. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095151. eCollection 
2014.

Mammalian TBX1 preferentially binds and regulates downstream targets via a tandem
T-site repeat.

Castellanos R(1), Xie Q(2), Zheng D(3), Cvekl A(2), Morrow BE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
United States of America. (2)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America; Department of Ophthalmology,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America.
(3)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
United States of America; Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America.

Haploinsufficiency or mutation of TBX1 is largely responsible for the etiology of
physical malformations in individuals with velo-cardio-facial/DiGeorge syndrome
(VCFS/DGS/22q11.2 deletion syndrome). TBX1 encodes a transcription factor protein
that contains an evolutionarily conserved DNA binding domain termed the T-box
that is shared with other family members. All T-box proteins, examined so far,
bind to similar but not identical consensus DNA sequences, indicating that they
have specific binding preferences. To identify the TBX1 specific consensus
sequence, Systematic Evolution of Ligands by Exponential Enrichment (SELEX) was
performed. In contrast to other TBX family members recognizing palindrome
sequences, we found that TBX1 preferentially binds to a tandem repeat of
5'-AGGTGTGAAGGTGTGA-3'. We also identified a second consensus sequence comprised 
of a tandem repeat with a degenerated downstream site. We show that three known
human disease-causing TBX1 missense mutations (F148Y, H194Q and G310S) do not
alter nuclear localization, or disrupt binding to the tandem repeat consensus
sequences, but they reduce transcriptional activity in cell culture reporter
assays. To identify Tbx1-downstream genes, we performed an in silico genome wide 
analysis of potential cis-acting elements in DNA and found strong enrichment of
genes required for developmental processes and transcriptional regulation. We
found that TBX1 binds to 19 different loci in vitro, which may correspond to
putative cis-acting binding sites. In situ hybridization coupled with luciferase 
gene reporter assays on three gene loci, Fgf8, Bmper, Otog-MyoD, show that these 
motifs are directly regulated by TBX1 in vitro. Collectively, the present studies
establish new insights into molecular aspects of TBX1 binding to DNA. This work
lays the groundwork for future in vivo studies, including chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by next generation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) to further 
elucidate the molecular pathogenesis of VCFS/DGS.

PMCID: PMC4010391
PMID: 24797903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Circ Res. 2014 Jun 20;115(1):23-31. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.303300. Epub 2014
Apr 18.

HIC2 is a novel dosage-dependent regulator of cardiac development located within 
the distal 22q11 deletion syndrome region.

Dykes IM(1), van Bueren KL(1), Ashmore RJ(1), Floss T(1), Wurst W(1), Szumska
D(1), Bhattacharya S(1), Scambler PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, University
College London, London, United Kingdom (I.M.D., K.L.v.B., R.J.A., P.J.S.);
Institute of Developmental Genetics (T.F., W.W.) and Technische Universität
München-Weihenstephan, Institute of Developmental Genetics (T.F., W.W.),
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany; German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Site Munich, Munich, Germany (W.W.); Munich
Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Adolf Butenandt Institute,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany (W.W.); and Departments
of Cardiovascular Medicine (D.S., S.B.) and Cardiovascular Medicine (I.M.D.),
University of Oxford, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Headington,
Oxford, United Kingdom. (2)From the Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child
Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom (I.M.D., K.L.v.B.,
R.J.A., P.J.S.); Institute of Developmental Genetics (T.F., W.W.) and Technische 
Universität München-Weihenstephan, Institute of Developmental Genetics (T.F.,
W.W.), Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany; German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Site Munich, Munich, Germany (W.W.); Munich
Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Adolf Butenandt Institute,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany (W.W.); and Departments
of Cardiovascular Medicine (D.S., S.B.) and Cardiovascular Medicine (I.M.D.),
University of Oxford, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Headington,
Oxford, United Kingdom. p.scambler@ucl.ac.uk.

RATIONALE: 22q11 deletion syndrome arises from recombination between low-copy
repeats on chromosome 22. Typical deletions result in hemizygosity for TBX1
associated with congenital cardiovascular disease. Deletions distal to the
typically deleted region result in a similar cardiac phenotype but lack in
extracardiac features of the syndrome, suggesting that a second haploinsufficient
gene maps to this interval.
OBJECTIVE: The transcription factor HIC2 is lost in most distal deletions, as
well as in a minority of typical deletions. We used mouse models to test the
hypothesis that HIC2 hemizygosity causes congenital heart disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We created a genetrap mouse allele of Hic2. The genetrap
reporter was expressed in the heart throughout the key stages of cardiac
morphogenesis. Homozygosity for the genetrap allele was embryonic lethal before
embryonic day E10.5, whereas the heterozygous condition exhibited a partially
penetrant late lethality. One third of heterozygous embryos had a cardiac
phenotype. MRI demonstrated a ventricular septal defect with over-riding aorta.
Conditional targeting indicated a requirement for Hic2 within the Nkx2.5+ and
Mesp1+ cardiovascular progenitor lineages. Microarray analysis revealed increased
expression of Bmp10.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate a novel role for Hic2 in cardiac
development. Hic2 is the first gene within the distal 22q11 interval to have a
demonstrated haploinsufficient cardiac phenotype in mice. Together our data
suggest that HIC2 haploinsufficiency likely contributes to the cardiac defects
seen in distal 22q11 deletion syndrome.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 24748541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Aug 15;23(16):4215-31. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu140. Epub 2014 Apr
4.

Tbx1 is required autonomously for cell survival and fate in the pharyngeal core
mesoderm to form the muscles of mastication.

Kong P(1), Racedo SE(1), Macchiarulo S(1), Hu Z(1), Carpenter C(2), Guo T(1),
Wang T(3), Zheng D(4), Morrow BE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1301 Morris Park 
Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. (2)Department of Surgery, Montefiore Medical
Center, 111 East 210th Street, Bronx, NY 10467, USA. (3)Department of
Epidemiology and Population Health, Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA and.
(4)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1301 Morris Park 
Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA, Departments of Neurology and Neuroscience,
Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park
Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. (5)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, 1301 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA,
bernice.morrow@einstein.yu.edu.

Velo-cardio-facial/DiGeorge syndrome, also known as 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, is
a congenital anomaly disorder characterized by craniofacial anomalies including
velo-pharyngeal insufficiency, facial muscle hypotonia and feeding difficulties, 
in part due to hypoplasia of the branchiomeric muscles. Inactivation of both
alleles of mouse Tbx1, encoding a T-box transcription factor, deleted on
chromosome 22q11.2, results in reduction or loss of branchiomeric muscles. To
identify downstream pathways, we performed gene profiling of microdissected
pharyngeal arch one (PA1) from Tbx1(+/+) and Tbx1(-/-) embryos at stages E9.5
(somites 20-25) and E10.5 (somites 30-35). Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factors were reduced, while secondary heart field genes were
increased in expression early and were replaced by an increase in expression of
cellular stress response genes later, suggesting a change in gene expression
patterns or cell populations. Lineage tracing studies using Mesp1(Cre) and T-Cre 
drivers showed that core mesoderm cells within PA1 were present at E9.5 but were 
greatly reduced by E10.5 in Tbx1(-/-) embryos. Using Tbx1(Cre) knock-in mice, we 
found that cells are lost due to apoptosis, consistent with increase in
expression of cellular stress response genes at E10.5. To determine whether Tbx1 
is required autonomously in the core mesoderm, we used Mesp1(Cre) and T-Cre
mesodermal drivers in combination with inactivate Tbx1 and found reduction or
loss of branchiomeric muscles from PA1. These mechanistic studies inform us that 
Tbx1 is required upstream of key myogenic genes needed for core mesoderm cell
survival and fate, between E9.5 and E10.5, resulting in formation of the
branchiomeric muscles.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4103673
PMID: 24705356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 17;9(3):e91598. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091598. eCollection
2014.

TBX1 mutation identified by exome sequencing in a Japanese family with 22q11.2
deletion syndrome-like craniofacial features and hypocalcemia.

Ogata T(1), Niihori T(2), Tanaka N(3), Kawai M(4), Nagashima T(5), Funayama R(5),
Nakayama K(5), Nakashima S(1), Kato F(1), Fukami M(6), Aoki Y(2), Matsubara Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, 
Japan. (2)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Kurashiki Central Hospital,
Kurashiki, Japan. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto University School of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (5)Division of Cell Proliferation, United Centers for
Advanced Research and Translational Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (6)National Research Institute for Child Health and
Development, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University
School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan; National Research Institute for Child Health
and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Although TBX1 mutations have been identified in patients with 22q11.2
deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS)-like phenotypes including characteristic
craniofacial features, cardiovascular anomalies, hypoparathyroidism, and thymic
hypoplasia, the frequency of TBX1 mutations remains rare in deletion-negative
patients. Thus, it would be reasonable to perform a comprehensive genetic
analysis in deletion-negative patients with 22q11.2DS-like phenotypes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We studied three subjects with craniofacial
features and hypocalcemia (group 1), two subjects with craniofacial features
alone (group 2), and three subjects with normal phenotype within a single
Japanese family. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis excluded chromosome 
22q11.2 deletion, and genomewide array comparative genomic hybridization analysis
revealed no copy number change specific to group 1 or groups 1+2. However, exome 
sequencing identified a heterozygous TBX1 frameshift mutation (c.1253delA,
p.Y418fsX459) specific to groups 1+2, as well as six missense variants and two
in-frame microdeletions specific to groups 1+2 and two missense variants specific
to group 1. The TBX1 mutation resided at exon 9C and was predicted to produce a
non-functional truncated protein missing the nuclear localization signal and most
of the transactivation domain.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Clinical features in groups 1+2 are well explained by
the TBX1 mutation, while the clinical effects of the remaining variants are
largely unknown. Thus, the results exemplify the usefulness of exome sequencing
in the identification of disease-causing mutations in familial disorders.
Furthermore, the results, in conjunction with the previous data, imply that TBX1 
isoform C is the biologically essential variant and that TBX1 mutations are
associated with a wide phenotypic spectrum, including most of 22q11.2DS
phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3956758
PMID: 24637876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Environ Toxicol. 2015 Sep;30(9):1014-23. doi: 10.1002/tox.21975. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Protective effects of puerarin against tetrabromobisphenol a-induced apoptosis
and cardiac developmental toxicity in zebrafish embryo-larvae.

Yang S(1), Wang S(1), Sun F(2), Zhang M(1), Wu F(1), Xu F(1), Ding Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese
Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing, 100012, China. (2)Department
of Life Science, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, 310053, China.

Tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA), a brominated flame retardant, is detected commonly
in aquatic environments, where it is thought to be highly toxic to the
development of aquatic life. In this study, zebrafish embryos and larvae were
used to investigate the protective effects of puerarin after exposure to TBBPA.
Malformation, blood flow disorders, pericardial edema, and spawn coagulation
rates increased, whereas survival decreased significantly after exposure to 0.5
and 1.0 mg L(-1) TBBPA. The measured indices of morphological toxicity improved
after treatment with puerarin. TBBPA also induced reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production in a dose-dependent manner. Acridine orange staining results revealed 
that TBBPA exposure caused cardiomyocyte apoptosis and induced the expression of 
three proapoptotic genes: P53, Bax, and Caspase9. In contrast, the expression of 
the antiapoptotic gene Bcl2 was down-regulated. When genes related to cardiac
development were assessed, the expression of Tbx1, Raldh2, and Bmp2b changed
after exposure to the combination of TBBPA and puerarin. These results suggest
that TBBPA induces cardiomyocyte apoptosis and ROS production, resulting in
cardiac developmental toxicity in zebrafish embryos or larvae. Therefore,
puerarin regulates the expression of cardiac developmental genes, such as Tbx1,
Bmp2b, and Raldh2 by inhibiting ROS production, and subsequently modulates
cardiac development after the exposure of zebrafish larvae to TBBPA.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24596333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Adipocyte. 2014 Jan 1;3(1):54-7. doi: 10.4161/adip.26520. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Novel nuances of human brown fat.

Scheele C(1), Larsen TJ(1), Nielsen S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Inflammation and Metabolism; Department of Infectious Diseases;
Rigshospitalet; Copenhagen, Denmark.

There is a current debate in the literature on whether human fat derived from the
supraclavicular region should be classified as brown, or as the white fat-derived
less potent, brite/beige. This commentary addresses whether the existing
classification defined in mice is sufficient to describe the types of thermogenic
adipocytes in humans. We recently published a contradictory mRNA expression
signature of human supraclavicular fat defined by an upregulation of the brite
marker TBX1 along with the classical brown markers ZIC1 and LHX8, as well as
genes indicating brown fat activity including UCP1, PGC-1a, and PRDM16; and,
finally, a downregulation of the white/brite markers HOXC8 and HOXC9.
Subcutaneous fat was used as reference material. Another recent study presents a 
higher expression of ZIC1 and a lower expression of TBX1 in interscapular
compared with supraclavicular fat. Here, however, there was no difference in
UCP1, PGC-1a, PRDM16, suggesting both depots had equal brown fat potency. Taken
together, supraclavicular brown fat derived from adult humans seems to represent 
a type of brown fat with distinct features from both subcutaneous white/brite and
interscapular brown fat. Therefore, the classification of adipocyte subtypes
defined in mice may need reconsideration when applying to humans.

PMCID: PMC3917934
PMID: 24575370  [PubMed]


75. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jul 1;23(13):1491-500. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0488. Epub 2014
Apr 2.

Tbx1 modulates endodermal and mesodermal differentiation from mouse induced
pluripotent stem cells.

Yan Y(1), Su M, Song Y, Tang Y, Tian XC, Rood D, Lai L.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Allied Health Sciences, University of Connecticut , Storrs,
Connecticut.

The T-box transcriptional factor (Tbx) family of transcriptional factors has
distinct roles in a wide range of embryonic differentiation or response pathways.
Tbx1, a T-box transcription factor, is an important gene for the human congenital
disorder 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)
technology offers new opportunities for both elucidation of the pathogenesis of
diseases and the development of stem-cell-based therapies. In this study, we
generated iPSCs from Tbx1(-/-) and Tbx1(+/+) fibroblasts and investigated the
spontaneous differentiation potential of iPSCs by detailed lineage analysis of
the iPSC-derived embryoid bodies. Undifferentiated Tbx1(-/-) and Tbx1(+/+) iPSCs 
showed similar expression levels of pluripotent markers. The ability of the
Tbx1(-/-) iPSCs to generate endodermal and mesodermal lineages was compromised
upon spontaneous differentiation into embryonic bodies. Restoration of Tbx1
expression in the Tbx1(-/-) iPSCs to normal levels using an inducible lentiviral 
system rescued these cells from the potential of defective differentiation.
Interestingly, overexpression of Tbx1 in the Tbx1(-/-) iPSCs to higher levels
than in the Tbx1(+/+) iPSCs again led to a defective differentiation potential.
Additionally, we observed that expression of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 10
and FGF8 was downregulated in the Tbx1(-/-) iPSC-derived cells, which suggests
that Tbx1 regulates the expression of FGFs. Taken together, our results
implicated the Tbx1 level as an important determinant of endodermal and
mesodermal lineage differentiation during embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC4066228
PMID: 24564535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Mar;28(3):344-56. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1254. Epub 2014 Jan
30.

RIP140 represses the "brown-in-white" adipocyte program including a futile cycle 
of triacylglycerol breakdown and synthesis.

Kiskinis E(1), Chatzeli L, Curry E, Kaforou M, Frontini A, Cinti S, Montana G,
Parker MG, Christian M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology (E.K.), Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138; Institute of
Reproductive and Developmental Biology (L.C., E.C., M.G.P.), Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, W12 0NN, United Kingdom; Department of Mathematics
(M.K., G.M.), Statistics Section, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United
Kingdom; Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine (A.F., S.C.),
University of Ancona, (Politecnica delle Marche), 60126 Ancona, Italy; Division
of Metabolic and Vascular Health (M.C.), Warwick Medical School, University of
Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom.

Receptor-interacting protein 140 (RIP140) is a corepressor of nuclear receptors
that is highly expressed in adipose tissues. We investigated the role of RIP140
in conditionally immortal preadipocyte cell lines prepared from white or brown
fat depots. In white adipocytes, a large set of brown fat-associated genes was
up-regulated in the absence of RIP140. In contrast, a relatively minor role can
be ascribed to RIP140 in the control of basal gene expression in differentiated
brown adipocytes because significant changes were observed only in Ptgds and
Fabp3. The minor role of RIP140 in brown adipocytes correlates with the similar
histology and uncoupling protein 1 and CIDEA staining in knockout compared with
wild-type brown adipose tissue (BAT). In contrast, RIP140 knockout sc white
adipose tissue (WAT) shows increased numbers of multilocular adipocytes with
elevated staining for uncoupling protein 1 and CIDEA. Furthermore in a white
adipocyte cell line, the markers of BRITE adipocytes, Tbx1, CD137, Tmem26,
Cited1, and Epsti1 were repressed in the presence of RIP140 as was Prdm16.
Microarray analysis of wild-type and RIP140-knockout white fat revealed elevated 
expression of genes associated with cold-induced expression or high expression in
BAT. A set of genes associated with a futile cycle of triacylglycerol breakdown
and resynthesis and functional assays revealed that glycerol kinase and
glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase activity as well as [(3)H]glycerol
incorporation were elevated in the absence of RIP140. Thus, RIP140 blocks the
BRITE program in WAT, preventing the expression of brown fat genes and inhibiting
a triacylglycerol futile cycle, with important implications for energy
homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4207910
PMID: 24479876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Mar;99(3):E469-73. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-3136. Epub 
2014 Jan 1.

Analysis of AP2S1, a calcium-sensing receptor regulator, in familial and sporadic
isolated hypoparathyroidism.

Lambert AS(1), Grybek V, Francou B, Esterle L, Bertrand G, Bouligand J,
Guiochon-Mantel A, Hieronimus S, Voitel D, Soskin S, Magdelaine C, Lienhardt A,
Silve C, Linglart A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 986 (A.-S.L., V.G., C.S., A.Lin.), Hôpital Bicêtre-Paris-Sud;
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Service d'Endocrinologie et Diabétologie
de l'Enfant (L.E., A.Lin.), Hôpital Bicêtre-Paris-Sud Centre de Référence des
Maladies Rares du Métabolisme du Calcium et du Phosphore (L.E., C.S., A.Lin.);
and Faculté de Médecine ( (B.F., J.B., A.G.-M., A.Lin.) and INSERM Unité Mixte de
Recherche en Santé 693 (B.F., J.B., A.G.-M.), Université Paris Sud, 94270 Le
Kremlin Bicêtre, France; Service de Pédiatrie (A.-S.L., A.Lie.) and Service de
Génétique et Cytogénétique (C.M.), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Limoges,
87000 Limoges, France; Service de Génétique Moléculaire (G.B., C.S.), Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Bichat, 75870 Paris, France; Service de Génétique
Moléculaire, Pharmacogénétique, et Hormonologie (B.F., J.B., A.G.-M.), Hôpital
Bicêtre-Paris-Sud, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 94270 Paris, France;
Service d'Endocrinologie et Métabolisme (S.H.), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
Nice, 06000 Nice, France; Service de Médecine Interne (D.V.), Centre Hospitalier 
Louis Mourier, 92700 Colombes, France; and Service de Pédiatrie (S.S.), Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Strasbourg, 67085 Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND: Except after neck surgery, hypoparathyroidism is a rare disease
caused by defects in genes involved in parathyroid gland development
(TBX1/22q11.2 del, GCMB, GATA3, TBCE) or function [calcium sensing receptor
(CASR), GNA11, PTH], or the autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (AIRE).
Approximately 90% of sporadic cases and 30% of familial cases of isolated
hypoparathyroidism remain unexplained. Recurrent missense mutations in AP2S1, a
calcium-sensing receptor regulator, have been recently identified in familial
hyperparathyroidism.
AIM: The aim of the study was to investigate AP2S1 as a putative
hypoparathyroidism-causing gene.
METHODS: Sequencing analysis and quantitative genomic PCR of the AP2S1 gene in a 
large cohort of 10 index cases (from nine families) and 50 sporadic cases
affected with isolated hypoparathyroidism were investigated.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: None of the 60 patients presented with nucleotidic
changes or copy number variation in the AP2S1 gene, thereby excluding AP2S1
defects as a frequent cause of isolated hypoparathyroidism.

PMID: 24423332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Med Genet. 2014 Apr;51(4):268-70. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-102100. Epub 2014
Jan 13.

Conotruncal malformations and absent thymus due to a deleterious NKX2-6 mutation.

Ta-Shma A(1), El-lahham N, Edvardson S, Stepensky P, Nir A, Perles Z, Gavri S,
Golender J, Yaakobi-Simhayoff N, Shaag A, Rein AJ, Elpeleg O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Hadassah, Hebrew University Medical
Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Truncus arteriosus (TA) accounts for ~1% of congenital heart defects.
The aetiology of isolated TA is largely unknown but when occurring as part of a
syndrome, it is mostly associated with chromosome 22q11 deletion. Vice versa, the
most common congenital heart defects associated with chromosome 22q11 deletion
are conotruncal malformations. In this study we investigated the cause of
multiple conotruncal malformations accompanied by athymia in a consanguineous
family.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Whole exome analysis revealed a homozygous deleterious
mutation in the NKX2-6 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: NKX2-6 encodes a homeobox-containing protein which is expressed in
mouse embryo at E8.0-E9.5 at the caudal pharyngeal arches and the outflow tract. 
A single missense mutation was previously implicated in the aetiology of familial
isolated TA; however, null mice are entirely normal. The clear phenotype
associated with a homozygous deleterious mutation in the present report, falls
well within the spectrum of the cardiac defects seen in DiGeorge syndrome, is in 
agreement with NKX2-6 downstream location in the TBX1 signalling pathway and
confirms NKX2-6 role in human cardiogenesis.

PMID: 24421281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Yi Chuan. 2013 Sep;35(9):1058-64.

[Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway and regulation of inner ear development].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen ZQ(1), Han XH(2), Cao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)The First Clinical Medical College, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, China. erwin_0108@sina.com (2)School of Basic Medicine, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China.

During inner ear development, Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is involved 
in the ventral otic identity, cell fate determination of statoacoustic ganglion
neurons and hair cell development. Shh protein, secreted from floor plate,
antagonizes Wnt protein from roof plate, which refines and maintains dorsoventral
axial patterning in the ear. Shh, served as a mitogen during neurogenesis,
directly promotes the development of spiral ganglion neuron. After Shh signaling 
pathway is activated, Ngn1 is freed from Tbx1 repression. As a result, Shh
indirectly upregulates the expression of Ngn1, thus regulating neurogenic
patterning of inner ear. In addition, Shh regulates the differentiation of hair
cells by influencing cell cycle of the progenitor cells located in the cochlea.
The basal-to-apical wave of Shh decline ensures the normal devel- opment pattern 
of hair cells. It is confirmed by a quantity of researches conducted in both
animals and patients with hereditary hearing impairment that abnormal Shh
signaling results in aberrant transcription of target genes, disturbance of the
proper development of inner ear, and human hearing impairment. In humans,
diseases accompanied by hearing disorders caused by abnormal Shh signaling
include Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS), Pallister-Hall syndrome
(PHS), Waardenburg syndrome (WS) and medulloblastoma, etc. This review would
provide a theoretical basis for further study of molecular mechanisms and
clinical use of inner ear development.

PMID: 24400478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Dis Model Mech. 2014 Feb;7(2):245-57. doi: 10.1242/dmm.012484. Epub 2013 Dec 19.

Dysphagia and disrupted cranial nerve development in a mouse model of DiGeorge
(22q11) deletion syndrome.

Karpinski BA(1), Maynard TM, Fralish MS, Nuwayhid S, Zohn IE, Moody SA, LaMantia 
AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, The George Washington
University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington DC 20037, USA.

We assessed feeding-related developmental anomalies in the LgDel mouse model of
chromosome 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS), a common developmental disorder
that frequently includes perinatal dysphagia--debilitating feeding, swallowing
and nutrition difficulties from birth onward--within its phenotypic spectrum.
LgDel pups gain significantly less weight during the first postnatal weeks, and
have several signs of respiratory infections due to food aspiration. Most 22q11
genes are expressed in anlagen of craniofacial and brainstem regions critical for
feeding and swallowing, and diminished expression in LgDel embryos apparently
compromises development of these regions. Palate and jaw anomalies indicate
divergent oro-facial morphogenesis. Altered expression and patterning of
hindbrain transcriptional regulators, especially those related to retinoic acid
(RA) signaling, prefigures these disruptions. Subsequently, gene expression, axon
growth and sensory ganglion formation in the trigeminal (V), glossopharyngeal
(IX) or vagus (X) cranial nerves (CNs) that innervate targets essential for
feeding, swallowing and digestion are disrupted. Posterior CN IX and X ganglia
anomalies primarily reflect diminished dosage of the 22q11DS candidate gene Tbx1.
Genetic modification of RA signaling in LgDel embryos rescues the anterior CN V
phenotype and returns expression levels or pattern of RA-sensitive genes to those
in wild-type embryos. Thus, diminished 22q11 gene dosage, including but not
limited to Tbx1, disrupts oro-facial and CN development by modifying RA-modulated
anterior-posterior hindbrain differentiation. These disruptions likely contribute
to dysphagia in infants and young children with 22q11DS.

PMCID: PMC3917245
PMID: 24357327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Pediatr Surg Int. 2014 Feb;30(2):143-9. doi: 10.1007/s00383-013-3455-9.

Altered Tbx1 gene expression is associated with abnormal oesophageal development 
in the adriamycin mouse model of oesophageal atresia/tracheo-oesophageal fistula.

Mc Laughlin D(1), Murphy P, Puri P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Natural Sciences, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

INTRODUCTION: Oesophageal atresia/tracheo-oesophageal atresia (OA/TOF) frequently
arises with associated anomalies and has been clinically linked with 22q11
deletion syndromes, a group of conditions due to Tbx1 gene mutation which include
Di George syndrome. Tbx1 and Tbx2 genes modulate pharyngeal and cardiac
development, but are also expressed in the developing foregut and are known to
interact with key signalling pathways described in oesophageal formation
including bone morphogenic proteins. The adriamycin mouse model (AMM) reliably
displays OA/TOF-like foregut malformations providing a powerful system for
investigating the disturbances in gene regulation and morphology involved in
tracheo-oesophageal malformations. We hypothesised that foregut abnormalities
observed in the AMM are associated with altered Tbx1 and Tbx2 gene expression.
METHODS: Time-mated CBA/Ca mice received intra-peritoneal injection of adriamycin
(for treated) or saline (for controls) on embryonic days (E)7 and 8. Untreated
Cd1 embryos were used to establish normal expression patterns. Embryos harvested 
on E9-E11 underwent whole-mount in situ hybridization with labelled RNA probes
for Tbx1 and Tbx2. Optical projection tomography was used to visualise expression
in whole embryos by 3D imaging.
RESULTS: Tbx1 expression was visualised in a highly specific pattern in the
proximal oesophageal endoderm in normal and control embryos. In the AMM,
extensive ectopic expression of Tbx1 was detected in the dorsal foregut and
adjacent to the TOF. The focally restricted oesophageal expression pattern
persisted in the AMM, but was posteriorly displaced in relation to the tracheal
bifurcation. Tbx2 was widely expressed in the ventral foregut mesoderm of
controls, lacking specific endoderm localisation. In the AMM, altered Tbx2
expression in the foregut was only seen in severely affected embryos.
CONCLUSION: Highly specific Tbx1 expression in the proximal oesophageal endoderm 
suggests that Tbx1 may be an important regulator of normal oesophageal
development. Altered Tbx1 expression in dorsal foregut and adjacent to the TOF in
the AMM suggests that Tbx1 gene disruption may contribute to the pathogenesis of 
tracheo-oesophageal malformations.

PMID: 24356861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS Biol. 2013 Dec;11(12):e1001725. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001725. Epub 2013
Dec 3.

NK4 antagonizes Tbx1/10 to promote cardiac versus pharyngeal muscle fate in the
ascidian second heart field.

Wang W(1), Razy-Krajka F, Siu E, Ketcham A, Christiaen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, New York University, New York, New York, United States 
of America.

The heart and head muscles share common developmental origins and genetic
underpinnings in vertebrates, including humans. Parts of the heart and
cranio-facial musculature derive from common mesodermal progenitors that express 
NKX2-5, ISL1, and TBX1. This ontogenetic kinship is dramatically reflected in the
DiGeorge/Cardio-Velo-Facial syndrome (DGS/CVFS), where mutations of TBX1 cause
malformations in the pharyngeal apparatus and cardiac outflow tract. Cardiac
progenitors of the first heart field (FHF) do not require TBX1 and segregate
precociously from common progenitors of the second heart field (SHF) and
pharyngeal muscles. However, the cellular and molecular mechanisms that govern
heart versus pharyngeal muscle specification within this lineage remain elusive. 
Here, we harness the simplicity of the ascidian larva to show that, following
asymmetric cell division of common progenitors, NK4/NKX2-5 promotes
GATAa/GATA4/5/6 expression and cardiac specification in the second heart
precursors by antagonizing Tbx1/10-mediated inhibition of GATAa and activation of
Collier/Olf/EBF (COE), the determinant of atrial siphon muscle (ASM)
specification. Our results uncover essential regulatory connections between the
conserved cardio-pharyngeal factor Tbx1/10 and muscle determinant COE, as well as
a mutual antagonism between NK4 and Tbx1/10 activities upstream of GATAa and COE.
The latter cross-antagonism underlies a fundamental heart versus pharyngeal
muscle fate choice that occurs in a conserved lineage of cardio-pharyngeal
progenitors. We propose that this basic ontogenetic motif underlies cardiac and
pharyngeal muscle development and evolution in chordates.

PMCID: PMC3849182
PMID: 24311985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Gene. 2014 Feb 10;535(2):290-3. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.012. Epub 2013 Dec 1.

Genetic analysis of the TBX1 gene promoter in indirect inguinal hernia.

Zhang Y(1), Han Q(1), Li C(2), Li W(1), Fan H(1), Xing Q(1), Yan B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Surgery, Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital,
Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong 272029, China. (2)Division of
Electrocardiogram, Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical 
University, Jining, Shandong 272029, China. (3)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory
of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment, Jining Medical University Affiliated 
Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong 272029, China. Electronic
address: yanbo@mail.jnmc.edu.cn.

Inguinal hernia is a common disease, most cases of which are indirect inguinal
hernia (IIH). Genetic factors play an important role for inguinal hernia.
Increased incidences of inguinal hernia have been reported in patients with
22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome, which is mainly caused by TBX1 gene mutations.
Thus, we hypothesized that altered TBX1 gene expression may contribute to IIH
development. In this study, the human TBX1 gene promoter was genetically analyzed
in children with IIH (n=100) and ethnic-matched controls (n=167). Functions of
DNA sequence variants (DSVs) within the TBX1 gene promoter were examined in
cultured human fibroblast cells. The results showed that two heterozygous DSVs
were found, both of which were single nucleotide polymorphisms. One DSV, g.4248
C>T (rs41298629), was identified in a 2-year-old boy with right-sided IIH, but
not in all controls, which significantly decreased TBX1 gene promoter activity.
Another DSV, g.4199 C>T (rs41260844), was found in both IIH patients and controls
with similar frequencies (P>0.05), which did not affect TBX1 gene promoter
activity. Collectively, our data suggested that the DSV within the TBX1 gene
promoter may change TBX1 level, contributing to IIH development as a rare risk
factor. Underlying molecular mechanisms need to be established.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24295890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Chin Med J (Engl). 2013 Dec;126(23):4583-4.

Tbx1 regulates the development of zebrafish neural crest cells by retinoic acid
signaling.

Wang W(1), Zhang LF, Gui YH, Hu JY, Song HY.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Center, Children's Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 201102,
China.

Erratum in
    Chin Med J (Engl). 2014;127(6):1070.

PMID: 24286429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cells Tissues Organs. 2013;198(2):99-110. doi: 10.1159/000353116. Epub 2013 Jul
30.

Inductive ability of human developing and differentiated dental mesenchyme.

Zheng L(1), Warotayanont R, Stahl J, Kunimatsu R, Klein O, DenBesten PK, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orofacial Sciences, University of California, San Francisco,
Calif., USA.

The development of cell-based therapeutic strategies to bioengineer tooth tissue 
is a promising approach for the treatment of lost or damaged tooth tissue. The
lack of a readily available cell source for human dental epithelial cells (ECs)
severely constrains the progress of tooth bioengineering. Previous studies in
model organisms have demonstrated that developing dental mesenchyme can instruct 
nondental epithelium to differentiate into enamel-forming epithelium. In this
study, we characterized the ability of fetal and adult human dental mesenchyme to
promote differentiation of human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived ECs (ES-ECs) 
into ameloblast-lineage cells. ES-ECs were co-cultured either with human fetal
dental mesenchymal cells (FDMCs) or with adult dental mesenchymal cells (ADMCs)
in either a three-dimensional culture system, or in the renal capsules of SCID
mice. When co-cultured with FDMCs in vitro, ES-ECs polarized and expressed
amelogenin. Tooth organ-like structures assembled with epithelium and encased
mesenchyme and developing enamel-like structures could be detected in the
complexes resulting from in vitro and ex vivo co-culture of ES-ECs and FDMCs. In 
contrast, co-cultured ES-ECs and ADMCs formed amorphous spherical structures and 
occasionally formed hair. Transcription factors were significantly upregulated in
FDMCs compared to ADMCs including MSX1, GLI1, LHX6, LHX8,LEF1 and TBX1. In
summary, FDMCs but not ADMCs had the capacity to induce differentiation of ES-ECs
into ameloblast lineage cells. Further characterization of the functional
differences between these two types of dental mesenchyme could enable
reprogramming of ADMCs to enhance their odontogenic inductive competence.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 24192998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 10;8(10):e77171. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077171.
eCollection 2013.

Tbx2a is required for specification of endodermal pouches during development of
the pharyngeal arches.

Thi Thu HN(1), Haw Tien SF, Loh SL, Bok Yan JS, Korzh V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore, Singapore ; Department of 
Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore ;
Department of Surgery, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

Tbx2 is a member of the T-box family of transcription factors essential for
embryo- and organogenesis. A deficiency in the zebrafish paralogue tbx2a causes
abnormalities of the pharyngeal arches in a p53-independent manner. The
pharyngeal arches are formed by derivatives of all three embryonic germ layers:
endodermal pouches, mesenchymal condensations and neural crest cells. While tbx2a
expression is restricted to the endodermal pouches, its function is required for 
the normal morphogenesis of the entire pharyngeal arches. Given the similar
function of Tbx1 in craniofacial development, we explored the possibility of an
interaction between Tbx1 and Tbx2a. The use of bimolecular fluorescence
complementation revealed the interaction between Tbx2a and Tbx1, thus providing
support for the idea that functional interaction between different, co-expressed 
Tbx proteins could be a common theme across developmental processes in cell
lineages and tissues. Together, this work provides mechanistic insight into the
role of TBX2 in human disorders affecting the face and neck.

PMCID: PMC3795029
PMID: 24130849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 27;8(9):e73685. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073685. eCollection
2013.

Transcription profiles of endothelial cells in the rat ductus arteriosus during a
perinatal period.

Liu NM(1), Yokota T, Maekawa S, Lü P, Zheng YW, Taniguchi H, Yokoyama U, Kato T, 
Minamisawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Medical Bioscience, Waseda University, Tokyo,
Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(1). doi:10.1371/annotation/ebd2da91-3f5a-4b50-8f16-9d7150795c69.
Tei, Inbun [corrected to Zheng, Yun-Wen].

Endothelial cells (ECs) lining the blood vessels serve a variety of functions and
play a central role in the homeostasis of the circulatory system. Since the
ductus arteriosus (DA) has different arterial characteristics from its connecting
vessels, we hypothesized that ECs of the DA exhibited a unique gene profile
involved in the regulation of DA-specific morphology and function. Using a
fluorescence-activated cell sorter, we isolated ECs from pooled tissues from the 
DA or the descending aorta of Wistar rat fetuses at full-term of gestation (F
group) or neonates 30 minutes after birth (N group). Using anti-CD31 and
anti-CD45 antibodies as cell surface markers for ECs and hematopoietic derived
cells, respectively, cDNAs from the CD31-positive and CD45-negative cells were
hybridized to the Affymetrix GeneChip® Rat Gene 1.0 ST Array. Among 26,469
gene-level probe sets, 82 genes in the F group and 81 genes in the N group were
expressed at higher levels in DA ECs than in aortic ECs (p<0.05, fold
change>2.0). In addition to well-known endothelium-enriched genes such as Tgfb2
and Vegfa, novel DA endothelium-dominant genes including Slc38a1, Capn6, and Lrat
were discovered. Enrichment analysis using GeneGo MetaCore software showed that
DA endothelium-related biological processes were involved in morphogenesis and
development. We identified many overlapping genes in each process including
neural crest-related genes (Hoxa1, Hoxa4, and Hand2, etc) and the second heart
field-related genes (Tbx1, Isl1, and Fgf10, etc). Moreover, we found that
regulation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, cell adhesion, and retinol
metabolism are the active pathways involved in the network via potential
interactions with many of the identified genes to form DA-specific endothelia. In
conclusion, the present study uncovered several significant differences of the
transcriptional profile between the DA and aortic ECs. Newly identified DA
endothelium-dominant genes may play an important role in DA-specific functional
and morphologic characteristics.

PMCID: PMC3785468
PMID: 24086288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(9):e1003785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003785. Epub 2013 Sep 
19.

MicroRNA-17-92, a direct Ap-2a transcriptional target, modulates T-box factor
activity in orofacial clefting.

Wang J(1), Bai Y, Li H, Greene SB, Klysik E, Yu W, Schwartz RJ, Williams TJ,
Martin JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2013 Dec;9(12).
doi:10.1371/annotation/90602bc3-5052-49ac-a7fb-33210d7c8b4d.

Among the most common human congenital anomalies, cleft lip and palate (CL/P)
affects up to 1 in 700 live births. MicroRNA (miR)s are small, non-coding RNAs
that repress gene expression post-transcriptionally. The miR-17-92 cluster
encodes six miRs that have been implicated in human cancers and heart
development. We discovered that miR-17-92 mutant embryos had severe craniofacial 
phenotypes, including incompletely penetrant CL/P and mandibular hypoplasia.
Embryos that were compound mutant for miR-17-92 and the related miR-106b-25
cluster had completely penetrant CL/P. Expression of Tbx1 and Tbx3, the
DiGeorge/velo-cardio-facial (DGS) and Ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS) disease genes,
was expanded in miR-17-92 mutant craniofacial structures. Both Tbx1 and Tbx3 had 
functional miR seed sequences that mediated gene repression. Analysis of
miR-17-92 regulatory regions uncovered conserved and functional AP-2a recognition
elements that directed miR-17-92 expression. Together, our data indicate that
miR-17-92 modulates expression of critical T-box transcriptional regulators
during midface development and is itself a target of Bmp-signaling and the
craniofacial pioneer factor AP-2a. Our data are the first genetic evidence that
an individual miR or miR cluster is functionally important in mammalian CL/P.

PMCID: PMC3777996
PMID: 24068957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2013 Dec;13(6):613-21. doi: 10.1007/s11882-013-0384-6.

Understanding the role of Tbx1 as a candidate gene for 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.

Gao S(1), Li X, Amendt BA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) is caused by a commonly occurring
microdeletion on chromosome 22. Clinical findings include cardiac malformations, 
thymic and parathyroid hypoplasia, craniofacial dysmorphisms, and dental defects.
These phenotypes are due mainly to abnormal development of the pharyngeal
apparatus. Targeted deletion studies in mice and analysis of naturally occurring 
mutations in humans have implicated Tbx1 as a candidate gene for 22q11.2DS. Tbx1 
belongs to an evolutionarily conserved T-box family of transcription factors,
whose expression is precisely regulated during embryogenesis, and it appears to
regulate the proliferation and differentiation of various progenitor cells during
organogenesis. In this review, we discuss the mechanisms of Tbx1 during
development of the heart, thymus and parathyroid glands, as well as during
formation of the palate, teeth, and other craniofacial features.

PMCID: PMC3840116
PMID: 23996541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. BMC Dev Biol. 2013 Aug 23;13:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-13-33.

Conditional and constitutive expression of a Tbx1-GFP fusion protein in mice.

Freyer L, Nowotschin S, Pirity MK, Baldini A, Morrow BE.

BACKGROUND: Velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS) is caused by
a 1.5-3 Mb microdeletion of chromosome 22q11.2, frequently referred to as 22q11.2
deletion syndrome (22q11DS). This region includes TBX1, a T-box transcription
factor gene that contributes to the etiology of 22q11DS. The requirement for TBX1
in mammalian development is dosage-sensitive, such that loss-of-function (LOF)
and gain-of-function (GOF) of TBX1 in both mice and humans results in disease
relevant congenital malformations.
RESULTS: To further gain insight into the role of Tbx1 in development, we have
targeted the Rosa26 locus to generate a new GOF mouse model in which a Tbx1-GFP
fusion protein is expressed conditionally using the Cre/LoxP system. Tbx1-GFP
expression is driven by the endogenous Rosa26 promoter resulting in ectopic and
persistent expression. Tbx1 is pivotal for proper ear and heart development;
ectopic activation of Tbx1-GFP in the otic vesicle by Pax2-Cre and Foxg1-Cre
represses neurogenesis and produces morphological defects of the inner ear.
Overexpression of a single copy of Tbx1-GFP using Tbx1Cre/+ was viable, while
overexpression of both copies resulted in neonatal lethality with cardiac outflow
tract defects. We have partially rescued inner ear and heart anomalies in
Tbx1Cre/- null embryos by expression of Tbx1-GFP.
CONCLUSIONS: We have generated a new mouse model to conditionally overexpress a
GFP-tagged Tbx1 protein in vivo. This provides a useful tool to investigate in
vivo direct downstream targets and protein binding partners of Tbx1.

PMCID: PMC3765320
PMID: 23971992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Dec;161A(12):3133-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36148. Epub 2013 
Aug 16.

JAG1 mutation in a patient with deletion 22q11.2 syndrome and tetralogy of
Fallot.

Digilio MC(1), Luca AD, Lepri F, Guida V, Ferese R, Dentici ML, Angioni A, Marino
B, Dallapiccola B.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics and Cytogenetics, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS,
Rome, Italy.

Deletion 22q11.2 (del22q11.2) syndrome, also known as DiGeorge/Velo-cardio-facial
syndrome (DG/VCFS), and Alagille syndrome are genetic disorders
characteristically associated with congenital heart defects (CHDs). We report on 
a patient with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) and clinical features of DG/VCFS,
hemizygous for del22q11.2 and heterozygous for the 2810G > A (p.Arg937Gln)
mutation in the JAG1 gene associated with Alagille syndrome. The clinical
features of del22q11.2 syndrome are present in the patient, including facial
anomalies, typical TOF, speech delay with hypernasal voice, and learning
difficulties. TOF and mild hepatic involvement, consisting of slightly elevated
aminotransferase conjugated bilirubin levels, were the only features of Alagille 
syndrome in our patient. The anatomic type of TOF displayed no distinctive
recognizable pattern for either DG/VCFS or Alagille syndrome. It is likely that
hemizygosity of the TBX1 gene was causally related to TOF in this patient,
although a synergistic pathogenic role of the JAG1 gene mutation in causing the
heart defect cannot be excluded. JAG1 mutations have been previously detected in 
patients with nonsyndromic TOF and recent molecular evidence supports the
cumulative effect of multiple genetic defects in the etiology of human
malformations. We hypothesize that a similar mechanism could be present in this
patient with del22q11.2 syndrome associated with a JAG1 missense mutation acting 
as possible modifier factor for TOF.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23956173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jan 1;23(1):78-89. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt400. Epub 2013 Aug 14.

Tbx1 regulates brain vascularization.

Cioffi S(1), Martucciello S, Fulcoli FG, Bilio M, Ferrentino R, Nusco E,
Illingworth E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics 'ABT'.

The transcription factor TBX1 is the major gene involved in 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome (22q11.2DS). Using mouse models of these diseases, we have previously
shown that TBX1 activates VEGFR3 in endothelial cells (EC), and that this
interaction is critical for the development of the lymphatic vasculature. In this
study, we show that TBX1 regulates brain angiogenesis. Using loss-of-function
genetics and molecular approaches, we show that TBX1 regulates the VEGFR3 and
DLL4 genes in brain ECs. In mice, loss of TBX1 causes global brain vascular
defects, comprising brain vessel hyperplasia, enhanced angiogenic sprouting and
vessel network disorganization. This phenotype is recapitulated in EC-specific
Tbx1 conditional mutants and in an EC-only 3-dimensional cell culture system
(matrigel), indicating that the brain vascular phenotype is cell autonomous.
Furthermore, EC-specific conditional Tbx1 mutants have poorly perfused brain
vessels and brain hypoxia, indicating that the expanded vascular network is
functionally impaired. In EC-matrigel cultures, a Notch1 agonist is able to
partially rescue microtubule hyperbranching induced by TBX1 knockdown. Thus, we
have identified a novel transcriptional regulator of angiogenesis that exerts its
effect in brain by negatively regulating angiogenesis through the
DLL4/Notch1-VEGFR3 regulatory axis. Given the similarity of the phenotypic
consequences of TBX1 mutation in humans and mice, this unexpected role of TBX1 in
murine brain vascularization should stimulate clinicians to search for brain
microvascular anomalies in 22q11.2DS patients and to evaluate whether some of the
anatomical and functional brain anomalies in patients may have a microvascular
origin.

PMID: 23945394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mol Syndromol. 2013 Jun;4(5):235-45. doi: 10.1159/000351127. Epub 2013 May 28.

More Clinical Overlap between 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome and CHARGE Syndrome than 
Often Anticipated.

Corsten-Janssen N(1), Saitta SC, Hoefsloot LH, McDonald-McGinn DM, Driscoll DA,
Derks R, Dickinson KA, Kerstjens-Frederikse WS, Emanuel BS, Zackai EH, van
Ravenswaaij-Arts CM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, Department of
Genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands.

CHARGE (coloboma, heart defects, atresia of choanae, retardation of growth and
development, genital hypoplasia, and ear abnormalities) and 22q11.2 deletion
syndromes are variable, congenital malformation syndromes that show considerable 
phenotypic overlap. We further explored this clinical overlap and proposed
recommendations for the genetic diagnosis of both syndromes. We described 2
patients clinically diagnosed with CHARGE syndrome, who were found to carry a
22q11.2 deletion, and searched the literature for more cases. In addition, we
screened our cohort of CHD7 mutation carriers (n = 802) for typical 22q11.2
deletion features and studied CHD7 in 20 patients with phenotypically 22q11.2
deletion syndrome but without haploinsufficiency of TBX1. In total, we identified
5 patients with a clinical diagnosis of CHARGE syndrome and a proven 22q11.2
deletion. Typical 22q11.2 deletion features were found in 30 patients (30/802,
3.7%) of our CHD7 mutation-positive cohort. We found truncating CHD7 mutations in
5/20 patients with phenotypically 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Differentiating
between CHARGE and 22q11.2 deletion syndromes can be challenging. CHD7 and TBX1
probably share a molecular pathway or have common target genes in affected
organs. We strongly recommend performing CHD7 analysis in patients with a 22q11.2
deletion phenotype without TBX1 haploinsufficiency and conversely, performing a
genome-wide array in CHARGE syndrome patients without a CHD7 mutation.

PMCID: PMC3711480
PMID: 23885230  [PubMed]


94. Front Immunol. 2013 Jul 12;4:187. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00187. eCollection
2013.

FOXN1: A Master Regulator Gene of Thymic Epithelial Development Program.

Romano R(1), Palamaro L, Fusco A, Giardino G, Gallo V, Del Vecchio L, Pignata C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, "Federico II" University ,
Naples , Italy.

T cell ontogeny is a sophisticated process, which takes place within the thymus
through a series of well-defined discrete stages. The process requires a proper
lympho-stromal interaction. In particular, cortical and medullary thymic
epithelial cells (cTECs, mTECs) drive T cell differentiation, education, and
selection processes, while the thymocyte-dependent signals allow thymic
epithelial cells (TECs) to maturate and provide an appropriate thymic
microenvironment. Alterations in genes implicated in thymus organogenesis,
including Tbx1, Pax1, Pax3, Pax9, Hoxa3, Eya1, and Six1, affect this
well-orchestrated process, leading to disruption of thymic architecture. Of note,
in both human and mice, the primordial TECs are yet unable to fully support T
cell development and only after the transcriptional activation of the
Forkhead-box n1 (FOXN1) gene in the thymic epithelium this essential function is 
acquired. FOXN1 is a master regulator in the TEC lineage specification in that it
down-stream promotes transcription of genes, which, in turn, regulate TECs
differentiation. In particular, FOXN1 mainly regulates TEC patterning in the
fetal stage and TEC homeostasis in the post-natal thymus. An inborn null mutation
in FOXN1 leads to Nude/severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) phenotype in
mouse, rat, and humans. In Foxn1 (-/-) nude animals, initial formation of the
primordial organ is arrested and the primordium is not colonized by hematopoietic
precursors, causing a severe primary T cell immunodeficiency. In humans, the
Nude/SCID phenotype is characterized by congenital alopecia of the scalp,
eyebrows, and eyelashes, nail dystrophy, and a severe T cell immunodeficiency,
inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder. Aim of this review is to summarize 
all the scientific information so far available to better characterize the
pivotal role of the master regulator FOXN1 transcription factor in the TEC
lineage specifications and functionality.

PMCID: PMC3709140
PMID: 23874334  [PubMed]


95. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2014 Apr;43(4):396-403. doi: 10.1002/uog.12550. Epub
2013 Dec 26.

Microdeletions/duplications involving TBX1 gene in fetuses with conotruncal heart
defects which are negative for 22q11.2 deletion on fluorescence in-situ
hybridization.

Chen M(1), Yang YS, Shih JC, Lin WH, Lee DJ, Lin YS, Chou CH, Cameron AD,
Ginsberg NA, Chen CA, Lee ML, Ma GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genomic Medicine, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan;
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua,
Taiwan; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine and
Hospital, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Life
Sciences, Tunghai University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVES: Conotruncal heart defects (CTD) are associated with del22q11.2
syndrome, which is often diagnosed by fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH). 
However, in those negative for del22q11.2 on FISH, the etiology is usually
obscure. We aimed to use high-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization 
(array CGH) to clarify the underlying genetic causes in these cases.
METHODS: In this retrospective study, fetal samples of amniocytes or fibroblasts,
taken either for prenatal diagnosis by amniocentesis or for postnatal survey
after termination of pregnancy, were obtained from 45 fetuses with CTD and were
investigated by cytogenetic analysis including karyotyping and FISH for
del22q11.2 syndrome. Eight fetuses with no findings on karyotyping and FISH were 
investigated further by array CGH, real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (qPCR) and Sanger sequencing of TBX1.
RESULTS: Array CGH revealed that three of the eight fetuses carried
submicroscopic genomic imbalances. Of these, two cases showed similar small
microdeletions/duplications in 22q11.2 (one 0.85 kb microdeletion and one 8.51 kb
microduplication). The minimal shared region spanned exon 2 of TBX1, a candidate 
gene responsible for cardiovascular defects in del22q11.2 syndrome. In all eight 
cases, the array CGH results were confirmed by qPCR, and Sanger sequencing did
not detect other molecular pathologies.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate an association between TBX1 variations and
fetal CTD. The results also demonstrate the power of array CGH to further
scrutinize the critical gene(s) of del22q11.2 syndrome responsible for heart
defects. Array CGH apparently has diagnostic sensitivity superior to that of FISH
in fetuses with CTD associated with del22q11.2 (and dup22q11.2) syndrome.

Copyright © 2013 ISUOG. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23828768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 2013 May-Jun;2(3):393-403. doi: 10.1002/wdev.75. 
Epub 2012 Jun 19.

The 22q11 deletion: DiGeorge and velocardiofacial syndromes and the role of TBX1.

Papangeli I(1), Scambler P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

Hemizygous deletion of 22q11 affects approximately 1:4000 live births and may
give rise to many different malformations but classically results in a
constellation of phenotypes that receive a diagnosis of DiGeorge syndrome or
velocardiofacial syndrome. Particularly affected are the heart and great vessels,
the endocrine glands of the neck, the face, the soft palate, and cognitive
development. Although up to 50 genes may be deleted, it is haploinsufficiency of 
the transcription factor TBX1 that is thought to make the greatest contribution
to the disorder. Mouse embryos are exquisitely sensitive to varying levels of
Tbx1 mRNA, and Tbx1 is required in all three germ layers of the embryonic
pharyngeal region for normal development. TBX1 controls cell proliferation and
affects cellular differentiation in a cell autonomous fashion, but it also
directs non-cell autonomous effects, most notably in the signaling between
pharyngeal surface ectoderm and the rostral neural crest. TBX1 interacts with
several signaling pathways, including fibroblast growth factor, retinoic acid,
CTNNB1 (formerly known as ß-catenin), and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), and
may regulate pathways by both DNA-binding and non-binding activity. In addition
to the structural abnormalities seen in 22q11 deletion syndrome (DS) and Tbx1
mutant mouse models, patients reaching adolescence and adulthood have a
predisposition to psychiatric illness. Whether this has a developmental basis
and, if so, which genes are involved is an ongoing strand of research. Thus,
knowledge of the genetic and developmental mechanisms underlying 22q11DS has the 
potential to inform about common disease as well as developmental defect.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23799583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Gene. 2013 Sep 15;527(1):405-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.06.009. Epub 2013 Jun
17.

Chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: prenatal diagnosis, array comparative
genomic hybridization characterization using uncultured amniocytes and literature
review.

Chen CP(1), Huang JP, Chen YY, Chern SR, Wu PS, Su JW, Chen YT, Chen WL, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. cpc_mmh@yahoo.com

We present prenatal diagnosis of de novo 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome using
uncultured amniocytes in a pregnancy with conotruncal heart malformations in the 
fetus. We discuss the genotype-phenotype correlation and the consequence of
haploinsufficiency of TBX1, COMT, UFD1L, GNB1L and MED15 in the deleted region.
We review the literature of chromosomal loci and genes responsible for
conotruncal heart malformations and tetralogy of Fallot.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23791650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Lipid Res. 2013 Aug;54(8):2214-24. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M038711. Epub 2013 Jun 5.

Distinct populations of adipogenic and myogenic Myf5-lineage progenitors in white
adipose tissues.

Shan T(1), Liang X, Bi P, Zhang P, Liu W, Kuang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, 
USA.

Brown adipose tissues (BAT) are derived from a myogenic factor 5
(Myf5)-expressing cell lineage and white adipose tissues (WAT) predominantly
arise from non-Myf5 lineages, although a subpopulation of adipocytes in some WAT 
depots can be derived from the Myf5 lineage. However, the functional implication 
of the Myf5- and non-Myf5-lineage cells in WAT is unclear. We found that the
Myf5-lineage constitution in subcutaneous WAT depots is negatively correlated to 
the expression of classical BAT and newly defined beige/brite adipocyte-specific 
genes. Consistently, fluorescent-activated cell sorting (FACS)-purified
Myf5-lineage adipo-progenitors give rise to adipocytes expressing lower levels of
BAT-specific Ucp1, Prdm16, Cidea, and Ppargc1a genes and beige adipocyte-specific
CD137, Tmem26, and Tbx1 genes compared with the non-Myf5-lineage adipocytes from 
the same depots. Ablation of the Myf5-lineage progenitors in WAT stromal vascular
cell (SVC) cultures leads to increased expression of BAT and beige cell signature
genes. Strikingly, the Myf5-lineage cells in WAT are heterogeneous and contain
distinct adipogenic [stem cell antigen 1(Sca1)-positive] and myogenic
(Sca1-negative) progenitors. The latter differentiate robustly into myofibers in 
vitro and in vivo, and they restore dystrophin expression after transplantation
into mdx mouse, a model for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. These results
demonstrate the heterogeneity and functional differences of the Myf5- and
non-Myf5-lineage cells in the white adipose tissue.

PMCID: PMC3708371
PMID: 23740968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cell Metab. 2013 May 7;17(5):798-805. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.04.011.

A classical brown adipose tissue mRNA signature partly overlaps with brite in the
supraclavicular region of adult humans.

Jespersen NZ(1), Larsen TJ, Peijs L, Daugaard S, Homøe P, Loft A, de Jong J,
Mathur N, Cannon B, Nedergaard J, Pedersen BK, Møller K, Scheele C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Inflammation and Metabolism, Department of Infectious Diseases,
Rigshospitalet, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Human brown adipose tissue (BAT) has been detected in adults but was recently
suggested to be of brite/beige origin. We collected BAT from the supraclavicular 
region in 21 patients undergoing surgery for suspected cancer in the neck area
and assessed the gene expression of established murine markers for brown,
brite/beige, and white adipocytes. We demonstrate that a classical brown
expression signature, including upregulation of miR-206, miR-133b, LHX8, and ZIC1
and downregulation of HOXC8 and HOXC9, coexists with an upregulation of two newly
established brite/beige markers, TBX1 and TMEM26. A similar mRNA expression
profile was observed when comparing isolated human adipocytes from BAT and white 
adipose tissue (WAT) depots, differentiated in vitro. In conclusion, our data
suggest that human BAT might consist of both classical brown and recruitable
brite adipocytes, an observation important for future considerations on how to
induce human BAT.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23663743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Hum Mutat. 2013 Sep;34(9):1250-9. doi: 10.1002/humu.22354. Epub 2013 Jun 3.

Chimeric negative regulation of p14ARF and TBX1 by a t(9;22) translocation
associated with melanoma, deafness, and DNA repair deficiency.

Tan X(1), Anzick SL, Khan SG, Ueda T, Stone G, Digiovanna JJ, Tamura D,
Wattendorf D, Busch D, Brewer CC, Zalewski C, Butman JA, Griffith AJ, Meltzer PS,
Kraemer KH.

Author information: 
(1)DNA Repair Section, Dermatology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4258, USA.

Melanoma is the most deadly form of skin cancer and DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) is
the most frequent interstitial deletion syndrome. We characterized a novel
balanced t(9;22)(p21;q11.2) translocation in a patient with melanoma, DNA repair 
deficiency, and features of DGS including deafness and malformed inner ears.
Using chromosome sorting, we located the 9p21 breakpoint in CDKN2A intron 1. This
resulted in underexpression of the tumor suppressor p14 alternate reading frame
(p14ARF); the reduced DNA repair was corrected by transfection with p14ARF.
Ultraviolet radiation-type p14ARF mutations in his melanoma implicated p14ARF in 
its pathogenesis. The 22q11.2 breakpoint was located in a palindromic AT-rich
repeat (PATRR22). We identified a new gene, FAM230A, that contains PATRR22 within
an intron. The 22q11.2 breakpoint was located 800 kb centromeric to TBX1, which
is required for inner ear development. TBX1 expression was greatly reduced. The
translocation resulted in a chimeric transcript encoding portions of p14ARF and
FAM230A. Inhibition of chimeric p14ARF-FAM230A expression increased p14ARF and
TBX1 expression and improved DNA repair. Expression of the chimera in normal
cells produced dominant negative inhibition of p14ARF. Similar chimeric mRNAs may
mediate haploinsufficiency in DGS or dominant negative inhibition of other genes 
such as those involved in melanoma.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC3746749
PMID: 23661601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2013 Jun;77(6):1002-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2013.03.032. Epub 2013 May 1.

Exploring a neurogenic basis of velopharyngeal dysfunction in Tbx1 mutant mice:
no difference in volumes of the nucleus ambiguus.

Spruijt NE(1), Rana MS, Christoffels VM, Mink van der Molen AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, University Medical Center Utrecht, Postbus
85090, KE 04.140.0, 3508 AB Utrecht, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Velopharyngeal hypotonia seems to be an important factor in
velopharyngeal dysfunction in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, but the etiology is not 
understood. Because TBX1 maps within the typical 22q11.2 deletion and
Tbx1-deficient mice phenocopy many findings in patients with the 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome, TBX1 is considered the major candidate gene in the etiology of these
defects. Tbx1 heterozygosity in mice results in abnormal vocalization 7 days
postnatally, suggestive of velopharyngeal dysfunction. Previous case-control
studies on muscle specimens from patients and mice revealed no evidence for a
myogenic cause of velopharyngeal dysfunction. Velopharyngeal muscles are
innervated by cranial nerves that receive signals from the nucleus ambiguus in
the brainstem. In this study, a possible neurogenic cause underlying
velopharyngeal dysfunction in Tbx1 heterozygous mice was explored by determining 
the size of the nucleus ambiguus in Tbx1 heterozygous and wild type mice.
METHODS: The cranial motor nuclei in the brainstems of postnatal day 7 wild type 
(n=4) and Tbx1 heterozygous (n=4) mice were visualized by in situ hybridization
on transverse sections to detect Islet-1 mRNA, a transcription factor known to be
expressed in motor neurons. The volumes of the nucleus ambiguus were calculated.
RESULTS: No substantial histological differences were noted between the nucleus
ambiguus of the two groups. Tbx1 mutant mice had mean nucleus ambiguus volumes of
4.6 million µm(3) (standard error of the mean 0.9 million µm(3)) and wild type
mice had mean volumes of 3.4 million µm(3) (standard error of the mean 0.6
million µm(3)). Neither the difference nor the variance between the means were
statistically significant (t-test p=0.30, Levene's test p=0.47, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the histology, there is no difference or variability
between the volumes of the nucleus ambiguus of Tbx1 heterozygous and wild type
mice. The etiology of velopharyngeal hypotonia and variable speech in children
with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome warrants further investigation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23642587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;15(6):659-67. doi: 10.1038/ncb2740. Epub 2013 Apr 28.

Bi-directional interconversion of brite and white adipocytes.

Rosenwald M(1), Perdikari A, Rülicke T, Wolfrum C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, ETH Zurich, Schwerzenbach,
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;15(6):568-9.
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;14(6):325.

Brown adipose tissue helps to maintain body temperature in hibernators, rodents
and neonatal mammals by converting lipids and glucose into heat, thereby
increasing energy expenditure. In addition to classical brown adipocytes, adult
rodents-like adult humans-harbour brown-like adipocytes in the predominantly
white adipose tissue. The formation of these brite (brown-in-white) adipocytes is
a physiological response to chronic cold and their cellular origin is under
debate. We show here that cold-induced formation of brite adipocytes in mice is
reversed within 5 weeks of warm adaptation, but the brite adipocytes formed by
cold stimulation are not eliminated. Genetic tracing and transcriptional
characterization of isolated adipocytes demonstrates that they are converted into
cells with the morphology and gene expression pattern of white adipocytes.
Moreover, these white-typical adipocytes can convert into brite adipocytes on
additional cold stimulation. Shifting the balance of this interconversion from
the white towards the brite phenotype might provide a new means of counteracting 
obesity by increasing energy expenditure.

PMID: 23624403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jun;164A(6):1372-83. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35881. Epub 2013 
Apr 23.

Development of the human aortic arch system captured in an interactive
three-dimensional reference model.

Rana MS(1), Sizarov A, Christoffels VM, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Department of Anatomy, Embryology and
Physiology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Variations and mutations in the human genome, such as 22q11.2 microdeletion, can 
increase the risk for congenital defects, including aortic arch malformations.
Animal models are increasingly expanding our molecular and genetic insights into 
aortic arch development. However, in order to justify animal-to-human
extrapolations, a human morphological, and molecular reference model would be of 
great value, but is currently lacking. Here, we present interactive
three-dimensional reconstructions of the developing human aortic arch system,
supplemented with the protein distribution of developmental markers for
patterning and growth, including T-box transcription factor TBX1, a major
candidate for the phenotypes found in patients with the 22q11.2 microdeletion.
These reconstructions and expression data facilitate unbiased interpretations,
and reveal previously unappreciated aspects of human aortic arch development.
Based on our reconstructions and on reported congenital anomalies of the
pulmonary trunk and tributaries, we postulate that the pulmonary arteries
originate from the aortic sac, rather than from the sixth pharyngeal arch
arteries. Similar to mouse, TBX1 is expressed in pharyngeal mesenchyme and
epithelia. The endothelium of the pharyngeal arch arteries is largely negative
for TBX1 and family member TBX2 but expresses neural crest marker AP2a, which
gradually decreases with ongoing development of vascular smooth muscle. At early 
stages, the pharyngeal arch arteries, aortic sac, and the dorsal aortae in
particular were largely negative for proliferation marker Ki67, potentially an
important parameter during aortic arch system remodeling. Together, our data
support current animal-to-human extrapolations and future genetic and molecular
analyses using animal models of congenital heart disease. © 2013 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23613216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Development. 2013 May;140(9):2015-26. doi: 10.1242/dev.087320.

Dynamics of thymus organogenesis and colonization in early human development.

Farley AM(1), Morris LX, Vroegindeweij E, Depreter ML, Vaidya H, Stenhouse FH,
Tomlinson SR, Anderson RA, Cupedo T, Cornelissen JJ, Blackburn CC.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Stem Cell Research, School
of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, CRM Building, 5 Little France
Drive, Edinburgh..

The thymus is the central site of T-cell development and thus is of fundamental
importance to the immune system, but little information exists regarding
molecular regulation of thymus development in humans. Here we demonstrate, via
spatial and temporal expression analyses, that the genetic mechanisms known to
regulate mouse thymus organogenesis are conserved in humans. In addition, we
provide molecular evidence that the human thymic epithelium derives solely from
the third pharyngeal pouch, as in the mouse, in contrast to previous suggestions.
Finally, we define the timing of onset of hematopoietic cell colonization and
epithelial cell differentiation in the human thymic primordium, showing,
unexpectedly, that the first colonizing hematopoietic cells are
CD45(+)CD34(int/-). Collectively, our data provide essential information for
translation of principles established in the mouse to the human, and are of
particular relevance to development of improved strategies for enhancing immune
reconstitution in patients.

PMCID: PMC3631974
PMID: 23571219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58145. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058145. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

DiGeorge syndrome gene tbx1 functions through wnt11r to regulate heart looping
and differentiation.

Choudhry P(1), Trede NS.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Department of Oncological Sciences, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America. priya.choudhry@hci.utah.edu

DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) is the most common microdeletion syndrome, and is
characterized by congenital cardiac, craniofacial and immune system
abnormalities. The cardiac defects in DGS patients include conotruncal and
ventricular septal defects. Although the etiology of DGS is critically regulated 
by TBX1 gene, the molecular pathways underpinning TBX1's role in heart
development are not fully understood. In this study, we characterized heart
defects and downstream signaling in the zebrafish tbx1(-/-) mutant, which has
craniofacial and immune defects similar to DGS patients. We show that tbx1(-/-)
mutants have defective heart looping, morphology and function. Defective heart
looping is accompanied by failure of cardiomyocytes to differentiate normally and
failure to change shape from isotropic to anisotropic morphology in the outer
curvatures of the heart. This is the first demonstration of tbx1's role in
regulating heart looping, cardiomyocyte shape and differentiation, and may
explain how Tbx1 regulates conotruncal development in humans. Next we elucidated 
tbx1's molecular signaling pathway guided by the cardiac phenotype of tbx1(-/-)
mutants. We show for the first time that wnt11r (wnt11 related), a member of the 
non-canonical Wnt pathway, and its downstream effector gene alcama (activated
leukocyte cell adhesion molecule a) regulate heart looping and differentiation
similarly to tbx1. Expression of both wnt11r and alcama are downregulated in
tbx1(-/-) mutants. In addition, both wnt11r (-/-) mutants and alcama morphants
have heart looping and differentiation defects similar to tbx1(-/-) mutants.
Strikingly, heart looping and differentiation in tbx1(-/-) mutants can be
partially rescued by ectopic expression of wnt11r or alcama, supporting a model
whereby heart looping and differentiation are regulated by tbx1 in a linear
pathway through wnt11r and alcama. This is the first study linking tbx1 and
non-canonical Wnt signaling and extends our understanding of DGS and heart
development.

PMCID: PMC3606275
PMID: 23533583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2013 May 1;18(3):e414-20.

Contribution of polymorphisms in genes associated with craniofacial development
to the risk of nonsyndromic cleft lip and/or palate in the Brazilian population.

Paranaíba LM(1), de Aquino SN, Bufalino A, Martelli-Júnior H, Graner E, Brito LA,
e Passos-Bueno MR, Coletta RD, Swerts MS.

Author information: 
(1)Stomatology Clinic, Dental School, State University of Montes Claros, Montes
Claros, Minas Gerais, Brazil. liviaparanaib@gmail.com

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Nonsyndromic cleft lip and/or palate (NSCL/P) is a
complex disease associated with both genetic and environmental factors. One
strategy for identifying of possible NSCL/P genetic causes is to evaluate
polymorphic variants in genes involved in the craniofacial development.
DESIGN: We carried out a case-control analysis of 13 single nucleotide
polymorphisms in 9 genes related to craniofacial development, including TBX1,
PVRL1, MID1, RUNX2, TP63, TGFß3, MSX1, MYH9 and JAG2, in 367 patients with NSCL/P
and 413 unaffected controls from Brazil to determine their association with
NSCL/P.
RESULTS: Four out of 13 polymorphisms (rs28649236 and rs4819522 of TBX1,
rs7940667 of PVRL1 and rs1057744 of JAG2) were presented in our population.
Comparisons of allele and genotype frequencies revealed that the G variant allele
and the AG/GG genotypes of TBX1 rs28649236 occurred in a frequency significantly 
higher in controls than in the NSCL/P group (OR: 0.41; 95% CI: 0.25-0.67;
p=0.0002). The frequencies of rs4819522, rs7940667 and rs1057744 minor alleles
and genotypes were similar between control and NSCL/P group, without significant 
differences. No significant associations among cleft types and polymorphisms were
observed.
CONCLUSION: The study suggests for the first time evidences to an association of 
the G allele of TBX1 rs28649236 polymorphism and NSCL/P.

PMCID: PMC3668866
PMID: 23524414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Gene. 2013 Sep 25;527(2):694-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.02.044. Epub 2013 Mar
16.

Clinical and molecular description of the prenatal diagnosis of a fetus with a
maternally inherited microduplication 22q11.2 of 2.5 Mb.

Christopoulou G(1), Sismani C, Sakellariou M, Saklamaki M, Athanassiou V,
Velissariou V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, General, Maternity and Pediatric
Clinic Mitera, 6 Erythrou Stavrou St., 15123 Maroussi, Athens, Greece.

Microduplications of 22q11.2 have been recently characterized as a new genomic
duplication syndrome showing an extremely variable phenotype ranging from normal 
or mild learning disability to multiple congenital defects and sharing some
overlapping features with DiGeorge/Velocardiofacial syndrome (DGS/VCFS). We
report on the prenatal diagnosis of a 22q11.2 microduplication in a fetus with
normal development that was referred for chromosomal analysis at 17 weeks of
gestation because of advanced maternal age. Pregnancy was the result of an
IVF-ICSI attempt after 4 years of infertility, mainly due to severe
oligoasthenoteratospermia of the father. Amniocentesis was undertaken and
cytogenetic analysis revealed an apparently normal male karyotype. Multiple
Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) revealed a microduplication in the 
22q11.2 chromosome region. Parental analysis showed that the 22q11.2
microduplication has been inherited from the otherwise healthy mother. Analysis
with high resolution array-CGH showed that the size of the microduplication is
2.5 Mb and revealed the genes that are duplicated, including the TBX1 gene. The
parents elected to continue with the pregnancy and the infant is now five months 
old and shows normal development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23506827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Oct;70(20):3929-45. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1305-5. Epub 
2013 Mar 12.

Regulation of organogenesis and stem cell properties by T-box transcription
factors.

Takashima Y(1), Suzuki A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organogenesis and Regeneration, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, 
Japan.

T-box transcription factors containing the common DNA-binding domain T-box
contribute to the organization of multiple tissues in vertebrates and
invertebrates. In mammals, 17 T-box genes are divided into five subfamilies
depending on their amino acid homology. The proper distribution and expression of
individual T-box transcription factors in different tissues enable regulation of 
the proliferation and differentiation of tissue-specific stem cells and
progenitor cells in a suitable time schedule for tissue organization.
Consequently, uncontrollable expressions of T-box genes induce abnormal tissue
organization, and eventually cause various diseases with malformation and
malfunction of tissues and organs. Furthermore, some T-box transcription factors 
are essential for maintaining embryonic stem cell pluripotency, improving the
quality of induced pluripotent stem cells, and inducing cell-lineage conversion
of differentiated cells. These lines of evidence indicate fundamental roles of
T-box transcription factors in tissue organization and stem cell properties, and 
suggest that these transcription factors will be useful for developing
therapeutic approaches in regenerative medicine.

PMID: 23479132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Exp Hematol. 2013 Jun;41(6):558-566.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2013.02.005. Epub
2013 Feb 19.

Molecular and functional characterization of human bone marrow adipocytes.

Poloni A(1), Maurizi G, Serrani F, Mancini S, Zingaretti MC, Frontini A, Cinti S,
Olivieri A, Leoni P.

Author information: 
(1)Clinica di Ematologia, Dipartimento Scienze Cliniche e Molecolari, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche-Azienda Ospedali Riuniti, Ancona, Italy.
a.poloni@univpm.it

Adipocytes are a cell population largely located in the human bone marrow cavity.
In this specific microenvironment where adipocytes can interact with a variety of
different cells, the role of fat is mainly unknown. To our knowledge, this report
is the first to characterize mature adipocytes isolated from human bone marrow
(BM-A) molecularly and functionally to better understand their roles into the
hematopoietic microenvironment. Healthy BM-A were isolated after collagenase
digestion and filtration. We studied the morphology of BM-A, their gene
expression and immunophenotypic profile and their functional ability in the
hematopoietic microenvironment, comparing them with adipocytes derived from
adipose tissue (AT-A). BM-A showed a unilocular lipid morphology similar to AT-A 
and did not lose their morphology in culture; they showed a comparable pattern of
stem cell-surface antigens to AT-A. In line with these observations, molecular
data showed that BM-A expressed some embryonic stem cells genes, such as Oct4,
KLf4, c-myc, Gata4, Tbx1, and Sox17, whereas they did not express the stem cell
markers Sox2 and Nanog. Moreover, BM-A had long telomeres that were similar to
bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells. Notably, BM-A supported the survival and
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells in long-term cultures. These results 
showed that BM-A are stromal cells with a gene expression pattern that
distinguished them from AT-A. BM-A showed stem cell properties through their
hematopoietic supporting function, which was certainly linked to their role in
the maintenance of the bone marrow microenvironment. Depending on specific
demands, BM-A may acquire different functions based on their local environment.

Copyright © 2013 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23435314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Epigenetics. 2013 Mar;8(3):317-32. doi: 10.4161/epi.23989. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Early de novo DNA methylation and prolonged demethylation in the muscle lineage.

Tsumagari K(1), Baribault C, Terragni J, Varley KE, Gertz J, Pradhan S, Badoo M, 
Crain CM, Song L, Crawford GE, Myers RM, Lacey M, Ehrlich M.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Human Genetics and Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane Health Sciences
Center, New Orleans, LA, USA.

Myogenic cell cultures derived from muscle biopsies are excellent models for
human cell differentiation. We report the first comprehensive analysis of
myogenesis-specific DNA hyper- and hypo-methylation throughout the genome for
human muscle progenitor cells (both myoblasts and myotubes) and skeletal muscle
tissue vs. 30 non-muscle samples using reduced representation bisulfite
sequencing. We also focused on four genes with extensive hyper- or
hypo-methylation in the muscle lineage (PAX3, TBX1, MYH7B/MIR499 and OBSCN) to
compare DNA methylation, DNaseI hypersensitivity, histone modification, and CTCF 
binding profiles. We found that myogenic hypermethylation was strongly associated
with homeobox or T-box genes and muscle hypomethylation with contractile fiber
genes. Nonetheless, there was no simple relationship between differential gene
expression and myogenic differential methylation, rather only for subsets of
these genes, such as contractile fiber genes. Skeletal muscle retained ~30% of
the hypomethylated sites but only ~3% of hypermethylated sites seen in myogenic
progenitor cells. By enzymatic assays, skeletal muscle was 2-fold enriched
globally in genomic 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC) vs. myoblasts or myotubes and
was the only sample type enriched in 5-hmC at tested myogenic hypermethylated
sites in PAX3/CCDC140 andTBX1. TET1 and TET2 RNAs, which are involved in
generation of 5-hmC and DNA demethylation, were strongly upregulated in myoblasts
and myotubes. Our findings implicate de novo methylation predominantly before the
myoblast stage and demethylation before and after the myotube stage in control of
transcription and co-transcriptional RNA processing. They also suggest that, in
muscle, TET1 or TET2 are involved in active demethylation and in formation of
stable 5-hmC residues.

PMCID: PMC3669123
PMID: 23417056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Dev Biol. 2013 Apr 15;376(2):245-59. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.01.022. Epub 2013 
Feb 1.

Org-1 is required for the diversification of circular visceral muscle founder
cells and normal midgut morphogenesis.

Schaub C(1), Frasch M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Division of Developmental Biology, Friedrich-Alexander 
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Staudtstr. 5, 91058 Erlangen, Germany.

The T-Box family of transcription factors plays fundamental roles in the
generation of appropriate spatial and temporal gene expression profiles during
cellular differentiation and organogenesis in animals. In this study we report
that the Drosophila Tbx1 orthologue optomotor-blind-related-gene-1 (org-1) exerts
a pivotal function in the diversification of circular visceral muscle founder
cell identities in Drosophila. In embryos mutant for org-1, the specification of 
the midgut musculature per se is not affected, but the differentiating midgut
fails to form the anterior and central midgut constrictions and lacks the gastric
caeca. We demonstrate that this phenotype results from the nearly complete loss
of the founder cell specific expression domains of several genes known to
regulate midgut morphogenesis, including odd-paired (opa), teashirt (tsh),
Ultrabithorax (Ubx), decapentaplegic (dpp) and wingless (wg). To address the
mechanisms that mediate the regulatory inputs from org-1 towards Ubx, dpp, and wg
in these founder cells we genetically dissected known visceral mesoderm specific 
cis-regulatory-modules (CRMs) of these genes. The analyses revealed that the
activities of the dpp and wg CRMs depend on org-1, the CRMs are bound by Org-1 in
vivo and their T-Box binding sites are essential for their activation in the
visceral muscle founder cells. We conclude that Org-1 acts within a well-defined 
signaling and transcriptional network of the trunk visceral mesoderm as a crucial
founder cell-specific competence factor, in concert with the general visceral
mesodermal factor Biniou. As such, it directly regulates several key genes
involved in the establishment of morphogenetic centers along the anteroposterior 
axis of the visceral mesoderm, which subsequently organize the formation of
midgut constrictions and gastric caeca and thereby determine the morphology of
the midgut.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3602240
PMID: 23380635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Dev Dyn. 2013 May;242(5):550-9. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23928. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

Tbx1 is required for second heart field proliferation in zebrafish.

Nevis K(1), Obregon P, Walsh C, Guner-Ataman B, Burns CG, Burns CE.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

BACKGROUND: The mammalian outflow tract (OFT) and primitive right ventricle arise
by accretion of newly differentiated cells to the arterial pole of the heart tube
from multi-potent progenitor cells of the second heart field (SHF). While
mounting evidence suggests that the genetic pathways regulating SHF development
are highly conserved in zebrafish, this topic remains an active area of
investigation.
RESULTS: Here, we extend previous observations demonstrating that zebrafish tbx1 
(van gogh, vgo) mutants show ventricular and OFT defects consistent with a
conserved role in SHF-mediated cardiogenesis. Surprisingly, we reveal through
double in situ analyses that tbx1 transcripts are excluded from cardiac
progenitor cells and differentiated cardiomyocytes, suggesting a non-autonomous
role in SHF development. Further, we find that the diminutive ventricle in vgo
animals results from a 25% decrease in cardiomyocyte number that occurs
subsequent to heart tube stages. Lastly, we report that although SHF progenitors 
are specified in the absence of Tbx1, they fail to be maintained due to
compromised SHF progenitor cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies highlight conservation of Tbx1 function in zebrafish
SHF biology.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3676967
PMID: 23335360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Anat. 2013 Mar;222(3):349-57. doi: 10.1111/joa.12023. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

The pattern of the coronary arterial orifices in hearts with congenital
malformations of the outflow tracts: a marker of rotation of the outflow tract
during cardiac development?

Houyel L(1), Bajolle F, Capderou A, Laux D, Parisot P, Bonnet D.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Marie-Lannelongue, CMR-M3C, Université Paris-Sud, Le Plessis-Robinson,
France. l.houyel@ccml.fr

Outflow tract defects, including cardiac neural crest defects (so-called
conotruncal defects) and transposition of the great arteries, are due to an
abnormal rotation of the outflow tract during cardiac development. Coronary
orifices are often abnormal in outflow tract defects, particularly in common
arterial trunk (CAT). A recent study indicates that abnormal coronary artery
pattern in a mouse model with common arterial outlet (Tbx1-/- mouse mutant) could
be due to a reduced and malpositioned subpulmonary coronary-refractory myocardial
domain. The aim of our study was to demonstrate the relation between coronary
orifices pattern in outflow tract defects in human and the abnormal embryonic
rotation of the outflow tract. We analyzed 101 heart specimens with outflow tract
defects: 46 CAT, 15 tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), 29 TOF with pulmonary atresia
(TOF-PA), 11 double-outlet right ventricle with subaortic ventricular septal
defect (DORV) and 17 controls. The position of left and right coronary orifices
(LCO, RCO) was measured in degrees on the aortic/truncal circumference. The
anterior angle between LCO and RCO (a) was calculated. The LCO was more posterior
in TOF (31 °), TOF-PA (47 °), DORV (44 °), CAT (63 °), compared with controls
(0 °, P < 0.05), and more posterior in CAT than in other outflow tract defects
(P < 0.05). The RCO was more anterior in TOF (242 °), TOF-PA (245 °) and DORV
(271 °) than in controls (213 °, P < 0.05), but not in CAT (195 °). The a angle
was similar in TOF, TOF-PA, DORV and controls (149 °, 162 °, 133 °, 147 °), but
significantly larger in CAT (229 °, P < 0.0001). In all outflow tract defects but
CAT, the displacement of LCO (anterior) and RCO (posterior), while the a angle
remains constant, might be due to incomplete rotation of the myocardium at the
base of the outflow tract, leading to an abnormally positioned subpulmonary
coronary-refractory myocardial domain. The larger a angle in CAT could reflect
its dual identity, aortic and pulmonary.

© 2013 The Authors Journal of Anatomy © 2013 Anatomical Society.

PMCID: PMC3582254
PMID: 23317176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Genome Res. 2013 Apr;23(4):687-97. doi: 10.1101/gr.146936.112. Epub 2013 Jan 8.

MMAPPR: mutation mapping analysis pipeline for pooled RNA-seq.

Hill JT(1), Demarest BL, Bisgrove BW, Gorsi B, Su YC, Yost HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah Molecular Medicine 
Program, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

Forward genetic screens in model organisms are vital for identifying novel genes 
essential for developmental or disease processes. One drawback of these screens
is the labor-intensive and sometimes inconclusive process of mapping the
causative mutation. To leverage high-throughput techniques to improve this
mapping process, we have developed a Mutation Mapping Analysis Pipeline for
Pooled RNA-seq (MMAPPR) that works without parental strain information or
requiring a preexisting SNP map of the organism, and adapts to differential
recombination frequencies across the genome. MMAPPR accommodates the considerable
amount of noise in RNA-seq data sets, calculates allelic frequency by Euclidean
distance followed by Loess regression analysis, identifies the region where the
mutation lies, and generates a list of putative coding region mutations in the
linked genomic segment. MMAPPR can exploit RNA-seq data sets from isolated
tissues or whole organisms that are used for gene expression and transcriptome
analysis in novel mutants. We tested MMAPPR on two known mutant lines in
zebrafish, nkx2.5 and tbx1, and used it to map two novel ENU-induced
cardiovascular mutants, with mutations found in the ctr9 and cds2 genes. MMAPPR
can be directly applied to other model organisms, such as Drosophila and
Caenorhabditis elegans, that are amenable to both forward genetic screens and
pooled RNA-seq experiments. Thus, MMAPPR is a rapid, cost-efficient, and highly
automated pipeline, available to perform mutant mapping in any organism with a
well-assembled genome.

PMCID: PMC3613585
PMID: 23299975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Res Med Sci. 2012 Mar;17(3):310-2.

A case report of 22q11 deletion syndrome confirmed by array-CGH method.

Sedghi M(1), Nouri N, Abdali H, Memarzadeh M, Nouri N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Alzahra Hospital, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.

Velo-cardio-facial syndrome (VCFS) is caused by a submicroscopic deletion on the 
long arm of chromosome 22 and affects approximately 1 in 4000 persons, making it 
the second most prevalent genetic syndrome after Down syndrome and the most
common genetic syndrome associated with cleft palate. Most of the 22q11.2
deletion cases are new occurrences or sporadic; however, in about 10 % of
families, the deletion is inherited and other family members are affected or at
risk for passing this deletion to their children. This report describes a 1.5
years-old male child with clinical signs of velo-cardio-facial syndrome (VCFS)
presented with heart defect, soft cleft palate, developmental delay, acrocephaly,
seizure, MRI abnormalities and descriptive facial feature, such as hypertelorism.
Array-CGH test was done to confirm the diagnosis; the result revealed a 2.6 Mbp
deletion in 22q11.2 chromosome that containing TBX1 and COMT genes. Our data
suggest that haploinsufficiency of TBX1 gene is probably a major contributor to
some of the syndrome characteristic signs, such as heart defect. Because of
developmental delay and dysmorphic facial feature were observed in the index's
mother and relatives, inherited autosomal dominant form of VCF is probable, and
MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification) test should be performed 
for parents to estimate the recurrent risk in next pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC3527053
PMID: 23267387  [PubMed]


116. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Dec;158A(12):vii-viii. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35798.

Genetic modifier to chromatin may contribute to 22q11 deletion/VCF/DiGeorge
syndrome variability: MOZ gene may also exacerbate effects of retinoic acid in
genetic disorder.

Levenson D.

PMID: 23174944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2013 Jan;77(1):123-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2012.10.009. Epub 2012 Oct 31.

A candidate gene approach to identify modifiers of the palatal phenotype in
22q11.2 deletion syndrome patients.

Widdershoven JC(1), Bowser M, Sheridan MB, McDonald-McGinn DM, Zackai EH, Solot
CB, Kirschner RE, Beemer FA, Morrow BE, Devoto M, Emanuel BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Maastricht University
Medical Center, The Netherlands. josine.widdershoven@mumc.nl

OBJECTIVE: Palatal anomalies are one of the identifying features of 22q11.2
deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) affecting about one third of patients. To identify 
genetic variants that increase the risk of cleft or palatal anomalies in
22q11.2DS patients, we performed a candidate gene association study in 101
patients with 22q11.2DS genotyped with the Affymetrix genome-wide human SNP array
6.0.
METHODS: Patients from Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, USA and Wilhelmina
Children's Hospital Utrecht, The Netherlands were stratified based on palatal
phenotype (overt cleft, submucosal cleft, bifid uvula). SNPs in 21 candidate
genes for cleft palate were analyzed for genotype-phenotype association. In
addition, TBX1 sequencing was carried out. Quality control and association
analyses were conducted using the software package PLINK.
RESULTS: Genotype and phenotype data of 101 unrelated patients (63 non-cleft
subjects (62.4%), 38 cleft subjects (37.6%)) were analyzed. A Total of 39 SNPs on
10 genes demonstrated a p-value =0.05 prior to correction. The most significant
SNPs were found on FGF10. However none of the SNPs remained significant after
correcting for multiple testing.
CONCLUSIONS: Although these results are promising, analysis of additional samples
will be required to confirm that variants in these regions influence risk for
cleft palate or palatal anomalies in 22q11.2DS patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4098838
PMID: 23121717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Transgenic Res. 2013 Jun;22(3):659-66. doi: 10.1007/s11248-012-9664-5. Epub 2012 
Nov 2.

Generation and characterization of Tbx1-AmCyan1 transgenic reporter mouse line
that selectively labels developing thymus primordium.

Kimura W(1), Sharkar MT, Sultana N, Islam MJ, Uezato T, Miura N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1
Handa-yama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Shizuoka, Japan.

Thymus development is a complicated process that includes highly dynamic
morphological changes and reciprocal tissue interactions between endoderm-derived
epithelial cells of the anterior foregut and neural crest-derived mesenchymal
cells. We generated and characterized a Tbx1-AmCyan1 reporter transgenic mouse to
visualize thymus precursor cells during early embryonic development. In
transgenic embryos, AmCyan1 fluorescence was specifically detected in the
endoderm of the developing 3rd and 4th pharyngeal pouches and later in thymus
epithelium until E14.5. Cells expressing AmCyan1 that were isolated based on
AmCyan1 fluorescence expressed endodermal, thymic, and parathyroid markers, but
they did not express neural crest or endothelial markers; these findings
indicated that this transgenic mouse strain could be used to collect thymic or
parathyroid precursor cells or both. We also showed that in nude mice, which
exhibit defects in thymus development, the thymus precursors were clearly labeled
with AmCyan1. In summary, these AmCyan1-fluorescent transgenic mice are useful
for investigating early thymus development.

PMID: 23117587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 13;109(46):18839-44. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1208690109. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

Pharyngeal mesoderm regulatory network controls cardiac and head muscle
morphogenesis.

Harel I(1), Maezawa Y, Avraham R, Rinon A, Ma HY, Cross JW, Leviatan N, Hegesh J,
Roy A, Jacob-Hirsch J, Rechavi G, Carvajal J, Tole S, Kioussi C, Quaggin S,
Tzahor E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

The search for developmental mechanisms driving vertebrate organogenesis has
paved the way toward a deeper understanding of birth defects. During
embryogenesis, parts of the heart and craniofacial muscles arise from pharyngeal 
mesoderm (PM) progenitors. Here, we reveal a hierarchical regulatory network of a
set of transcription factors expressed in the PM that initiates heart and
craniofacial organogenesis. Genetic perturbation of this network in mice resulted
in heart and craniofacial muscle defects, revealing robust cross-regulation
between its members. We identified Lhx2 as a previously undescribed player during
cardiac and pharyngeal muscle development. Lhx2 and Tcf21 genetically interact
with Tbx1, the major determinant in the etiology of
DiGeorge/velo-cardio-facial/22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Furthermore, knockout of
these genes in the mouse recapitulates specific cardiac features of this
syndrome. We suggest that PM-derived cardiogenesis and myogenesis are network
properties rather than properties specific to individual PM members. These
findings shed new light on the developmental underpinnings of congenital defects.

PMCID: PMC3503185
PMID: 23112163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 6;109(45):18273-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1215360109. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Fibroblast growth factor 10 gene regulation in the second heart field by Tbx1,
Nkx2-5, and Islet1 reveals a genetic switch for down-regulation in the
myocardium.

Watanabe Y(1), Zaffran S, Kuroiwa A, Higuchi H, Ogura T, Harvey RP, Kelly RG,
Buckingham M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS) Unité de Recherche Associée 2578, Institut Pasteur, 75015
Paris, France.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2013 Mar 29;112(7):985-7.

During cardiogenesis, Fibroblast Growth Factor (Fgf10) is expressed in the
anterior second heart field. Together with Fibroblast growth factor 8 (Fgf8),
Fgf10 promotes the proliferation of these cardiac progenitor cells that form the 
arterial pole of the heart. We have identified a 1.7-kb region in the first
intron of Fgf10 that is necessary and sufficient to direct transgene expression
in this cardiac context. The 1.7-kb sequence is directly controlled by T-box
transcription factor 1 (Tbx1) in anterior second heart field cells that
contribute to the outflow tract. It also responds to both NK2 transcription
factor related, locus 5 (Nkx2-5) and ISL1 transcription factor, LIM/homeodomain
(Islet1), acting through overlapping sites. Mutation of these sites reduces
transgene expression in the anterior second heart field where the Fgf10
regulatory element is activated by Islet1 via direct binding in vivo. Analysis of
the response to Nkx2-5 loss- and Isl1 gain-of-function genetic backgrounds
indicates that the observed up-regulation of its activity in Nkx2-5 mutant
hearts, reflecting that of Fgf10, is due to the absence of Nkx2-5 repression and 
to up-regulation of Isl1, normally repressed in the myocardium by Nkx2-5. ChIP
experiments show strong binding of Nkx2-5 in differentiated myocardium. Molecular
and genetic analysis of the Fgf10 cardiac element therefore reveals how key
cardiac transcription factors orchestrate gene expression in the anterior second 
heart field and how genes, such as Fgf10, normally expressed in the progenitor
cell population, are repressed when these cells enter the heart and differentiate
into myocardium. Our findings provide a paradigm for transcriptional mechanisms
that underlie the changes in regulatory networks during the transition from
progenitor state to that of the differentiated tissue.

PMCID: PMC3494960
PMID: 23093675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jan 15;22(2):300-12. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds429. Epub 2012 Oct
16.

22q11 Gene dosage establishes an adaptive range for sonic hedgehog and retinoic
acid signaling during early development.

Maynard TM(1), Gopalakrishna D, Meechan DW, Paronett EM, Newbern JM, LaMantia AS.

Author information: 
(1)GW Institute for Neuroscience and Department of Pharmacology and Physiology,
The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Washington DC, USA.

We asked whether key morphogenetic signaling pathways interact with 22q11 gene
dosage to modulate the severity of cranial or cardiac anomalies in DiGeorge/22q1 
deletion syndrome (22q11DS). Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and retinoic acid (RA)
signaling is altered in the brain and heart-clinically significant 22q11DS
phenotypic sites-in LgDel mouse embryos, an established 22q11DS model. LgDel
embryos treated with cyclopamine, an Shh inhibitor, or carrying mutations in
Gli3(Xtj), an Shh-signaling effector, have morphogenetic anomalies that are
either not seen, or seen at significantly lower frequencies in control or
single-mutant embryos. Similarly, RA exposure or genetic loss of RA function via 
heterozygous mutation of the RA synthetic enzyme Raldh2 induces novel cranial
anomalies and enhances cardiovascular phenotypes in LgDel but not other
genotypes. These changes are not seen in heterozygous Tbx1 mutant embryos-a 22q11
gene thought to explain much of 22q11DS pathogenesis-in which Shh or RA signaling
has been similarly modified. Our results suggest that full dosage of 22q11 genes 
beyond Tbx1 establish an adaptive range for morphogenetic signaling via Shh and
RA. When this adaptive range is constricted by diminished dosage of 22q11 genes, 
embryos are sensitized to otherwise benign changes in Shh and RA signaling. Such 
sensitization, in the face of environmental or genetic factors that modify Shh or
RA signaling, may explain variability in 22q11DS morphogenetic phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3526161
PMID: 23077214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Eur J Med Genet. 2012 Dec;55(12):732-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.08.011. Epub
2012 Oct 9.

Phenotypic heterogeneity in a family with a small atypical microduplication of
chromosome 22q11.2 involving TBX1.

Weisfeld-Adams JD(1), Edelmann L, Gadi IK, Mehta L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics & Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10029, USA. james.weisfeld-adams@mssm.edu

The chromosome 22q11.2 region is commonly involved in non-allelic homologous
recombination (NAHR) events. Microduplications of 22q11.2, usually involving a 3 
Mb or 1.5 Mb region constitute the 22q11 microduplication syndrome. Both
microdeletions and microduplications of 22q11.21 are reported to share several
phenotypic characteristics, including dysmorphic facial features, velopharyngeal 
insufficiency, congenital heart disease, urogenital abnormalities, and
immunologic defects. We report a child who presented at 8 months of age for
evaluation of microcephaly and mild motor delay. Head circumference at birth, at 
8 months, and at 19 months of age was below the 3rd centile. Other findings
included left-sided cryptorchidism and developmental dysplasia of the left hip.
In addition, echocardiography revealed a restrictive patent ductus arteriosus.
Chromosomal microarray analysis using Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 
revealed a novel 437 kb interstitial duplication at 22q11.21, involving TBX1,
whose breakpoints did not coincide with known low copy repeat (LCR) regions. The 
same duplication was confirmed by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) in the
patient's mother and an older sister. The mother has a history of anxiety
disorder and depression. The sister had a history of delayed motor milestones.
None of the three duplication carriers has any documented renal anomalies or
other significant medical problems. This report demonstrates the clinical
heterogeneity associated with microduplications of 22q11.2 and illustrates the
difficulties related to providing prognostic information and accurate genetic
counseling to families when this finding is detected. The described
microduplication is the smallest in this genomic region reported to date and
further implicates abnormal gene dosage of TBX1 in disorders resulting from
22q11.2 rearrangements.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23059467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Med Genet. 2012 Oct;49(10):650-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101135.

De novo copy number variants are associated with congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

Yu L(1), Wynn J, Ma L, Guha S, Mychaliska GB, Crombleholme TM, Azarow KS, Lim FY,
Chung DH, Potoka D, Warner BW, Bucher B, LeDuc CA, Costa K, Stolar C, Aspelund G,
Arkovitz MS, Chung WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New
York 10032, USA.

BACKGROUND: Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a common birth defect with
significant morbidity and mortality. Although the aetiology of CDH remains poorly
understood, studies from animal models and patients with CDH suggest that genetic
factors play an important role in the development of CDH. Chromosomal anomalies
have been reported in CDH.
METHODS: In this study, the authors investigated the frequency of chromosomal
anomalies and copy number variants (CNVs) in 256 parent-child trios of CDH using 
clinical conventional cytogenetic and microarray analysis. The authors also
selected a set of CDH related training genes to prioritise the genes in those
segmental aneuploidies and identified the genes and gene sets that may contribute
to the aetiology of CDH.
RESULTS: The authors identified chromosomal anomalies in 16 patients (6.3%) of
the series including three aneuploidies, two unbalanced translocation, and 11
patients with de novo CNVs ranging in size from 95 kb to 104.6 Mb. The authors
prioritised the genes in the CNV segments and identified KCNA2, LMNA, CACNA1S,
MYOG, HLX, LBR, AGT, GATA4, SOX7, HYLS1, FOXC1, FOXF2, PDGFA, FGF6, COL4A1,
COL4A2, HOMER2, BNC1, BID, and TBX1 as genes that may be involved in diaphragm
development. Gene enrichment analysis identified the most relevant gene ontology 
categories as those involved in tissue development (p=4.4×10(-11)) or regulation 
of multicellular organismal processes (p=2.8×10(-10)) and 'receptor binding'
(p=8.7×10(-14)) and 'DNA binding transcription factor activity' (p=4.4×10(-10)).
CONCLUSIONS: The present findings support the role of chromosomal anomalies in
CDH and provide a set of candidate genes including FOXC1, FOXF2, PDGFA, FGF6,
COL4A1, COL4A2, SOX7, BNC1, BID, and TBX1 for further analysis in CDH.

PMCID: PMC3696999
PMID: 23054247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Nov;158A(11):2781-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35512. Epub 2012 
Oct 3.

Overt cleft palate phenotype and TBX1 genotype correlations in
velo-cardio-facial/DiGeorge/22q11.2 deletion syndrome patients.

Herman SB(1), Guo T, McGinn DM, Blonska A, Shanske AL, Bassett AS, Chow EW,
Bowser M, Sheridan M, Beemer F, Devriendt K, Swillen A, Breckpot J, Digilio MC,
Marino B, Dallapiccola B, Carpenter C, Zheng X, Johnson J, Chung J, Higgins AM,
Philip N, Simon T, Coleman K, Heine-Suner D, Rosell J, Kates W, Devoto M, Zackai 
E, Wang T, Shprintzen R, Emanuel BS, Morrow BE; International Chromosome 22q11.2 
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
10461, USA.

Velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome, also known as 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome (22q11DS) is the most common microdeletion syndrome, with an estimated
incidence of 1/2,000-1/4,000 live births. Approximately 9-11% of patients with
this disorder have an overt cleft palate (CP), but the genetic factors
responsible for CP in the 22q11DS subset are unknown. The TBX1 gene, a member of 
the T-box transcription factor gene family, lies within the 22q11.2 region that
is hemizygous in patients with 22q11DS. Inactivation of one allele of Tbx1 in the
mouse does not result in CP, but inactivation of both alleles does. Based on
these data, we hypothesized that DNA variants in the remaining allele of TBX1 may
confer risk to CP in patients with 22q11DS. To test the hypothesis, we evaluated 
TBX1 exon sequencing (n = 360) and genotyping data (n = 737) with respect to
presence (n = 54) or absence (n = 683) of CP in patients with 22q11DS. Two
upstream SNPs (rs4819835 and rs5748410) showed individual evidence for
association but they were not significant after correction for multiple testing. 
Associations were not identified between DNA variants and haplotypes in 22q11DS
patients with CP. Overall, this study indicates that common DNA variants in TBX1 
may be nominally causative for CP in patients with 22q11DS. This raises the
possibility that genes elsewhere on the remaining allele of 22q11.2 or in the
genome could be relevant.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3477281
PMID: 23034814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Evol Dev. 2012 May-Jun;14(3):257-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-142X.2012.00543.x.

Development of the head and trunk mesoderm in the dogfish, Scyliorhinus torazame:
II. Comparison of gene expression between the head mesoderm and somites with
reference to the origin of the vertebrate head.

Adachi N(1), Takechi M, Hirai T, Kuratani S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Evolutionary Morphology, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, Kobe, Japan.

The vertebrate mesoderm differs distinctly between the head and trunk, and the
evolutionary origin of the head mesoderm remains enigmatic. Although the presence
of somite-like segmentation in the head mesoderm of model animals is generally
denied at molecular developmental levels, the appearance of head cavities in
elasmobranch embryos has not been explained, and the possibility that they may
represent vestigial head somites once present in an amphioxus-like ancestor has
not been ruled out entirely. To examine whether the head cavities in the shark
embryo exhibit any molecular signatures reminiscent of trunk somites, we isolated
several developmentally key genes, including Pax1, Pax3, Pax7, Pax9, Myf5, Sonic 
hedgehog, and Patched2, which are involved in myogenic and chondrogenic
differentiation in somites, and Pitx2, Tbx1, and Engrailed2, which are related to
the patterning of the head mesoderm, from an elasmobranch species, Scyliorhinus
torazame. Observation of the expression patterns of these genes revealed that
most were expressed in patterns that resembled those found in amniote embryos. In
addition, the head cavities did not exhibit an overt similarity to somites; that 
is, the similarity was no greater than that of the unsegmented head mesoderm in
other vertebrates. Moreover, the shark head mesoderm showed an amniote-like
somatic/visceral distinction according to the expression of Pitx2, Tbx1, and
Engrailed2. We conclude that the head cavities do not represent a manifestation
of ancestral head somites; rather, they are more likely to represent a derived
trait obtained in the lineage of gnathostomes.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23017074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. No To Hattatsu. 2012 Sep;44(5):392-6.

[A case of DiGeorge syndrome with left internal carotid artery absence probably
causing one-and-a-half syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Maruyama S(1), Suda M, Kobayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Niigata Prefectural Central Hospital, Joetsu,
Niigata. s-maru459@npch.lamen.or.jp

We experienced a case of DiGeorge syndrome with left internal carotid artery
absence probably causing one-and-a-half syndrome. MR angiogram demonstrated the
apparent absence of the left internal carotid artery and consequently abnormal
blood supply to the left middle cerebral artery, which was derived from the
basilar artery via the left posterior communicating artery. The patient
alsoshowed both an extremely narrow carotid canal on the left side and a very
fine vessel extending to the terminal of the left internal carotid artery.
Therefore, we regarded this abnormality as severe hypoplasia of left internal
carotid artery and supposed that this hypoplasia had originated in maldevelopment
of the third aortic arch based on the coexisting lower bifurcation of the right
common carotid artery. Since the lesion of one-and-a-half syndrome is restricted 
to the pontine tegmentum, we speculated that it had resulted from ischemia of the
basilar artery area during the embryonic period associated with the absence of
the internal carotid artery. To our knowledge, DiGeorge syndrome has never been
reported as a complication of internal carotid artery absence. The patient did
not demonstrate either chromosome 22q11.2 deletion or TBX1 gene mutation, which
is considered the gene responsible for 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Therefore, the 
etiology of DiGeorge syndrome in this case remains unclear.

PMID: 23012869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Circ Res. 2013 Jan 4;112(1):90-102. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.270223. Epub 2012
Sep 25.

Tbx1 genetically interacts with the transforming growth factor-ß/bone
morphogenetic protein inhibitor Smad7 during great vessel remodeling.

Papangeli I(1), Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)UCL-ICH, 30 Guilford St, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

RATIONALE: Growth and remodeling of the pharyngeal arch arteries are vital for
the development of a mature great vessel system. Dysmorphogenesis of the fourth
arch arteries can result in interruption of the aortic arch type B, typically
found in DiGeorge syndrome. Tbx1 haploinsufficient embryos, which model DiGeorge 
syndrome, display fourth arch artery defects during formation of the vessels.
Recovery from such defects is a documented yet unexplained phenotype in Tbx1
haploinsufficiency.
OBJECTIVE: To understand the nature of fourth arch artery growth recovery in Tbx1
haploinsufficiency and its underlying genetic control.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We categorized vessel phenotypes of Tbx1 heterozygotes as
hypoplastic or aplastic at the conclusion of pharyngeal artery formation and
compared these against the frequency of vessel defects scored at the end of great
vessel development. The frequency of hypoplastic vessels decreased during
embryogenesis, whereas no reduction of vessel aplasia was seen, implying recovery
is attributable to remodeling of hypoplastic vessels. We showed that Smad7, an
inhibitory Smad within the transforming growth factor-ß pathway, is regulated by 
Tbx1, is required for arch artery remodeling, and genetically interacts with Tbx1
in this process. Tbx1 and Tbx1;Smad7 haploinsufficiency affected several
remodeling processes; however, concurrent haploinsufficiency particularly
impacted on the earliest stage of vascular smooth muscle cell vessel coverage and
subsequent fibronectin deposition. Conditional reconstitution of Smad7 with a
Tbx1Cre driver indicated that the interaction between the 2 genes is cell
autonomous.
CONCLUSIONS: Tbx1 acts upstream of Smad7 controlling vascular smooth muscle and
extracellular matrix investment of the fourth arch artery.

PMID: 23011393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012 Dec;20(6):502-6. doi:
10.1097/MOO.0b013e328359b476.

Understanding velocardiofacial syndrome: how recent discoveries can help you
improve your patient outcomes.

Chinnadurai S(1), Goudy S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Vanderbilt Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 
37232, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Improved recognition of velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS) has
led to increasing awareness of VCFS by otolaryngologists. Understanding the
developmental biologic processes affected in VCFS patients will help improve
treatment and outcomes. Advanced application of molecular labeling techniques has
better outlined the role of T-Box transcription factor 1 (TBX1) as the primary
genetic anomaly leading to VCFS. TBX1 plays multiple roles during branchial,
cardiac, and craniofacial development and increased understanding of how these
systems are affected by TBX1 mutations will improve patient outcomes.
Furthermore, additional modifiers of TBX1 expression have been identified that
may explain the variability of VCFS phenotypes. The phenotypic spectrum of VCFS
may include cardiac anomalies, velopharyngeal insufficiency, aberrant calcium
metabolism, and immune dysfunction. Recent interest has focused on the cognitive 
and neuropsychiatric manifestations of VCFS. Improved understanding of the
biology of VCFS associated mutations has the potential to improve therapeutic
outcomes.
RECENT FINDINGS: This article will discuss recent developmental biologic
understanding of the role of TBX1 and genetic modifiers generating the phenotypic
variability seen in VCFS patients. Special attention is given to advances in the 
realms of immunodeficiency, hypocalcemia, cardiac and arterial patterning
anomalies, velopharyngeal insufficiency, as well as cognitive and psychiatric
problems.
SUMMARY: Enhanced understanding of the multiple systems affected by TBX1
mutations will result in improved patient outcomes and improved family education.
Future research will lead to improved detection of potential targets for gene
therapy and change the way physicians counsel families and treat patients.

PMID: 23000736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Gene. 2012 Dec 1;510(2):162-70. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.09.017. Epub 2012 Sep
14.

Transrepression activity of T-box1 in a gene regulation network in mouse cells.

Yee KK(1), Yagi H, Matsuoka R, Nakanishi T, Furukawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Integrated Medical Sciences, Tokyo Women's Medical University,
Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

T-box1 (TBX1) has been identified as a candidate disease-causing gene in DiGeorge
syndrome/conotruncal anomaly face syndrome (DGS/CAFS). Tbx1 can function as a
transcriptional transactivator as well as a transrepressor. Although the
transactivating role of Tbx1 has been the focus of a number of published studies,
its transrepression activity has been largely unexplored. Thus, this study
centers on the identification of potential transrepressed targets of Tbx1. By
subtractive hybridization, we compared the expression profiles of control mouse
P19 cells and P19 cells depleted of Tbx1 via RNA interference. We identified 127 
genes that were potentially transrepressed by Tbx1. Of the transrepressed genes, 
we focused on Ywhae and C1qbp and carried out promoter assays. The results showed
that Tbx1 potentially transrepresses the promoter activities of these genes via
palindromic sequences, including 5'-CCACAG-3' and 5'-(C/G)TGTG(C/G)-3', harbored 
within the promoters. Electromobility shift assays also showed that Tbx1
specifically interacts with certain portions of these promoter sequences.
Moreover, the construction of Tbx1 mutants containing known human TBX1 mutations 
showed that these mutations result in the loss of Tbx1 transrepression activity. 
These results indicate that Tbx1 functions as a transrepressor in a gene
regulation network, wherein Ywhae and C1qbp are 2 of the targets transrepressed
by Tbx1 via T-box binding elements. Hence, the loss of TBX1 transrepression
activity could be associated with the disease phenotypes of patients with
DGS/CAFS.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22982415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Dev Dyn. 2012 Nov;241(11):1744-56. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23862. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

The regulation of endogenous retinoic acid level through CYP26B1 is required for 
elevation of palatal shelves.

Okano J(1), Kimura W, Papaionnou VE, Miura N, Yamada G, Shiota K, Sakai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. junkookanodr@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: In previous studies, we investigated the effects of excess retinoic
acid (RA) during palatogenesis by RA administration to pregnant mice. In the
present study, we deleted Cyp26b1, one of the RA-degrading enzymes, to further
study the effects of excess RA in the normal developing palate and to understand 
how endogenous levels of RA are regulated.
RESULTS: Excess RA, due to the absence of Cyp26b1, targets cells in the bend
region of the palatal shelves and inhibits their horizontal elevation, leading to
cleft palate. An organ culture of Cyp26b1-/- palatal shelves after tongue removal
did not rescue the impaired elevation of the palatal shelves. The expression of
Fgf10, Bmp2, and Tbx1, important molecules in palatal development, was
down-regulated. Cell proliferation was decreased in the bend region of palatal
shelves. Tongue muscles were hypoplastic and/or missing in Cyp26b1-/- mice.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that CYP26B1 is essential during palatogenesis.
Excess RA due to the lack of Cyp26b1 suppresses the expression of key regulators 
of palate development in the bend region, resulting in a failure in the
horizontal elevation of the palatal shelves. The regulation of RA signaling
through CYP26B1 is also necessary for the development of tongue musculature and
for tongue depression.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22972661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Dev Cell. 2012 Sep 11;23(3):652-63. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.07.010. Epub 2012 
Aug 23.

MOZ regulates the Tbx1 locus, and Moz mutation partially phenocopies DiGeorge
syndrome.

Voss AK(1), Vanyai HK, Collin C, Dixon MP, McLennan TJ, Sheikh BN, Scambler P,
Thomas T.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Victoria
3052, Australia. avoss@wehi.edu.au

DiGeorge syndrome, caused by a 22q11 microdeletion or mutation of the TBX1 gene, 
varies in severity greatly, even among monozygotic twins. Epigenetic phenomena
have been invoked to explain phenotypic differences in individuals of identical
genetic composition, although specific chromatin modifications relevant to
DiGeorge syndrome are elusive. Here we show that lack of the histone
acetyltransferase MOZ (MYST3/KAT6A) phenocopies DiGeorge syndrome, and the MOZ
complex occupies the Tbx1 locus, promoting its expression and histone 3 lysine 9 
acetylation. Importantly, DiGeorge syndrome-like anomalies are present in mice
with homozygous mutation of Moz and in heterozygous Moz mutants when combined
with Tbx1 haploinsufficiency or oversupply of retinoic acid. Conversely, a Tbx1
transgene rescues the heart phenotype in Moz mutants. Our data reveal a molecular
mechanism for a specific chromatin modification of the Tbx1 locus intersecting
with an environmental determinant, modeling variability in DiGeorge syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3442180
PMID: 22921202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Oct;158A(10):2412-20. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35517. Epub 2012
Aug 14.

Phenotypic variability of atypical 22q11.2 deletions not including TBX1.

Verhagen JM(1), Diderich KE, Oudesluijs G, Mancini GM, Eggink AJ,
Verkleij-Hagoort AC, Groenenberg IA, Willems PJ, du Plessis FA, de Man SA,
Srebniak MI, van Opstal D, Hulsman LO, van Zutven LJ, Wessels MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Interstitial deletions of the chromosome 22q11.2 region are the most common
microdeletions in humans. The TBX1 gene is considered to be the major candidate
gene for the main features in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, including congenital
heart malformations, (para)thyroid hypoplasia, and craniofacial abnormalities. We
report on eight patients with atypical deletions of chromosome 22q11.2. These
deletions comprise the distal part of the common 22q11.2 deleted region but do
not encompass the TBX1 gene. Ten similar patients with overlapping distal 22q11.2
deletions have been reported previously. The clinical features of these patients 
are described and compared to those found in the classic 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome. We discuss the possible roles of a position effect or
haploinsufficiency of distally located genes (e.g., CRKL) in the molecular
pathogenesis of the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22893440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40974. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040974. Epub 2012 Jul 23.

Genome-wide association mapping and identification of candidate genes for the
rumpless and ear-tufted traits of the Araucana chicken.

Noorai RE(1), Freese NH, Wright LM, Chapman SC, Clark LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Biochemistry, Clemson University, Clemson, South
Carolina, United States of America.

Araucana chickens are known for their rounded, tailless rumps and tufted ears.
Inheritance studies have shown that the rumpless (Rp) and ear-tufted (Et) loci
each act in an autosomal dominant fashion, segregate independently, and are
associated with an increased rate of embryonic mortality. To find genomic regions
associated with Rp and Et, we generated genome-wide SNP profiles for a diverse
population of 60 Araucana chickens using the 60 K chicken SNP BeadChip.
Genome-wide association studies using 40 rumpless and 11 tailed birds showed a
strong association with rumpless on Gga 2 (P(raw)<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.45×10(-10),
P(genome)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00575), and analysis of genotypes revealed a 2.14 Mb haplotype
shared by all rumpless birds. Within this haplotype, a 0.74 Mb critical interval 
containing two Iroquois homeobox genes, Irx1 and Irx2, was unique to rumpless
Araucana chickens. Irx1 and Irx2 are central for developmental prepatterning, but
neither gene is known to have a role in mechanisms leading to caudal development.
A second genome-wide association analysis using 30 ear-tufted and 28 non-tufted
birds revealed an association with tufted on Gga 15 (P(raw)<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.61×10(-7),
P(genome)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0981). We identified a 0.58 Mb haplotype common to tufted birds and
harboring 7 genes. Because homozygosity for Et is nearly 100% lethal, we employed
a heterozygosity mapping approach to prioritize candidate gene selection. A 60 kb
region heterozygous in all Araucana chickens contains the complete coding
sequence for TBX1 and partial sequence for GNB1L. TBX1 is an important
transcriptional regulator of embryonic development and a key genetic determinant 
of human DiGeorge syndrome. Herein, we describe localization of Rp and Et and
identification of positional candidate genes.

PMCID: PMC3402462
PMID: 22844420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Gene. 2014 Feb 15;536(1):197-202. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.06.069. Epub 2012 Jul 
25.

Interaction between Tbx1 and Hoxd10 and connection with TGFß-BMP signal pathway
during kidney development.

Fu Y(1), Li F(2), Zhao DY(3), Zhang JS(4), Lv Y(5), Li-Ling J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medicine, China Medical
University, Shenyang, China. Electronic address: fuyu_727@yahoo.cn. (2)Department
of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medicine, China Medical University,
Shenyang, China. Electronic address: lifeiphoenix@yahoo.com.cn. (3)Sino-Dutch
Biomedical and Information Engineering School, Northeastern University, Shenyang,
China. Electronic address: zhaoyue@bmie.neu.edu.cn. (4)Sino-Dutch Biomedical and 
Information Engineering School, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China.
Electronic address: zhangjs@bmie.neu.edu.cn. (5)Department of Medical Genetics,
School of Basic Medicine, China Medical University, Shenyang, China. Electronic
address: hawk.lv@163.com. (6)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic
Medicine, China Medical University, Shenyang, China; Sino-Dutch Biomedical and
Information Engineering School, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China;
Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Life Science & Key Laboratory for
Bio-resources and Eco-environment of the Ministry of Education, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China. Electronic address: jliling@scu.edu.cn.

Renal malformations are commonly found among patients carrying a 22q11 deletion
which renders loss of Tbx1 gene, an important transcriptional factor implicated
in a number of developmental processes. Smad1 is known to interact with Tbx1, but
the exact mechanism remains unknown. In this study, we have measured the
expression of Tbx1 in both murine and human tissues using RT-PCR, and analyzed
its protein product and protein-protein interactions with Western blotting and
immunoprecipitation assays. Precipitated proteins were verified with mass
spectrometry. As discovered, Tbx1 binds with Hoxd10. Tbx1 and Hoxd10 genes also
have similar expression profiles during murine kidney development. Based on
homology between mouse and human, we hypothesized that such interaction also
exists in human. Through a RNA interference experiment using a human embryonic
kidney HEK293 cell line, we demonstrated that TBX1 can alter TGF-ß/BMP, an
important signaling pathway, through interacting with HOXD10. Above findings may 
shed light on the mechanism of TBX1 mutations leading to renal malformations
found in patients carrying a 22q11 deletion.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22842189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Nov;370(1-2):53-8. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1397-5. Epub
2012 Jul 17.

Genetic analysis of the TBX1 gene promoter in ventricular septal defects.

Wang H(1), Chen D, Ma L, Meng H, Liu Y, Xie W, Pang S, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment,
Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining,
Shandong, China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defects in humans. The
genetic causes for CHD remain largely unknown. T-box transcription factor 1
(TBX1), a dosage-sensitive regulator, plays a critical role in the heart
development. Mutations in the coding regions of TBX1 gene have been associated to
22q11 deletion syndrome with cardiac defects and isolated CHD cases, including
ventricular septal defect (VSD). To date, TBX1 gene promoter region has not been 
analyzed and reported in CHD patients. We hypothesized that the sequence variants
within TBX1 gene promoter region may change TBX1 levels and mediate CHD
development. In this study, the promoter regions of TBX1 gene were genetically
and functionally analyzed in 280 VSD patients and 267 healthy controls. Two novel
heterozygous variants, g.4353C>T and g.4510A>C, were found in two VSD patients,
but in none of controls. The single-nucleotide polymorphism-rs41260844,
g.4199T>C, was found more frequent in VSD patients than controls (P < 0.01).
Functional analyses revealed that these sequence variants significantly enhanced 
transcriptional activities of TBX1 gene promoter. Therefore, the sequence
variants within TBX1 gene promoter may contribute to the VSD etiology by altering
the expression levels of TBX1 gene. Pharmaceutical or genetic manipulation of
TBX1 gene expression may provide a novel personalized therapy to prevent and
treat late cardiac complications for the adult CHD patients carrying these
variants.

PMID: 22801995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Eur J Med Genet. 2012 Nov;55(11):650-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.06.014. Epub
2012 Jul 14.

An atypical 0.8 Mb inherited duplication of 22q11.2 associated with psychomotor
impairment.

Pebrel-Richard C(1), Kemeny S, Gouas L, Eymard-Pierre E, Blanc N, Francannet C,
Tchirkov A, Goumy C, Vago P.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogénétique Médicale, Univ Clermont1, UFR Médecine, CHU Clermont-Ferrand,
CHU Estaing, 1 place Lucie Aubrac, 63003 Clermont-Ferrand Cedex1, France.
cpebrel@chu-clermontferrand.fr

Microduplications 22q11.2 have been recently characterized as a new genomic
duplication syndrome showing an extremely variable phenotype ranging from normal 
or mild learning disability to multiple congenital defects and sharing some
overlapping features with DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome (DGS/VCFS),
including heart defects, urogenital abnormalities and velopharyngeal
insufficiency. We present an atypical and inherited 0.8-Mb duplication at
22q11.2, in the distal segment of the DGS/VCFS syndrome typically deleted region 
(TDR), in a 3-year-old boy with motor delay, language disorders and mild facial
phenotype. This 22q11.2 microduplication was identified by MLPA, designed to
detect recurrent microdeletions and microduplications of chromosomal regions
frequently involved in mental retardation syndromes and was further characterized
by aCGH. The duplicated region encompasses 14 genes, excluding TBX1 but including
CRKL, ZNF74, PIK4CA, SNAP29 and PCQAP known to contribute to several aspects of
the DGS/VCFS phenotype. To the best of our knowledge, only one case of an
isolated duplication in the distal segment of the TDR between chromosome
22-specific low-copy repeats B (LCR22-B) and D (LCR22-D) has been published, but 
the present report is the first one with a detailed description of physical and
developmental features in a patient carrying this kind of atypical 22q11.2
duplication. This case illustrates the importance of reporting unusual 22q11.2
duplications to further evaluate the incidence of these rearrangements in the
general population and to improve genotype-phenotype correlations and genetic
counseling.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22796526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Dev Dyn. 2012 Aug;241(8):1310-24. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23812. Epub 2012 Jun 26.

Biallelic expression of Tbx1 protects the embryo from developmental defects
caused by increased receptor tyrosine kinase signaling.

Simrick S(1), Szumska D, Gardiner JR, Jones K, Sagar K, Morrow B, Bhattacharya S,
Basson MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development and Stem Cell Biology, King's College
London, Guy's Tower, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) is the most common microdeletion 
syndrome in humans, characterized by cardiovascular defects such as interrupted
aortic arch, outflow tract defects, thymus and parathyroid hypo- or aplasia, and 
cleft palate. Heterozygosity of Tbx1, the mouse homolog of the candidate TBX1
gene, results in mild defects dependent on genetic background, whereas complete
inactivation results in severe malformations in multiple tissues.
RESULTS: The loss of function of two Sprouty genes, which encode feedback
antagonists of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling, phenocopy many defects
associated with 22q11DS in the mouse. The stepwise reduction of Sprouty gene
dosage resulted in different phenotypes emerging at specific steps, suggesting
that the threshold up to which a given developmental process can tolerate
increased RTK signaling is different. Tbx1 heterozygosity significantly
exacerbated the severity of all these defects, which correlated with a
substantial increase in RTK signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that TBX1 functions as an essential component
of a mechanism that protects the embryo against perturbations in RTK signaling
that may lead to developmental defects characteristic of 22q11DS. We propose that
genetic factors that enhance RTK signaling ought to be considered as potential
genetic modifiers of this syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4048740
PMID: 22674535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mech Dev. 2012 Jul;129(5-8):75-97. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2012.05.005. Epub 2012 May 
26.

How insights from cardiovascular developmental biology have impacted the care of 
infants and children with congenital heart disease.

Chin AJ(1), Saint-Jeannet JP, Lo CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, United States. chinalvi@mail.med.upenn.edu

To illustrate the impact developmental biology and genetics have already had on
the clinical management of the million infants born worldwide each year with CHD,
we have chosen three stories which have had particular relevance for pediatric
cardiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons, cardiac anesthesiologists, and cardiac
nurses. First, we show how Margaret Kirby's finding of the unexpected
contribution of an ectodermal cell population - the cranial neural crest - to the
aortic arch arteries and arterial pole of the embryonic avian heart provided a
key impetus to the field of cardiovascular patterning. Recognition that a
majority of patients affected by the neurocristopathy DiGeorge syndrome have a
chromosome 22q11 deletion, have also spurred tremendous efforts to characterize
the molecular mechanisms contributing to this pathology, assigning a major role
to the transcription factor Tbx1. Second, synthesizing the work of the last two
decades by many laboratories on a wide gamut of metazoans (invertebrates,
tunicates, agnathans, teleosts, lungfish, amphibians, and amniotes), we review
the >20 major modifications and additions to the ancient circulatory arrangement 
composed solely of a unicameral (one-chambered), contractile myocardial tube and 
a short proximal aorta. Two changes will be discussed in detail - the
interposition of a second cardiac chamber in the circulation and the septation of
the cardiac ventricle. By comparing the developmental genetic data of several
model organisms, we can better understand the origin of the various components of
the multicameral (multi-chambered) heart seen in humans. Third, Martina
Brueckner's discovery that a faulty axonemal dynein was responsible for the
phenotype of the iv/iv mouse (the first mammalian model of human heterotaxy)
focused attention on the biology of cilia. We discuss how even the care of the
complex cardiac and non-cardiac anomalies seen in heterotaxy syndrome, which have
long seemed impervious to advancements in surgical and medical intensive care,
may yet yield to strategies grounded in a better understanding of the cilium. The
fact that all cardiac defects seen in patients with full-blown heterotaxy can
also be seen in patients without obvious laterality defects hints at important
roles for ciliary function not only in left-right axis specification but also in 
cardiovascular morphogenesis. These three developmental biology stories
illustrate how the remaining unexplained mortality and morbidity of congenital
heart disease can be solved.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3409324
PMID: 22640994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mol Syndromol. 2011 Dec;2(1):35-44. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

22q11.2 Distal Deletion Syndrome: Description of a New Case with Truncus
Arteriosus Type 2 and Review.

Garavelli L(1), Rosato S, Wischmeijer A, Gelmini C, Esposito A, Mazzanti L,
Franchi F, De Crescenzo A, Palumbo O, Carella M, Riccio A.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Unit, Obstetric and Paediatric Department, Reggio Emilia,
Italy.

22q11.2 deletion syndrome is mainly characterized by conotruncal congenital heart
defects, velopharyngeal insufficiency, hypocalcemia and a characteristic
craniofacial appearance. The etiology in the majority of patients is a 3-Mb
recurrent deletion in region 22q11.2. Nevertheless, recently some cases of
infrequent deletions with various sizes have been reported with a different
phenotype. We report on a patient with congenital heart disease (truncus
arteriosus type 2) in whom a de novo 1.3-Mb 22q11.2 deletion was detected by
array comparative genomic hybridization. The deletion described corresponds to an
atypical and distal deletion which spans low copy repeat (LCR) 4 and is
associated with breakpoint sites that do not correspond to known LCRs of 22q11.2.
We examine the clinical phenotype of our case and compare our findings with those
published in the literature. The most prevalent clinical features in this type of
deletion are a history of prematurity, pre-natal and post-natal growth
retardation, slight facial dysmorphic features, microcephaly and developmental
delay, with a speech defect in particular. These are clearly different from those
found in the classic 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, and we believe that the main
differential diagnosis should be with Silver-Russel syndrome. In our case we
observe the cardiac phenotype with truncus arteriosus communis usually seen in
the classic 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, and so far associated with the TBX1 gene. 
Significantly, however, TBX1 is not included in our patient's deletion. The
possible roles of a position effect or other genes are discussed.

PMCID: PMC3343753
PMID: 22582037  [PubMed]


140. Seikagaku. 2012 Mar;84(3):168-76.

[Molecular mechanism of thymus development in the pharyngeal arch].

[Article in Japanese]

Okubo T(1), Takada S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Kitasato University, Sagamihara, Japan.

PMID: 22568068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Nature. 2012 Apr 4;485(7396):104-8. doi: 10.1038/nature10940.

An RNA interference screen uncovers a new molecule in stem cell self-renewal and 
long-term regeneration.

Chen T(1), Heller E, Beronja S, Oshimori N, Stokes N, Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, New
York 10065, USA.

Adult stem cells sustain tissue maintenance and regeneration throughout the
lifetime of an animal. These cells often reside in specific signalling niches
that orchestrate the stem cell's balancing act between quiescence and cell-cycle 
re-entry based on the demand for tissue regeneration. How stem cells maintain
their capacity to replenish themselves after tissue regeneration is poorly
understood. Here we use RNA-interference-based loss-of-function screening as a
powerful approach to uncover transcriptional regulators that govern the
self-renewal capacity and regenerative potential of stem cells. Hair follicle
stem cells provide an ideal model. These cells have been purified and
characterized from their native niche in vivo and, in contrast to their rapidly
dividing progeny, they can be maintained and passaged long-term in vitro.
Focusing on the nuclear proteins and/or transcription factors that are enriched
in stem cells compared with their progeny, we screened ~2,000 short hairpin RNAs 
for their effect on long-term, but not short-term, stem cell self-renewal in
vitro. To address the physiological relevance of our findings, we selected one
candidate that was uncovered in the screen: TBX1. This transcription factor is
expressed in many tissues but has not been studied in the context of stem cell
biology. By conditionally ablating Tbx1 in vivo, we showed that during
homeostasis, tissue regeneration occurs normally but is markedly delayed. We then
devised an in vivo assay for stem cell replenishment and found that when
challenged with repetitive rounds of regeneration, the Tbx1-deficient stem cell
niche becomes progressively depleted. Addressing the mechanism of TBX1 action, we
discovered that TBX1 acts as an intrinsic rheostat of BMP signalling: it is a
gatekeeper that governs the transition between stem cell quiescence and
proliferation in hair follicles. Our results validate the RNA interference screen
and underscore its power in unearthing new molecules that govern stem cell
self-renewal and tissue-regenerative potential.

PMCID: PMC3600643
PMID: 22495305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(3):e1002571. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002571. Epub 2012 Mar 
15.

Transcriptional control in cardiac progenitors: Tbx1 interacts with the BAF
chromatin remodeling complex and regulates Wnt5a.

Chen L(1), Fulcoli FG, Ferrentino R, Martucciello S, Illingworth EA, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Texas Heart Institute, Houston, Texas, USA.

Mutations of the Wnt5a gene, encoding a ligand of the non-canonical Wnt pathway, 
and the Ror2 gene, encoding its receptor, have been found in patients with
cardiac outflow tract defects. We found that Wnt5a is expressed in the second
heart field (SHF), a population of cardiac progenitor cells destined to populate 
the cardiac outflow tract and the right ventricle. Because of cardiac phenotype
similarities between Wnt5a and Tbx1 mutant mice, we tested potential interactions
between the two genes. We found a strong genetic interaction in vivo and
determined that the loss of both genes caused severe hypoplasia of SHF-dependent 
segments of the heart. We demonstrated that Wnt5a is a transcriptional target of 
Tbx1 and explored the mechanisms of gene regulation. Tbx1 occupies T-box binding 
elements within the Wnt5a gene and interacts with the Baf60a/Smarcd1 subunit of a
chromatin remodeling complex. It also interacts with the Setd7 histone H3K4
monomethyltransferase. Tbx1 enhances Baf60a occupation at the Wnt5a gene and
enhances its H3K4 monomethylation status. Finally, we show that Baf60a is
required for Tbx1-driven regulation of target genes. These data suggest a model
in which Tbx1 interacts with, and probably recruits a specific subunit of, the
BAF complex as well as histone methylases to activate or enhance transcription.
We speculate that this may be a general mechanism of T-box function and that
Baf60a is a key component of the transcriptional control in cardiac progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3305383
PMID: 22438823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32429. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032429. Epub 2012 Mar 2.

Endothelial neuropilin disruption in mice causes DiGeorge syndrome-like
malformations via mechanisms distinct to those caused by loss of Tbx1.

Zhou J(1), Pashmforoush M, Sucov HM.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California, United
States of America.

The spectrum of human congenital malformations known as DiGeorge syndrome (DGS)
is replicated in mice by mutation of Tbx1. Vegfa has been proposed as a modifier 
of DGS, based in part on the occurrence of comparable phenotypes in Tbx1 and
Vegfa mutant mice. Many additional genes have been shown to cause DGS-like
phenotypes in mice when mutated; these generally intersect in some manner with
Tbx1, and therefore impact the same developmental processes in which Tbx1 itself 
is involved. In this study, using Tie2Cre, we show that endothelial-specific
mutation of the gene encoding the VEGFA coreceptor neuropilin-1 (Nrp1) also
replicates the most prominent terminal phenotypes that typify DGS. However, the
developmental etiologies of these defects are fundamentally different from those 
caused by absence of TBX1. In Tie2Cre/Nrp1 mutants, initial pharyngeal
organization is normal but subsequent pharyngeal organ growth is impaired, second
heart field differentiation is normal but cardiac outflow tract cushion
organization is distorted, neural crest cell migration is normal, and palatal
mesenchyme proliferation is impaired with no change in apoptosis. Our results
demonstrate that impairment of VEGF-dependent endothelial pathways leads to a
spectrum of DiGeorge syndrome-type malformations, through processes that are
distinguishable from those controlled by Tbx1.

PMCID: PMC3292556
PMID: 22396765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Hear Res. 2012 Apr;286(1-2):55-63. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2012.02.005. Epub 2012
Feb 21.

MicroRNA-182 regulates otocyst-derived cell differentiation and targets T-box1
gene.

Wang XR(1), Zhang XM, Du J, Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, 58 Zhongshan Road, Guangzhou 510080, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Recently, in vitro and in vivo models have identified that microRNAs 
(miRNAs), which are extensively expressed in the inner ear, play important roles 
in inner ear development and function. However, the function of miRNA in
vertebrate tissue is not well understood.
RESULTS: The current study used an in vitro model of embryonic mouse inner ear in
a stem/progenitor cell culture to demonstrate that: 1) miR-182 is expressed
during differentiation of inner ear stem/progenitor cell into a hair cell-like
fate, 2) ectopic miR-182 promotes inner ear stem/progenitor cell differentiation 
into a hair cell-like fate, and 3) the function of miR-182 may be associated with
its putative target Tbx1, a transcription factors that have been implicated in
inner ear development and hair cell fate.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that miR-182 could regulate inner ear
progenitor cell differentiation and that miRNAs are important regulators of hair 
cell differentiation, providing new targets for hair cell repair.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22381690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jun 1;21(11):2524-37. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds071. Epub 2012 Feb 
27.

Tbx1 regulates oral epithelial adhesion and palatal development.

Funato N(1), Nakamura M, Richardson JA, Srivastava D, Yanagisawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Human Gene Sciences Center, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45
Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

Cleft palate, the most frequent congenital craniofacial birth defect, is a
multifactorial condition induced by the interaction of genetic and environmental 
factors. In addition to complete cleft palate, a large number of human cases
involve soft palate cleft and submucosal cleft palate. However, the etiology of
these forms of cleft palate has not been well understood. T-box transcriptional
factor (Tbx) family of transcriptional factors has distinct roles in a wide range
of embryonic differentiation or response pathways. Here, we show that genetic
disruption of Tbx1, a major candidate gene for the human congenital disorder
22q11.2 deletion syndrome (Velo-cardio-facial/DiGeorge syndrome), led to abnormal
epithelial adhesion between the palate and mandible in mouse, resulting in
various forms of cleft palate similar to human conditions. We found that
hyperproliferative epithelium failed to undergo complete differentiation in
Tbx1-null mice (Tbx1(-/-)). Inactivation of Tbx1 specifically in the keratinocyte
lineage (Tbx1(KCKO)) resulted in an incomplete cleft palate confined to the
anterior region of the palate. Interestingly, Tbx1 overexpression resulted in
decreased cell growth and promoted cell-cycle arrest in MCF7 epithelial cells.
These findings suggest that Tbx1 regulates the balance between proliferation and 
differentiation of keratinocytes and is essential for palatal fusion and oral
mucosal differentiation. The impaired adhesion separation of the oral epithelium 
together with compromised palatal mesenchymal growth is an underlying cause for
various forms of cleft palate phenotypes in Tbx1(-/-) mice. Our present study
reveals new pathogenesis of incomplete and submucous cleft palate during
mammalian palatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3607464
PMID: 22371266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jun 1;21(11):2485-96. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds063. Epub 2012 Feb 
24.

Tbx1 is a negative modulator of Mef2c.

Pane LS(1), Zhang Z, Ferrentino R, Huynh T, Cutillo L, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, National Research Council, 80131 Naples,
Italy.

The developmental role of the T-box transcription factor Tbx1 is exquisitely
dosage-sensitive. In this study, we performed a microarray-based transcriptome
analysis of E9.5 embryo tissues across a previously generated Tbx1 mouse allelic 
series. This analysis identified several genes whose expression was affected by
Tbx1 dosage. Interestingly, we found that the expression of the gene encoding the
cardiogenic transcription factor Mef2c was negatively correlated to Tbx1 dosage. 
In vivo data revealed Mef2c up-regulation in the second heart field (SHF) of Tbx1
null mutant embryos compared with wild-type littermates at E9.5. Conversely,
Mef2c expression was decreased in the SHF and in somites of Tbx1 gain-of-function
mutants. These results are consistent with the described role of Tbx1 in
suppressing cardiac progenitor cell differentiation and indicate also a negative 
effect of Tbx1 on Mef2c during skeletal muscle differentiation. We show that Tbx1
occupies conserved regulatory regions of the Mef2c locus, suggesting a direct
effect on Mef2c transcription. However, we also show that Tbx1 interferes with
the Gata4<U+2192> Mef2c regulatory pathway. Overall, our study uncovered a target of
Tbx1 with critical developmental roles, so highlighting the power of the dosage
gradient approach that we used.

PMCID: PMC3349424
PMID: 22367967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Nat Med. 2012 Feb 26;18(3):422-8. doi: 10.1038/nm.2683.

NKG2D signaling on CD8<U+207A> T cells represses T-bet and rescues CD4-unhelped CD8<U+207A> T
cell memory recall but not effector responses.

Zloza A(1), Kohlhapp FJ, Lyons GE, Schenkel JM, Moore TV, Lacek AT, O'Sullivan
JA, Varanasi V, Williams JW, Jagoda MC, Bellavance EC, Marzo AL, Thomas PG,
Zafirova B, Polic B, Al-Harthi L, Sperling AI, Guevara-Patiño JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Committee on Immunology, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

CD4-unhelped CD8(+) T cells are functionally defective T cells primed in the
absence of CD4(+) T cell help. Given the co-stimulatory role of natural-killer
group 2, member D protein (NKG2D) on CD8(+) T cells, we investigated its ability 
to rescue these immunologically impotent cells. We demonstrate that augmented
co-stimulation through NKG2D during priming paradoxically rescues memory, but not
effector, CD8(+) T cell responses. NKG2D-mediated rescue is characterized by
reversal of elevated transcription factor T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet)
expression and recovery of interleukin-2 and interferon-<U+03B3> production and
cytolytic responses. Rescue is abrogated in CD8(+) T cells lacking NKG2D.
Augmented co-stimulation through NKG2D confers a high rate of survival to mice
lacking CD4(+) T cells in a CD4-dependent influenza model and rescues
HIV-specific CD8(+) T cell responses from CD4-deficient HIV-positive donors.
These findings demonstrate that augmented co-stimulation through NKG2D is
effective in rescuing CD4-unhelped CD8(+) T cells from their pathophysiological
fate and may provide therapeutic benefits.

PMCID: PMC3436127
PMID: 22366950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Development. 2012 Mar;139(6):1213-24. doi: 10.1242/dev.071456.

RIPPLY3 is a retinoic acid-inducible repressor required for setting the borders
of the pre-placodal ectoderm.

Janesick A(1), Shiotsugu J, Taketani M, Blumberg B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, 2011 Biological Sciences 3,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-2300, USA.

Retinoic acid signaling is a major component of the neural posteriorizing process
in vertebrate development. Here, we identify a new role for the retinoic acid
receptor (RAR) in the anterior of the embryo, where RAR regulates Fgf8 expression
and formation of the pre-placodal ectoderm (PPE). RARa2 signaling induces key
pre-placodal genes and establishes the posterolateral borders of the PPE. RAR
signaling upregulates two important genes, Tbx1 and Ripply3, during early PPE
development. In the absence of RIPPLY3, TBX1 is required for the expression of
Fgf8 and hence, PPE formation. In the presence of RIPPLY3, TBX1 acts as a
transcriptional repressor, and functions to restrict the positional expression of
Fgf8, a key regulator of PPE gene expression. These results establish a novel
role for RAR as a regulator of spatial patterning of the PPE through Tbx1 and
RIPPLY3. Moreover, we demonstrate that Ripply3, acting downstream of RAR
signaling, is a key player in establishing boundaries in the PPE.

PMCID: PMC3283127
PMID: 22354841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Physiol Genomics. 2012 May 1;44(9):518-41. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00013.2012. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

Human gene copy number spectra analysis in congenital heart malformations.

Tomita-Mitchell A(1), Mahnke DK, Struble CA, Tuffnell ME, Stamm KD, Hidestrand M,
Harris SE, Goetsch MA, Simpson PM, Bick DP, Broeckel U, Pelech AN, Tweddell JS,
Mitchell ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. amitchell@mcw.edu

The clinical significance of copy number variants (CNVs) in congenital heart
disease (CHD) continues to be a challenge. Although CNVs including genes can
confer disease risk, relationships between gene dosage and phenotype are still
being defined. Our goal was to perform a quantitative analysis of CNVs involving 
100 well-defined CHD risk genes identified through previously published human
association studies in subjects with anatomically defined cardiac malformations. 
A novel analytical approach permitting CNV gene frequency "spectra" to be
computed over prespecified regions to determine phenotype-gene dosage
relationships was employed. CNVs in subjects with CHD (n = 945), subphenotyped
into 40 groups and verified in accordance with the European Paediatric Cardiac
Code, were compared with two control groups, a disease-free cohort (n = 2,026)
and a population with coronary artery disease (n = 880). Gains (=200 kb) and
losses (=100 kb) were determined over 100 CHD risk genes and compared using a
Barnard exact test. Six subphenotypes showed significant enrichment (P = 0.05),
including aortic stenosis (valvar), atrioventricular canal (partial),
atrioventricular septal defect with tetralogy of Fallot, subaortic stenosis,
tetralogy of Fallot, and truncus arteriosus. Furthermore, CNV gene frequency
spectra were enriched (P = 0.05) for losses at: FKBP6, ELN, GTF2IRD1, GATA4,
CRKL, TBX1, ATRX, GPC3, BCOR, ZIC3, FLNA and MID1; and gains at: PRKAB2, FMO5,
CHD1L, BCL9, ACP6, GJA5, HRAS, GATA6 and RUNX1. Of CHD subjects, 14% had causal
chromosomal abnormalities, and 4.3% had likely causal (significantly enriched),
large, rare CNVs. CNV frequency spectra combined with precision phenotyping may
lead to increased molecular understanding of etiologic pathways.

PMCID: PMC3426426
PMID: 22318994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Development. 2012 Mar;139(5):1001-12. doi: 10.1242/dev.073890.

Org-1, the Drosophila ortholog of Tbx1, is a direct activator of known identity
genes during muscle specification.

Schaub C(1), Nagaso H, Jin H, Frasch M.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Department of Biology,
Division of Developmental Biology, Staudtstrasse 5, Erlangen, Germany.

Members of the T-Box gene family of transcription factors are important players
in regulatory circuits that generate myogenic and cardiogenic lineage diversities
in vertebrates. We show that during somatic myogenesis in Drosophila, the single 
ortholog of vertebrate Tbx1, optomotor-blind-related-gene-1 (org-1), is expressed
in a small subset of muscle progenitors, founder cells and adult muscle
precursors, where it overlaps with the products of the muscle identity genes
ladybird (lb) and slouch (slou). In addition, org-1 is expressed in the lineage
of the heart-associated alary muscles. org-1 null mutant embryos lack Lb and Slou
expression within the muscle lineages that normally co-express org-1. As a
consequence, the respective muscle fibers and adult muscle precursors are either 
severely malformed or missing, as are the alary muscles. To address the
mechanisms that mediate these regulatory interactions between Org-1, Lb and Slou,
we characterized distinct enhancers associated with somatic muscle expression of 
lb and slou. We demonstrate that these lineage- and stage-specific cis-regulatory
modules (CRMs) bind Org-1 in vivo, respond to org-1 genetically and require T-box
domain binding sites for their activation. In summary, we propose that org-1 is a
common and direct upstream regulator of slou and lb in the developmental pathway 
of these two neighboring muscle lineages. Cross-repression between slou and lb
and combinatorial activation of lineage-specific targets by Org-1-Slou and
Org-1-Lb, respectively, then leads to the distinction between the two lineages.
These findings provide new insights into the regulatory circuits that control the
proper pattering of the larval somatic musculature in Drosophila.

PMCID: PMC3274361
PMID: 22318630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Development. 2012 Mar;139(5):958-67. doi: 10.1242/dev.068015.

Musculin and TCF21 coordinate the maintenance of myogenic regulatory factor
expression levels during mouse craniofacial development.

Moncaut N(1), Cross JW, Siligan C, Keith A, Taylor K, Rigby PW, Carvajal JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology, The Institute of Cancer Research, Chester Beatty
Laboratories, 237 Fulham Road, London, UK.

The specification of the skeletal muscle lineage during craniofacial development 
is dependent on the activity of MYF5 and MYOD, two members of the myogenic
regulatory factor family. In the absence of MYF5 or MYOD there is not an overt
muscle phenotype, whereas in the double Myf5;MyoD knockout branchiomeric myogenic
precursors fail to be specified and skeletal muscle is not formed. The
transcriptional regulation of Myf5 is controlled by a multitude of regulatory
elements acting at different times and anatomical locations, with at least five
operating in the branchial arches. By contrast, only two enhancers have been
implicated in the regulation of MyoD. In this work, we characterize an enhancer
element that drives Myf5 expression in the branchial arches from 9.5 days
post-coitum and show that its activity in the context of the entire locus is
dependent on two highly conserved E-boxes. These binding sites are required in a 
subset of Myf5-expressing cells including both progenitors and those which have
entered the myogenic pathway. The correct levels of expression of Myf5 and MyoD
result from activation by musculin and TCF21 through direct binding to specific
enhancers. Consistent with this, we show that in the absence of musculin the
timing of activation of Myf5 and MyoD is not affected but the expression levels
are significantly reduced. Importantly, normal levels of Myf5 expression are
restored at later stages, which might explain the absence of particular muscles
in the Msc;Tcf21 double-knockout mice.

PMCID: PMC3274357
PMID: 22318627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Dev Dyn. 2012 Mar;241(3):563-73. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23731. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Identification of putative retinoic acid target genes downstream of mesenchymal
Tbx1 during inner ear development.

Monks DC(1), Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
10461, USA.

BACKGROUND: The T-box transcription factor Tbx1 is expressed in the otic vesicle 
and surrounding mesoderm of the periotic mesenchyme (POM) during inner ear
development. Mesenchymal Tbx1 is essential for inner ear development, with
conditional mutants displaying defects in both the auditory and vestibular
systems. We have previously reported that mesodermal Tbx1 loss of function
mutants (Mest-KO) have reduced expression of retinoic acid (RA) metabolic genes, 
Cyp26a1 and Cyp26c1, in the POM, consistent with other studies showing an
increase in mesodermal RA reporter expression in Tbx1-/- embryos. However,
putative RA effector genes whose expression is altered downstream of increased
otic mesenchymal-epithelial RA signaling have remained elusive.
RESULTS: Here we report the identification of 18 retinoic acid responsive genes
altered in Mest-KO conditional mutants by microarray gene profiling. Nine were
chosen for biological validation including quantitative RT-PCR and in situ
hybridization (Otor, Mia, Col2a1, Clu, Adm, Myt1, Dlx3, Itgb3, and Itga2b).
CONCLUSION: Here study provides a series of newly identified RA effector genes
for inner ear development downstream of mesenchymal Tbx1 that may contribute to
the inner ear phenotype observed in Tbx1 loss of function mouse models.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3282991
PMID: 22275070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Seikagaku. 2011 Nov;83(11):1043-7.

[Epigenetic regulation of transcription in heart development].

[Article in Japanese]

Nimura K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Therapy Science, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

PMID: 22256602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2011;2011:130947. doi: 10.1155/2011/130947. Epub 2011 Dec
15.

ENU mutagenesis screen to establish motor phenotypes in wild-type mice and
modifiers of a pre-existing motor phenotype in tau mutant mice.

Liu X(1), Dobbie M, Tunningley R, Whittle B, Zhang Y, Ittner LM, Götz J.

Author information: 
(1)Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease Laboratory, Brain & Mind Research
Institute, University of Sydney, 100 Mallett Street, Camperdown, NSW 2050,
Australia.

Modifier screening is a powerful genetic tool. While not widely used in the
vertebrate system, we applied these tools to transgenic mouse strains that
recapitulate key aspects of Alzheimer's disease (AD), such as tau-expressing
mice. These are characterized by a robust pathology including both motor and
memory impairment. The phenotype can be modulated by ENU mutagenesis, which
results in novel mutant mouse strains and allows identifying the underlying
gene/mutation. Here we discuss this strategy in detail. We firstly obtained
pedigrees that modify the tau-related motor phenotype, with mapping ongoing. We
further obtained transgene-independent motor pedigrees: (i) hyperactive, circling
ENU 37 mice with a causal mutation in the Tbx1 gene-the complete knock-out of
Tbx1 models DiGeorge Syndrome; (ii) ENU12/301 mice that show sudden jerky
movements and tremor constantly; they have a causal mutation in the Kcnq1 gene,
modelling aspects of the Romano-Ward and Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndromes; and
(iii) ENU16/069 mice with tremor and hypermetric gait that have a causal mutation
in the Mpz (Myelin Protein Zero) gene, modelling Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type
1 (CMT1B). Together, we provide evidence for a real potential of an ENU
mutagenesis to dissect motor functions in wild-type and tau mutant mice.

PMCID: PMC3246812
PMID: 22219655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Autism Open Access. 2012;Suppl 1:001.

Mouse Models of 22q11.2-Associated Autism Spectrum Disorder.

Hiroi N(1), Hiramoto T(2), Harper KM(3), Suzuki G(4), Boku S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Golding 104, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461 USA ; Department
of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Golding 104, 1300 Morris
Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461 USA ; Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Golding 104, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461 USA. 
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Golding 104, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461 USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Northwestern University, Ward 
Building Room 9-258, 303 E. Chicago Ave. Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (4)Department of
Psychiatry, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki, Tokorozawa, Saitama
359-8513, Japan.

Copy number variation (CNV) of human chromosome 22q11.2 is associated with an
elevated rate of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and represents one of syndromic
ASDs with rare genetic variants. However, the precise genetic basis of this
association remains unclear due to its relatively large hemizygous and
duplication region, including more than 30 genes. Previous studies using genetic 
mouse models suggested that although not all 22q11.2 genes contribute to ASD
symptomatology, more than one 22q11.2 genes have distinct phenotypic targets for 
ASD symptoms. Our data show that deficiency of the two 22q11.2 genesTbx1 and
Sept5 causes distinct phenotypic sets of ASD symptoms.

PMCID: PMC4118685
PMID: 25089229  [PubMed]


156. Oncol Rep. 2012 Apr;27(4):1258-65. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1601. Epub 2011 Dec 21.

Using an exon microarray to identify a global profile of gene expression and
alternative splicing in K562 cells exposed to sodium valproate.

Zhang XZ(1), Yin AH, Zhu XY, Ding Q, Wang CH, Chen YX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, PR China.

To investigate the effect of valproate treatment on the K562 cell line, a model
for chronic myelogenous leukaemia, the growth and survival of the K562 cell line 
were investigated using the Annexin-V/PI dual staining method, and global
profiles of gene expression and alternative splicing in K562 cells were assessed 
using exon microarrays. A significant increase in cell apoptosis was observed in 
valproate-exposed K562 cells using flow cytometry. A total of 628 transcripts
were identified as being significantly differentially expressed. The number of
genes demonstrating increased expression levels was greater than the number of
genes demonstrating decreased expression levels (445 genes vs. 183 genes,
respectively). The significant enrichment analysis of GO terms for the
differentially expressed genes revealed that these genes are involved in many
important biological processes such as apoptosis. Six of the genes observed to be
differentially expressed that might be involved in apoptosis were selected to
undergo qRT-PCR validation. In total, 198 candidates of alternative splicing
variants were identified. Among them, three alternative splicing events were
selected for validation, and CBLC and TBX1 were confirmed to be alternatively
spliced by semi-nested PCR. In conclusion, valproate exposure facilitated cell
apoptosis, altered mRNA expression and alternative splicing events in the K562
cell line.

PMCID: PMC3583465
PMID: 22200904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2012 Jan;44(1):92-102. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmr090.

Epigenetic mechanisms in cardiac development and disease.

Vallaster M(1), Vallaster CD, Wu SM.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 02114,
USA.

During mammalian development, cardiac specification and ultimately lineage
commitment to a specific cardiac cell type is accomplished by the action of
specific transcription factors (TFs) and their meticulous control on an
epigenetic level. In this review, we detail how cardiac-specific TFs function in 
concert with nucleosome remodeling and histone-modifying enzymes to regulate a
diverse network of genes required for processes such as cell growth and
proliferation, or epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), for instance. We
provide examples of how several cardiac TFs, such as Nkx2.5, WHSC1, Tbx5, and
Tbx1, which are associated with developmental and congenital heart defects, are
required for the recruitment of histone modifiers, such as Jarid2, p300, and
Ash2l, and components of ATP-dependent remodeling enzymes like Brg1, Baf60c, and 
Baf180. Binding of these TFs to their respective sites at cardiac genes coincides
with a distinct pattern of histone marks, indicating that the precise regulation 
of cardiac gene networks is orchestrated by interactions between TFs and
epigenetic modifiers. Furthermore, we speculate that an epigenetic signature,
comprised of TF occupancy, histone modifications, and overall chromatin
organization, is an underlying mechanism that governs cardiac morphogenesis and
disease.

PMCID: PMC3244653
PMID: 22194017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Dec 21;12:169. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-169.

Detecting 22q11.2 deletion in Chinese children with conotruncal heart defects and
single nucleotide polymorphisms in the haploid TBX1 locus.

Xu YJ(1), Wang J, Xu R, Zhao PJ, Wang XK, Sun HJ, Bao LM, Shen J, Fu QH, Li F,
Sun K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Shanghai Children's Medical Center
Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200127,
China.

BACKGROUND: Conotruncal heart defects (CTDs) are present in 75-85% of patients
suffering from the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. To date, no consistent phenotype
has been consistently correlated with the 22q11.2 deletions. Genetic studies have
implicated TBX1 as a critical gene in the pathogenesis of the syndrome. The aim
of study was to determine the incidence of the 22q11.2 deletion in Chinese
patients with CTDs and the possible mechanism for pathogenesis of CTDs.
METHODS: We enrolled 212 patients with CTDs and 139 unrelated healthy controls.
Both karyotypic analysis and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
were performed for all CTDs patients. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was
performed for the patients with genetic deletions and their relatives. The TBX1
gene was sequenced for all patients and healthy controls. The <U+03C7>2 and Fisher's
exact test were used in the statistical analysis.
RESULTS: Thirteen of the 212 patients with CTDs (6.13%) were found to have the
22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Of the 13 cases, 11 presented with a hemizygous
interstitial microdeletion from CLTCL1 to LZTR1; one presented with a regional
deletion from CLTCL1 to DRCR8; and one presented with a regional deletion from
CDC45L to LZTR1. There were eight sequence variants in the haploid TBX1 genes of 
the del22q11 CTDs patients. The frequency of one single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) in the del22q11 patients was different from that of the non-del patients (P
< 0.05), and the frequencies of two other SNPs were different between the non-del
CTDs patients and controls (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: CTDs, especially pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect
and tetralogy of Fallot, are the most common disorders associated with the
22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Those patients with both CTDs and 22q11.2 deletion
generally have a typical or atypical deletion region within the TBX1 gene. Our
results indicate that TBX1 genetic variants may be associated with CTDs.

PMCID: PMC3259064
PMID: 22185286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28394. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028394. Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Brachyury and related Tbx proteins interact with the Mixl1 homeodomain protein
and negatively regulate Mixl1 transcriptional activity.

Pereira LA(1), Wong MS, Lim SM, Sides A, Stanley EG, Elefanty AG.

Author information: 
(1)Differentiation and Transcription Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre
and the Pathology Department, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

Mixl1 is a homeodomain transcription factor required for mesoderm and endoderm
patterning during mammalian embryogenesis. Despite its crucial function in
development, co-factors that modulate the activity of Mixl1 remain poorly
defined. Here we report that Mixl1 interacts physically and functionally with the
T-box protein Brachyury and related members of the T-box family of transcription 
factors. Transcriptional and protein analyses demonstrated overlapping expression
of Mixl1 and Brachyury during embryonic stem cell differentiation. In vitro
protein interaction studies showed that the Mixl1 with Brachyury associated via
their DNA-binding domains and gel shift assays revealed that the Brachyury T-box 
domain bound to Mixl1-DNA complexes. Furthermore, luciferase reporter experiments
indicated that association of Mixl1 with Brachyury and related T-box factors
inhibited the transactivating potential of Mixl1 on the Gsc and Pdgfra promoters.
Our results indicate that the activity of Mixl1 can be modulated by
protein-protein interactions and that T-box factors can function as negative
regulators of Mixl1 activity.

PMCID: PMC3229578
PMID: 22164283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Mar 15;21(6):1217-29. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr553. Epub 2011 Nov 
24.

Identification of a Tbx1/Tbx2/Tbx3 genetic pathway governing pharyngeal and
arterial pole morphogenesis.

Mesbah K(1), Rana MS, Francou A, van Duijvenboden K, Papaioannou VE, Moorman AF, 
Kelly RG, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Institute of Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille University,
CNRS UMR6216, Marseille, France.

The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) is the most common microdeletion
disorder and is characterized by abnormal development of the pharyngeal apparatus
and heart. Cardiovascular malformations (CVMs) affecting the outflow tract (OFT) 
are frequently observed in 22q11.2DS and are among the most commonly occurring
heart defects. The gene encoding T-box transcription factor 1 (Tbx1) has been
identified as a major candidate for 22q11.2DS. However, CVMs are generally
considered to have a multigenic basis and single-gene mutations underlying these 
malformations are rare. The T-box family members Tbx2 and Tbx3 are individually
required in regulating aspects of OFT and pharyngeal development. Here, using
expression and three-dimensional reconstruction analysis, we show that Tbx1 and
Tbx2/Tbx3 are largely uniquely expressed but overlap in the caudal pharyngeal
mesoderm during OFT development, suggesting potential combinatorial requirements.
Cross-regulation between Tbx1 and Tbx2/Tbx3 was analyzed using mouse genetics and
revealed that Tbx1 deficiency affects Tbx2 and Tbx3 expression in neural
crest-derived cells and pharyngeal mesoderm, whereas Tbx2 and Tbx3 function
redundantly upstream of Tbx1 and Hh ligand expression in pharyngeal endoderm and 
bone morphogenetic protein- and fibroblast growth factor-signaling in cardiac
progenitors. Moreover, in vivo, we show that loss of two of the three genes
results in severe pharyngeal hypoplasia and heart tube extension defects. These
findings reveal an indispensable T-box gene network governing pharyngeal and OFT 
development and identify TBX2 and TBX3 as potential modifier genes of the
cardiopharyngeal phenotypes found in TBX1-haploinsufficient 22q11.2DS patients.

PMCID: PMC3491916
PMID: 22116936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2011 Dec;43(12):957-69. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmr098.

Dihydrofolate reductase is required for the development of heart and outflow
tract in zebrafish.

Sun S(1), Gui Y, Jiang Q, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Folic acid is very important for embryonic development and folic acid inhibition 
can cause congenital heart defects in vertebrates. Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR)
is a key enzyme in folate-mediated metabolism. The dysfunction of DHFR disrupts
the key biological processes which folic acid participates in. DHFR gene is
conserved during vertebrate evolution. It is important to investigate the roles
of DHFR in cardiac developments. In this study, we showed that DHFR knockdown
resulted in the abnormal developments of zebrafish embryos in the early stages.
Obvious malformations in heart and outflow tract (OFT) were also observed in DHFR
knockdown embryos. DHFR overexpression rescued the abnormal phenotypes in the
DHFR knockdown group. DHFR knockdown had negative impacts on the expressions of
NKX2.5 (NK2 transcription factor-related 5), MEF2C (myocyte-specific enhancer
factor 2C), TBX20 (T-box 20), and TBX1 (T-box 1) which are important
transcriptional factors during cardiac development process, while DHFR
overexpression had positive effects. DHFR was required for Hedgehog pathway. DHFR
knockdown caused reduced cell proliferation and increased apoptosis, while its
overexpression promoted cell proliferation and inhibited apoptosis. Taken
together, our study suggested that DHFR plays crucial roles in the development of
heart and OFT in zebrafish by regulating gene transcriptions and affecting cell
proliferation and apoptosis.

PMID: 22113051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2012 Jan;159B(1):61-71. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32002. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Evidence for involvement of GNB1L in autism.

Chen YZ(1), Matsushita M, Girirajan S, Lisowski M, Sun E, Sul Y, Bernier R, Estes
A, Dawson G, Minshew N, Shellenberg GD, Eichler EE, Rieder MJ, Nickerson DA,
Tsuang DW, Tsuang MT, Wijsman EM, Raskind WH, Brkanac Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Medical Genetics), University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington 98195-7720, USA.

Structural variations in the chromosome 22q11.2 region mediated by nonallelic
homologous recombination result in 22q11.2 deletion (del22q11.2) and 22q11.2
duplication (dup22q11.2) syndromes. The majority of del22q11.2 cases have facial 
and cardiac malformations, immunologic impairments, specific cognitive profile
and increased risk for schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). The
phenotype of dup22q11.2 is frequently without physical features but includes the 
spectrum of neurocognitive abnormalities. Although there is substantial evidence 
that haploinsufficiency for TBX1 plays a role in the physical features of
del22q11.2, it is not known which gene(s) in the critical 1.5<U+2009>Mb region are
responsible for the observed spectrum of behavioral phenotypes. We identified an 
individual with a balanced translocation 46,XY,t(1;22)(p36.1;q11.2) and a
behavioral phenotype characterized by cognitive impairment, autism, and
schizophrenia in the absence of congenital malformations. Using somatic cell
hybrids and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) we mapped the chromosome-22
breakpoint within intron 7 of the GNB1L gene. Copy number evaluations and direct 
DNA sequencing of GNB1L in 271 schizophrenia and 513 autism cases revealed
dup22q11.2 in two families with autism and private GNB1L missense variants in
conserved residues in three families (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.036). The identified missense
variants affect residues in the WD40 repeat domains and are predicted to have
deleterious effects on the protein. Prior studies provided evidence that GNB1L
may have a role in schizophrenia. Our findings support involvement of GNB1L in
ASDs as well.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3270696
PMID: 22095694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Proteins. 2012 Feb;80(2):655-60. doi: 10.1002/prot.23208. Epub 2011 Nov 17.

Structure of the DNA-bound T-box domain of human TBX1, a transcription factor
associated with the DiGeorge syndrome.

El Omari K(1), De Mesmaeker J, Karia D, Ginn H, Bhattacharya S, Mancini EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Structural Biology, The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, 
University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom.

PMID: 22095455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2011 Nov;1237:24-38. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06221.x.

Transcription factors in parathyroid development: lessons from hypoparathyroid
disorders.

Grigorieva IV(1), Thakker RV.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Endocrine Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Oxford
Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Churchill Hospital,
University of Oxford, Headington, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Parathyroid developmental anomalies, which result in hypoparathyroidism, are
common and may occur in one in 4,000 live births. Parathyroids, in man, develop
from the endodermal cells of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches, whereas, in
the mouse they develop solely from the endoderm of the third pharyngeal pouches. 
In addition, neural crest cells that arise from the embryonic mid- and hindbrain 
also contribute to parathyroid gland development. The molecular signaling
pathways that are involved in determining the differentiation of the pharyngeal
pouch endoderm into parathyroid cells are being elucidated by studies of patients
with hypoparathyroidism and appropriate mouse models. These studies have revealed
important roles for a number of transcription factors, which include Tbx1, Gata3,
Gcm2, Sox3, Aire1 and members of the homeobox (Hox) and paired box (Pax)
families.

© 2011 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 22082362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Dev Dyn. 2011 Dec;240(12):2680-7. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22765. Epub 2011 Oct 25.

ARVCF depletion cooperates with Tbx1 deficiency in the development of
22q11.2DS-like phenotypes in Xenopus.

Tran HT(1), Delvaeye M, Verschuere V, Descamps E, Crabbe E, Van Hoorebeke L,
McCrea P, Adriaens D, Van Roy F, Vleminckx K.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Molecular Biomedical Research, VIB & Ghent University, Ghent,
Belgium.

The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is a common dominant genetic disorder characterized
by a heterozygous deletion of a cluster of genes on chromosome 22q11.2. TBX1, a
transcription factor belonging to the T-box gene family, is a key player in the
syndrome. However, heterozygosity of Tbx1 in mouse models does not fully
recapitulate the phenotypes characteristic of the disease, which may point to the
involvement of other genes in the deleted chromosomal region. Hence, we
investigated the contribution of the catenin ARVCF, another gene that is deleted 
in 22q11.2DS. During Xenopus development, ARVCF mRNA is expressed in the
pharyngeal arches and depleting either ARVCF or Tbx1 results in delayed migration
of the cranial neural crest cells and in defects in the craniofacial skeleton and
aortic arches. Moreover, double depletion of ARVCF and Tbx1 revealed that they
act cooperatively, indicating that decreased ARVCF levels may also contribute to 
22q11.2DS-associated phenotypes.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22028109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Dec 15;20(24):4775-85. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr404. Epub 2011 Sep
9.

Tbx1: identification of a 22q11.2 gene as a risk factor for autism spectrum
disorder in a mouse model.

Hiramoto T(1), Kang G, Suzuki G, Satoh Y, Kucherlapati R, Watanabe Y, Hiroi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Although twin studies indicate clear genetic bases of autism spectrum disorder
(ASD), the precise mechanisms through which genetic variations causally result in
ASD are poorly understood. Individuals with 3 Mb and nested 1.5 Mb hemizygosity
of the chromosome 22q11.2 represent genetically identifiable cases of ASD.
However, because more than 30 genes are deleted even in the minimal deletion
cases of 22q11.2 deficiency, the individual 22q11.2 gene(s) responsible for ASD
remain elusive. Here, we examined the impact of constitutive heterozygosity of
Tbx1, a 22q11.2 gene, on the behavioral phenotypes of ASD and characterized the
regional and cellular expression of its mRNA and protein in mice. Congenic Tbx1
heterozygous (HT) mice were impaired in social interaction, ultrasonic
vocalization, memory-based behavioral alternation, working memory and
thigmotaxis, compared with wild-type (WT) mice. These phenotypes were not due to 
non-specific alterations in olfactory function, exploratory behavior, motor
movement or anxiety-related behavior. Tbx1 mRNA and protein were ubiquitously
expressed throughout the brains of C57BL/6J mice, but protein expression was
enriched in regions that postnatally retain the capacity of neurogenesis, and in 
fact, postnatally proliferating cells expressed Tbx1. In postnatally derived
hippocampal culture cells of C57BL/6J mice, Tbx1 levels were higher during
proliferation than during differentiation, and expressed in neural progenitor
cells, immature and matured neurons and glial cells. Taken together, our data
suggest that Tbx1 is a gene responsible for the phenotypes of 22q11.2
hemizygosity-associated ASD possibly through its role in diverse cell types,
including postnatally and prenatally generated neurons.

PMCID: PMC3221538
PMID: 21908517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Hum Genet. 2011 Nov;56(11):810-2. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.100. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Tandem configurations of variably duplicated segments of 22q11.2 confirmed by
fiber-FISH analysis.

Shimojima K(1), Okamoto N, Inazu T, Yamamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Women's Medical University Institute for Integrated Medical Sciences,
Tokyo, Japan.

22q11.2 duplication syndrome has recently been established as a new syndrome
manifesting broad clinical phenotypes including mental retardation. It is
reciprocal to DiGeorge (DGS)/velo-cardio-facial syndrome (VCFS), in which the
same portion of the chromosome is hemizygously deleted. Deletions and
duplications of the 22q11.2 region are facilitated by the low-copy repeats (LCRs)
flanking this region. In this study, we aimed to identify the directions of the
duplicated segments of 22q11.2 to better understand the mechanism of chromosomal 
duplication. To achieve this aim, we accumulated samples from four patients with 
22q11.2 duplications. One of the patients had an atypically small (741<U+2009>kb)
duplication of 22q11.2. The centromeric end of the breakpoint was on LCR22A, but 
the telomeric end was between LCR22A and B. Therefore, the duplicated segment did
not include T-box 1 gene (TBX1), the gene primarily responsible for the DGS/VCFS.
As this duplication was shared by the patient's healthy mother, this appears to
be a benign copy-number variation rather than a disease-causing alteration. The
other three patients showed 3.0 or 4.0<U+2009>Mb duplications flanked by LCRs. The
directions of the duplicated segments were investigated by fiber-fluorescence in 
situ hybridization analysis. All samples showed tandem configurations. These
results support the hypothesized mechanism of non-allelic homologous
recombination with flanking LCRs and add additional evidence that many
interstitial duplications are aligned as tandem configurations.

PMID: 21866110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Hered. 2011 Sep-Oct;102 Suppl 1:S68-73. doi: 10.1093/jhered/esr053.

A rare form of persistent right aorta arch in linkage disequilibrium with the
DiGeorge critical region on CFA26 in German Pinschers.

Philipp U(1), Menzel J, Distl O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine 
Hannover, Foundation, Bünteweg 17p, 30559 Hannover, Germany.

Persistent right aortic arch (PRAA) is a congenital vascular ring anomaly common 
in several dog breeds. In German Pinscher, the disorder is characterized by a
left retroesophageal subclavian artery in combination with a ligamentum
arteriosum originating at the aberrant left subclavian artery (PRAA-SA-LA). In
this study, we genotyped 38 microsatellite markers on canine chromosome 26
(CFA26) in German Pinschers and tested them for linkage and association. We found
a chromosome-wide significantly linked genomic region on CFA26, which corresponds
to the human DiGeorge syndrome critical region (DGCR). Therefore, we analyzed
sequences from 13 genes of DGCR and the canine t-box gene TBX1. We identified a
total of 26 polymorphisms in German Pinschers. Three of these SNPs located within
TBX1 and one in the mitochondrial ribosomal protein L40 gene (MRPL40) were
associated with the PRAA-SA-LA phenotype in German Pinscher. Despite linkage and 
association between PRAA-SA-LA and the canine DGCR, none of these mutations
appeared responsible for PRAA-SA-LA. As the orthologue human region on HSA22q11.2
is known for high susceptibility to genomic rearrangements, we suspect that in
German Pinschers, chromosomal aberrations might cause PRAA-SA-LA.

PMID: 21846749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. PLoS Genet. 2011 Aug;7(8):e1002210. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002210. Epub 2011 
Aug 11.

The Caenorhabditis elegans T-box factor MLS-1 requires Groucho co-repressor
interaction for uterine muscle specification.

Miller RR(1), Okkema PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Laboratory for Molecular Biology,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

T-box proteins are conserved transcription factors that play crucial roles in
development of all metazoans; and, in humans, mutations affecting T-box genes are
associated with a variety of congenital diseases and cancers. Despite the
importance of this transcription factor family, very little is known regarding
how T-box factors regulate gene expression. The Caenorhabditis elegans genome
contains 21 T-box genes, and their characterized functions include cell fate
specification in a variety of tissues. The C. elegans Tbx1 sub-family member
MLS-1 functions during larval development to specify the fate of non-striated
uterine muscles; and, in mls-1 mutants, uterine muscles are transformed to a
vulval muscle fate. Here we demonstrate that MLS-1 function depends on binding to
the Groucho-family co-repressor UNC-37. MLS-1 interacts with UNC-37 via a
conserved eh1 motif, and the MLS-1 eh1 motif is necessary for MLS-1 to specify
uterine muscle fate. Moreover, unc-37 loss-of-function produces uterine muscle to
vulval muscle fate transformation similar to those observed in mls-1 mutants.
Based on these results, we conclude that MLS-1 specifies uterine muscle fate by
repressing target gene expression, and this function depends on interaction with 
UNC-37. Moreover, we suggest that MLS-1 shares a common mechanism for
transcriptional repression with related T-box factors in other animal phyla.

PMCID: PMC3154951
PMID: 21852953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Development. 2011 Sep;138(18):3967-76. doi: 10.1242/dev.066126. Epub 2011 Aug 10.

Otic ablation of smoothened reveals direct and indirect requirements for Hedgehog
signaling in inner ear development.

Brown AS(1), Epstein DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

In mouse embryos lacking sonic hedgehog (Shh), dorsoventral polarity within the
otic vesicle is disrupted. Consequently, ventral otic derivatives, including the 
cochlear duct and saccule, fail to form, and dorsal otic derivatives, including
the semicircular canals, endolymphatic duct and utricle, are malformed or absent.
Since inner ear patterning and morphogenesis are heavily dependent on
extracellular signals derived from tissues that are also compromised by the loss 
of Shh, the extent to which Shh signaling acts directly on the inner ear for its 
development is unclear. To address this question, we generated embryos in which
smoothened (Smo), an essential transducer of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, was
conditionally inactivated in the otic epithelium (Smo(ecko)). Ventral otic
derivatives failed to form in Smo(ecko) embryos, whereas vestibular structures
developed properly. Consistent with these findings, we demonstrate that ventral, 
but not dorsal, otic identity is directly dependent on Hh. The role of Hh in
cochlear-vestibular ganglion (cvg) formation is more complex, as both direct and 
indirect signaling mechanisms are implicated. Our data suggest that the loss of
cvg neurons in Shh(-/-) animals is due, in part, to an increase in Wnt
responsiveness in the otic vesicle, resulting in the ectopic expression of Tbx1
in the neurogenic domain and subsequent repression of Ngn1 transcription. A
mitogenic role for Shh in cvg progenitor proliferation was also revealed in our
analysis of Smo(ecko) embryos. Taken together, these data contribute to a better 
understanding of the intrinsic and extrinsic signaling properties of Shh during
inner ear development.

PMCID: PMC3160092
PMID: 21831920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Hum Mutat. 2011 Nov;32(11):1278-89. doi: 10.1002/humu.21568. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

Genotype and cardiovascular phenotype correlations with TBX1 in 1,022
velo-cardio-facial/DiGeorge/22q11.2 deletion syndrome patients.

Guo T(1), McDonald-McGinn D, Blonska A, Shanske A, Bassett AS, Chow E, Bowser M, 
Sheridan M, Beemer F, Devriendt K, Swillen A, Breckpot J, Digilio MC, Marino B,
Dallapiccola B, Carpenter C, Zheng X, Johnson J, Chung J, Higgins AM, Philip N,
Simon TJ, Coleman K, Heine-Suner D, Rosell J, Kates W, Devoto M, Goldmuntz E,
Zackai E, Wang T, Shprintzen R, Emanuel B, Morrow B; International Chromosome
22q11.2 Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Ob/Gyn and Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

Haploinsufficiency of TBX1, encoding a T-box transcription factor, is largely
responsible for the physical malformations in velo-cardio-facial
/DiGeorge/22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) patients. Cardiovascular
malformations in these patients are highly variable, raising the question as to
whether DNA variations in the TBX1 locus on the remaining allele of 22q11.2 could
be responsible. To test this, a large sample size is needed. The TBX1 gene was
sequenced in 360 consecutive 22q11DS patients. Rare and common variations were
identified. We did not detect enrichment in rare SNP (single nucleotide
polymorphism) number in those with or without a congenital heart defect. One
exception was that there was increased number of very rare SNPs between those
with normal heart anatomy compared to those with right-sided aortic arch or
persistent truncus arteriosus, suggesting potentially protective roles in the
SNPs for these phenotype-enrichment groups. Nine common SNPs (minor allele
frequency, MAF > 0.05) were chosen and used to genotype the entire cohort of
1,022 22q11DS subjects. We did not find a correlation between common SNPs or
haplotypes and cardiovascular phenotype. This work demonstrates that common DNA
variations in TBX1 do not explain variable cardiovascular expression in 22q11DS
patients, implicating existence of modifiers in other genes on 22q11.2 or
elsewhere in the genome.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3196824
PMID: 21796729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2011 Sep;75(9):1167-72. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2011.06.013. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Cleft palate, retrognathia and congenital heart disease in velo-cardio-facial
syndrome: a phenotype correlation study.

Friedman MA(1), Miletta N, Roe C, Wang D, Morrow BE, Kates WR, Higgins AM,
Shprintzen RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Velo-Cardio-Facial Syndrome International Center, Department of Otolaryngology
and Communication Sciences, SUNY Upstate Medical University, 725 Irving Avenue,
Suite 406, Syracuse, NY 13210, United States.

OBJECTIVE: Velo-cardio-facial syndrome (VCFS) is caused by a microdeletion of
approximately 40 genes from one copy of chromosome 22. Expression of the syndrome
is a variable combination of over 190 phenotypic characteristics. As of yet,
little is known about how these phenotypes correlate with one another or whether 
there are predictable patterns of expression. Two of the most common phenotypic
categories, congenital heart disease and cleft palate, have been proposed to have
a common genetic relationship to the deleted T-box 1 gene (TBX1). The purpose of 
this study is to determine if congenital heart disease and cleft palate are
correlated in a large cohort of human subjects with VCFS.
METHODS: This study is a retrospective chart review including 316 Caucasian
non-Hispanic subjects with FISH or CGH microarray confirmed chromosome 22q11.2
deletions. All subjects were evaluated by the interdisciplinary team at the
Velo-Cardio-Facial Syndrome International Center at Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, NY. Each combination of congenital heart disease, cleft palates, and
retrognathia was analyzed by Chi square or Fisher exact test.
RESULTS: For all categories of congenital heart disease and cleft palate or
retrognathia no significant associations were found, with the exception of
submucous cleft palate and retrognathia (nominal p=0.0325) and occult submucous
cleft palate and retrognathia (nominal p=0.000013).
CONCLUSIONS: Congenital heart disease and cleft palate do not appear to be
correlated in human subjects with VCFS despite earlier suggestions from animal
models. Possible explanations include modification of the effect of TBX1 by genes
outside of the 22q11.2 region that may further influence the formation of the
palate or heart, or the presence of epigenetic factors that may effect genes
within the deleted region, modifying genes elsewhere, or polymorphisms on the
normal copy of chromosome 22. Lastly, it is possible that TBX1 plays a role in
palate formation in some species, but not in humans. In VCFS, retrognathia is
caused by an obtuse angulation of the skull base. It is unknown if the
correlation between retrognathia and cleft palate in VCFS indicates a
developmental sequence related to skull morphology, or direct gene effects of
both anomalies. Much work remains to be done to fully understand the complex
relationships between phenotypic characteristics in VCFS.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3162093
PMID: 21763005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Proc Biol Sci. 2012 Jan 22;279(1727):237-46. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2011.0599. Epub
2011 Jun 15.

A stem-deuterostome origin of the vertebrate pharyngeal transcriptional network.

Gillis JA(1), Fritzenwanker JH, Lowe CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University of Chicago, 1027 East
57th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. jag93@cam.ac.uk

Hemichordate worms possess ciliated gills on their trunk, and the homology of
these structures with the pharyngeal gill slits of chordates has long been a
topic of debate in the fields of evolutionary biology and comparative anatomy.
Here, we show conservation of transcription factor expression between the
developing pharyngeal gill pores of the hemichordate Saccoglossus kowalevskii and
the pharyngeal gill slit precursors (i.e. pharyngeal endodermal outpockets) of
vertebrates. Transcription factors that are expressed in the pharyngeal endoderm,
ectoderm and mesenchyme of vertebrates are expressed exclusively in the
pharyngeal endoderm of S. kowalevskii. The pharyngeal arches and tongue bars of
S. kowalevskii lack Tbx1-expressing mesoderm, and are supported solely by an
acellular collagenous endoskeleton and by compartments of the trunk coelom. Our
findings suggest that hemichordate and vertebrate gills are homologous as simple 
endodermal outpockets from the foregut, and that much vertebrate pharyngeal
complexity arose coincident with the incorporation of cranial paraxial mesoderm
and neural crest-derived mesenchyme within pharyngeal arches along the chordate
and vertebrate stems, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3223668
PMID: 21676974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dev Biol. 2011 Aug 15;356(2):383-97. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.05.671. Epub 2011 
Jun 12.

Redundant and dosage sensitive requirements for Fgf3 and Fgf10 in cardiovascular 
development.

Urness LD(1), Bleyl SB, Wright TJ, Moon AM, Mansour SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112,
USA.

Heart development requires contributions from, and coordinated signaling
interactions between, several cell populations, including splanchnic and
pharyngeal mesoderm, postotic neural crest and the proepicardium. Here we report 
that Fgf3 and Fgf10, which are expressed dynamically in and near these
cardiovascular progenitors, have redundant and dosage sensitive requirements in
multiple aspects of early murine cardiovascular development. Embryos with
Fgf3(-/+);Fgf10(-/-), Fgf3(-/-);Fgf10(-/+) and Fgf3(-/-);Fgf10(-/-) genotypes
formed an allelic series of increasing severity with respect to embryonic
survival, with double mutants dead by E11.5. Morphologic analysis of embryos with
three mutant alleles at E11.5-E13.5 and double mutants at E9.5-E11.0 revealed
multiple cardiovascular defects affecting the outflow tract, ventricular septum, 
atrioventricular cushions, ventricular myocardium, dorsal mesenchymal protrusion,
pulmonary arteries, epicardium and fourth pharyngeal arch artery. Assessment of
molecular markers in E8.0-E10.5 double mutants revealed abnormalities in each
progenitor population, and suggests that Fgf3 and Fgf10 are not required for
specification of cardiovascular progenitors, but rather for their normal
developmental coordination. These results imply that coding or regulatory
mutations in FGF3 or FGF10 could contribute to human congenital heart defects.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3143275
PMID: 21664901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Development. 2011 Jul;138(13):2807-21. doi: 10.1242/dev.062737.

Dynamic control of head mesoderm patterning.

Bothe I(1), Tenin G, Oseni A, Dietrich S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, King's College London, London SE1
1UL, UK.

The embryonic head mesoderm gives rise to cranial muscle and contributes to the
skull and heart. Prior to differentiation, the tissue is regionalised by the
means of molecular markers. We show that this pattern is established in three
discrete phases, all depending on extrinsic cues. Assaying for direct and
first-wave indirect responses, we found that the process is controlled by dynamic
combinatorial as well as antagonistic action of retinoic acid (RA), Bmp and Fgf
signalling. In phase 1, the initial anteroposterior (a-p) subdivision of the head
mesoderm is laid down in response to falling RA levels and activation of Fgf
signalling. In phase 2, Bmp and Fgf signalling reinforce the a-p boundary and
refine anterior marker gene expression. In phase 3, spreading Fgf signalling
drives the a-p expansion of MyoR and Tbx1 expression along the pharynx, with RA
limiting the expansion of MyoR. This establishes the mature head mesoderm pattern
with markers distinguishing between the prospective extra-ocular and jaw skeletal
muscles, the branchiomeric muscles and the cells for the outflow tract of the
heart.

PMID: 21652653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2011 Jun;91(6):477-84. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20803. Epub 2011 May 17.

Tbx1, subpulmonary myocardium and conotruncal congenital heart defects.

Parisot P(1), Mesbah K, Théveniau-Ruissy M, Kelly RG.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Institute of Marseilles-Luminy, UMR 6216/CNRS,
Université de la Méditerranée, Marseilles, France.

Conotruncal congenital heart defects, including defects in septation and
alignment of the ventricular outlets, account for approximately a third of all
congenital heart defects. Failure of the left ventricle to obtain an independent 
outlet results in incomplete separation of systemic and pulmonary circulation at 
birth. The embryonic outflow tract, a transient cylinder of myocardium connecting
the embryonic ventricles to the aortic sac, plays a critical role in this process
during normal development. The outflow tract (OFT) is derived from a population
of cardiac progenitor cells called the second heart field that contributes to the
arterial pole of the heart tube during cardiac looping. During septation, the OFT
is remodeled to form the base of the ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk. Tbx1,
the major candidate gene for DiGeorge syndrome, is a critical transcriptional
regulator of second heart field development. DiGeorge syndrome patients are
haploinsufficient for Tbx1 and present a spectrum of conotruncal anomalies
including tetralogy of Fallot, pulmonary atresia, and common arterial trunk. In
this review, we focus on the role of Tbx1 in the regulation of second heart field
deployment and, in particular, in the development of a specific population of
myocardial cells at the base of the pulmonary trunk. Recent data characterizing
additional properties and regulators of development of this region of the heart, 
including the retinoic acid, hedgehog, and semaphorin signaling pathways, are
discussed. These findings identify future subpulmonary myocardium as the
clinically relevant component of the second heart field and provide new
mechanistic insight into a spectrum of common conotruncal congenital heart
defects.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21591244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Development. 2011 Jun;138(11):2389-98. doi: 10.1242/dev.061473.

Zebrafish cardiac development requires a conserved secondary heart field.

Hami D(1), Grimes AC, Tsai HJ, Kirby ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

The secondary heart field is a conserved developmental domain in avian and
mammalian embryos that contributes myocardium and smooth muscle to the definitive
cardiac arterial pole. This field is part of the overall heart field and its
myocardial component has been fate mapped from the epiblast to the heart in both 
mammals and birds. In this study we show that the population that gives rise to
the arterial pole of the zebrafish can be traced from the epiblast, is a discrete
part of the mesodermal heart field, and contributes myocardium after initial
heart tube formation, giving rise to both smooth muscle and myocardium. We also
show that Isl1, a transcription factor associated with undifferentiated cells in 
the secondary heart field in other species, is active in this field. Furthermore,
Bmp signaling promotes myocardial differentiation from the arterial pole
progenitor population, whereas inhibiting Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation leads to
reduced myocardial differentiation with subsequent increased smooth muscle
differentiation. Molecular pathways required for secondary heart field
development are conserved in teleosts, as we demonstrate that the transcription
factor Tbx1 and the Sonic hedgehog pathway are necessary for normal development
of the zebrafish arterial pole.

PMCID: PMC3091499
PMID: 21558385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Jul;96(7):E1115-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-0057. Epub 
2011 Apr 27.

Increased risk for non-autoimmune hypothyroidism in young patients with
congenital heart defects.

Passeri E(1), Frigerio M, De Filippis T, Valaperta R, Capelli P, Costa E,
Fugazzola L, Marelli F, Porazzi P, Arcidiacono C, Carminati M, Ambrosi B, Persani
L, Corbetta S.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Diabetology Unit, Dipartimento di Scienze
Medico-Chirurgiche, Università degli Studi di Milano, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura
a Carattere Scientifico Policlinico San Donato, 20097 San Donato Milanese, Italy.
luca.persani@unimi.it

CONTEXT: Newborns with congenital hypothyroidism (CH) have an increased risk for 
congenital heart defects (CHD) due to a common embryonic developmental program
between thyroid gland and heart and great vessels.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to investigate the prevalence and origin of thyroid 
disorders in young patients with CHD.
DESIGN AND SETTING: We conducted a prospective observational study between
January 2007 and January 2009 in academic Pediatric Cardiosurgery and
Endocrinology.
PATIENTS: Patients included 324 children (164 males, 160 females, aged 0.2-15.4
yrs) with CHD.
INTERVENTION: Subjects underwent hormonal and genetic screening.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Serum TSH and thyroid hormone levels were assessed.
RESULTS: Two CHD patients were diagnosed with CH at the neonatal screening
(1:162). Mild hypothyroidism (serum TSH > 4.0 µU/ml) was diagnosed and confirmed 
6 months later [TSH = 5.4 ± 1.5 µU/ml; free T(4) = 1.3 ± 0.2 ng/dl (normal values
0.8-1.9)] in 37 children (11.5%) who were negative at neonatal screening.
Hypothyroidism was not related to type of CHD, whereas TSH levels positively
correlated with serum N-terminal pro-type B natriuretic peptide levels.
Biochemical and ultrasound findings consistent with thyroid autoimmunity were
present in three of 37 hypothyroid children (8.1%). One patient had hemiagenesis 
(2.7%). Variations in candidate genes were screened in CHD patients. NKX2.5
coding sequence was normal in all samples. A 3-Mb microdeletion in 22q11.2 was
detected in three patients (8.3%), whereas only known polymorphisms were
identified in TBX1 coding sequence.
CONCLUSIONS: CHD patients have an increased risk for both CH (10-fold higher) and
acquired mild hypothyroidism (3-fold higher). Unrecognized mild hypothyroidism
may negatively affect the outcome of CHD children, suggesting that thyroid
function should be repeatedly checked. Thyroid autoimmunity and 22q11.2
microdeletions account for small percentages of these cases, and still unknown
mechanisms underline such a strong association.

PMID: 21525159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Jul 15;91(2):212-22. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr112. Epub 2011 Apr 
14.

Mechanisms of T-box gene function in the developing heart.

Greulich F(1), Rudat C, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, OE5250, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

The multi-chambered mammalian heart arises from a simple tube by polar
elongation, myocardial differentiation and morphogenesis. Members of the large
family of T-box (Tbx) transcription factors have been identified as crucial
players that act in distinct subprogrammes during cardiac regionalization. Tbx1
and Tbx18 ensure elongation of the cardiac tube at the anterior and posterior
pole, respectively. Tbx1 acts in the pharyngeal mesoderm to maintain
proliferation of mesenchymal precursor cells for formation of a myocardialized
and septated outflow tract. Tbx18 is expressed in the sinus venosus region and is
required for myocardialization of the caval veins and the sinoatrial node. Tbx5
and Tbx20 function in the early heart tube and independently activate the chamber
myocardial gene programme, whereas Tbx2 and Tbx3 locally repress this programme
to favour valvuloseptal and conduction system development. Here, we summarize
that these T-box factors act in different molecular circuits and control target
gene expression using diverse molecular strategies including binding to distinct 
protein interaction partners.

PMID: 21498422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Carcinog. 2011 Dec;50(12):981-91. doi: 10.1002/mc.20768. Epub 2011 Mar 22.

A novel role for the T-box transcription factor Tbx1 as a negative regulator of
tumor cell growth in mice.

Trempus CS(1), Wei SJ, Humble MM, Dang H, Bortner CD, Sifre MI, Kissling GE,
Sunman JA, Akiyama SK, Roberts JD, Tucker CJ, Chun KS, Tennant RW, Langenbach R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology and Pharmacology, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

The T-box transcription factor, Tbx1, an important regulatory gene in
development, is highly expressed in hair follicle (HF) stem cells in adult mice. 
Because mouse models of skin carcinogenesis have demonstrated that HF stem cells 
are a carcinogen target population and contribute significantly to tumor
development, we investigated whether Tbx1 plays a role in skin carcinogenesis. We
first assessed Tbx1 expression levels in mouse skin tumors, and found
down-regulation in all tumors examined. To study the effect of Tbx1 expression on
growth and tumorigenic potential of carcinoma cells, we transfected mouse Tbx1
cDNA into a mouse spindle cell carcinoma cell line that did not express
endogenous Tbx1. Following transfection, two cell lines expressing different
levels of the Tbx1/V5 fusion protein were selected for further study. Intradermal
injection of the cell lines into mice revealed that Tbx1 expression significantly
suppressed tumor growth, albeit with no change in tumor morphology. In culture,
ectopic Tbx1 expression resulted in decreased cell growth and reduced development
into multilayered colonies, compared to control cells. Tbx1-transfectants
exhibited a reduced proliferative rate compared to control cells, with fewer
cells in S and G2/M phases. The Tbx1 transfectants developed significantly fewer 
colonies in soft agar, demonstrating loss of anchorage-independent growth. Taken 
together, our data show that ectopic expression of Tbx1 restored contact
inhibition to the skin tumor cells, suggesting that this developmentally
important transcription factor may have a novel dual role as a negative regulator
of tumor growth. © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3125489
PMID: 21438027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Stem Cell Rev. 2011 Nov;7(4):958-68. doi: 10.1007/s12015-011-9249-3.

Variation in mesodermal and hematopoietic potential of adult skin-derived induced
pluripotent stem cell lines in mice.

Inoue T(1), Kulkeaw K, Okayama S, Tani K, Sugiyama D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoietic Stem Cells, SSP Stem Cell Unit, Kyushu University 
Faculty of Medical Sciences, Station for Collaborative Research 1 4F, 3-1-1
Maidashi, Higashi-Ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are a promising tool for regenerative
medicine. Use of iPSC lines for future hematotherapy will require examination of 
their hematopoietic potential. Adult skin fibroblast somatic cells constitute a
source of iPSCs that can be accessed clinically without ethical issues. Here, we 
used different methods to compare mesodermal and hematopoietic potential by
embryoid body formation of five iPSC lines established from adult mouse tail-tip 
fibroblasts (TTFs). We observed variation in proliferation and in expression of
genes (Brachyury, Tbx1, Gata1, Klf1, Csf1r) and proteins (Flk1, Ter119 and CD45) 
among TTF-derived lines. 256H18 iPSCs showed highest proliferation and most
efficient differentiation into mesodermal and hematopoietic cells, while
expression levels of the pluripotency genes Oct3/4, Sox2, Klf4 and Nanog were
lowest among lines analyzed. By contrast, the 212B2 line, transduced with c-Myc, 
showed lowest proliferation and differentiation potential, although expression
levels of Oct3/4, Sox2 and Klf4 were highest. Overall, we find that mesodermal
and hematopoietic potential varies among iPSCs from an identical tissue source
and that c-Myc expression likely underlies these differences.

PMID: 21424235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Clin Invest. 2011 Apr;121(4):1585-95. doi: 10.1172/JCI44630.

A Tbx1-Six1/Eya1-Fgf8 genetic pathway controls mammalian cardiovascular and
craniofacial morphogenesis.

Guo C(1), Sun Y, Zhou B, Adam RM, Li X, Pu WT, Morrow BE, Moon A, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Children's Hospital Boston, and Department of Surgery
and Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2011 May 2;121(5):2060.

Shared molecular programs govern the formation of heart and head during mammalian
embryogenesis. Development of both structures is disrupted in human chromosomal
microdeletion of 22q11.2 (del22q11), which causes DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) and
velo-cardio-facial syndrome (VCFS). Here, we have identified a genetic pathway
involving the Six1/Eya1 transcription complex that regulates cardiovascular and
craniofacial development. We demonstrate that murine mutation of both Six1 and
Eya1 recapitulated most features of human del22q11 syndromes, including
craniofacial, cardiac outflow tract, and aortic arch malformations. The mutant
phenotypes were attributable in part to a reduction of fibroblast growth factor 8
(Fgf8), which was shown to be a direct downstream effector of Six1 and Eya1.
Furthermore, we showed that Six1 and Eya1 genetically interacted with Fgf8 and
the critical del22q11 gene T-box transcription factor 1 (Tbx1) in mice. Together,
these findings reveal a Tbx1-Six1/Eya1-Fgf8 genetic pathway that is crucial for
mammalian cardiocraniofacial morphogenesis and provide insights into the
pathogenesis of human del22q11 syndromes.

PMCID: PMC3069777
PMID: 21364285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Feb;46(1):R33-42.

Morphogenetics of early thyroid development.

Fagman H(1), Nilsson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy at 
the University of Gothenburg, Gula Stråket 8, 413 45 Göteborg, Sweden.
henrik.fagman@gu.se

The thyroid develops from the foregut endoderm. Yet uncharacterized inductive
signals specify endoderm progenitors to a thyroid cell fate that assembles in the
pharyngeal floor from which the primordium buds and migrates to the final
position of the gland. The morphogenetic process is regulated by both
cell-autonomous (e.g. activated by NKX2-1, FOXE1, PAX8, and HHEX) and
mesoderm-derived (e.g. mediated by TBX1 and fibroblast growth factors) mechanisms
acting in concert to promote growth and survival of progenitor cells. The
developmental role of TSH is limited to thyroid differentiation set to work after
the gross anatomy of the gland is already sculptured. This review summarizes
recent advances on the molecular genetics of thyroid morphogenesis put into
context of endoderm developmental traits and highlights established and novel
mechanisms of thyroid dysgenesis of potential relevance to congenital
hypothyroidism in man.

PMID: 21322126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Reprod Dev. 2011 Mar;78(3):172-80. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21279. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

The duplicated rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) T-box transcription factors 1,
tbx1a and tbx1b, are up-regulated during testicular development.

Yano A(1), Nicol B, Guerin A, Guiguen Y.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UR1037 SCRIBE, IFR140, Ouest-Genopole, Rennes, France.

Tbx1 is a member of the T-box transcription factor gene family involved in
embryogenesis and organogenesis. Recently, within a pan-genomic screen using
rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) cDNA microarrays, we identified a tbx1
homolog with testicular over-expression during sex differentiation. Here, we
characterized two very similar rainbow trout tbx1 paralogs, tbx1a and tbx1b. In
adult tissues, tbx1a expression is restricted to the gonads, with high expression
in the testis, while tbx1b is more widely expressed in gonads, gills, brains,
muscle, and skin. During gonadal differentiation, both genes are differentially
expressed in favor of testis formation shortly after hatching. These genes are
expressed in somatic cells surrounding germ cells of the differentiating testis, 
while no or only weak expression was observed in the differentiating ovary. tbx1a
and tbx1b were also both down-regulated in the differentiating testis during
feminization with estrogens and up-regulated in the differentiating ovary during 
masculinization with an aromatase inhibitor. These results suggest that tbx1a and
tbx1b are probably involved in the regulation of testicular differentiation in
rainbow trout. Since Tbx1 is known to interact with the retinoic acid (RA)
signaling pathway, we also examined the effect of RA on the rainbow trout tbx1
expression pattern. Expression of tbx1a and tbx1b was down-regulated in
RA-treated male gonads, suggesting that tbx1 interacts with the RA signaling
pathway and thus could be involved in the control of rainbow trout gonadal
differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21308851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Dev Biol. 2011 Apr 1;352(1):164-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.032. Epub 2011
Feb 3.

Evolutionary implications of morphogenesis and molecular patterning of the blind 
gut in the planarian Schmidtea polychroa.

Martín-Durán JM(1), Romero R.

Author information: 
(1)Universitat de Barcelona, Departament de Genètica, Avda. Diagonal 645, E-08028
Barcelona, Spain. chemamartin@ub.edu

The formation of a through-gut was a key innovation in the evolution of
metazoans. There is still controversy regarding the origin of the anus and how it
may have been either gained or lost during evolution in different bilaterian
taxa. Thus, the study of groups with a blind gut is of great importance for
understanding the evolution of this organ system. Here, we describe the
morphogenesis and molecular patterning of the blind gut in the sexual triclad
Schmidtea polychroa. We identify and analyze the expression of goosecoid,
commonly associated with the foregut, and the GATA, ParaHox and T-box genes,
members of which commonly are associated with gut regionalization. We show that
GATA456a is expressed in the blind gut of triclads, while GATA456b is localized
in dorsal parenchymal cells. Goosecoid is expressed in the central nervous
system, and the unique ParaHox gene identified, Xlox, is detected in association 
with the nervous system. We have not isolated any brachyury gene in the T-box
complement of S. polychroa, which consists of one tbx1/10, three tbx2/3 and one
tbx20. Furthermore, the absence of genes like brachyury and caudal is also
present in other groups of Platyhelminthes. This study suggests that GATA456, in 
combination with foxA, is a gut-specific patterning mechanism conserved in the
triclad S. polychroa, while the conserved gut-associated expression of foregut,
midgut and hindgut markers is absent. Based on these data and the deviations in
spiral cleavage found in more basal flatworms, we propose that the lack of an
anus is an innovation of Platyhelminthes. This may be associated with loss of gut
gene expression or even gene loss.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21295562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Mol Oncol. 2011 Feb;5(1):61-76. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2010.11.004. Epub 2010 Nov 
25.

Methylation profiling with a panel of cancer related genes: association with
estrogen receptor, TP53 mutation status and expression subtypes in sporadic
breast cancer.

Rønneberg JA(1), Fleischer T, Solvang HK, Nordgard SH, Edvardsen H, Potapenko I, 
Nebdal D, Daviaud C, Gut I, Bukholm I, Naume B, Børresen-Dale AL, Tost J,
Kristensen V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University
Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease that can be divided in subtypes based on
histology, gene expression profiles as well as differences in genomic
aberrations. Distinct global DNA methylation profiles have been reported in
normal breast epithelial cells as well as in breast tumors. However, the
influence of the tumor methylome on the previously described subgroups of breast 
cancer is not fully understood. Here we report the DNA methylation profiles of 80
breast tumors using a panel of 807 cancer related genes interrogating 1505 CpG
sites. We identified three major clusters based on the methylation profiles; one 
consisting of mainly tumors of myoepithelial origin and two other clusters with
tumors of predominantly luminal epithelial origin. The clusters were different
with respect to estrogen receptor status, TP53 status, ErbB2 status and grade.
The most significantly differentially methylated genes including HDAC1, TFF1,
OGG1, BMP3, FZD9 and HOXA11 were confirmed by pyrosequencing. Gene Ontology
analysis revealed enrichment for genes involved in developmental processes
including homeobox domain genes (HOXA9, HOXA11, PAX6, MYBL2, ISL1 and IPF1) and
(ETS1, HDAC1, CREBBP, GAS7, SPI1 and TBX1). Extensive correlation to mRNA
expression was observed. Pathway analyses identified a significant association
with canonical (curated) pathways such as hepatic fibrosis including genes like
EGF, NGFR and TNF, dendritic cell maturation and the NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway. Our
results show that breast tumor expression subtypes harbor major epigenetic
differences and tumors with similar gene expression profiles might belong to
epigenetically different subtypes. Some of the transcription factors identified, 
with key roles in differentiation and development might play a role in inducing
and maintaining the different phenotypes.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21212030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Development. 2011 Feb;138(3):397-408. doi: 10.1242/dev.056093.

Her9 represses neurogenic fate downstream of Tbx1 and retinoic acid signaling in 
the inner ear.

Radosevic M(1), Robert-Moreno A, Coolen M, Bally-Cuif L, Alsina B.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Laboratory, Dept. Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra-Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, Dr. Aiguader 88,
Barcelona, Spain.

Proper spatial control of neurogenesis in the inner ear ensures the precise
innervation of mechanotransducing cells and the propagation of auditory and
equilibrium stimuli to the brain. Members of the Hairy and enhancer of split
(Hes) gene family regulate neurogenesis by inhibiting neuronal differentiation
and maintaining neural stem cell pools in non-neurogenic zones. Remarkably, their
role in the spatial control of neurogenesis in the ear is unknown. In this study,
we identify her9, a zebrafish ortholog of Hes1, as a key gene in regulating otic 
neurogenesis through the definition of the posterolateral non-neurogenic field.
First, her9 emerges as a novel otic patterning gene that represses proneural
function and regulates the extent of the neurogenic domain. Second, we place Her9
downstream of Tbx1, linking these two families of transcription factors for the
first time in the inner ear and suggesting that the reported role of Tbx1 in
repressing neurogenesis is in part mediated by the bHLH transcriptional repressor
Her9. Third, we have identified retinoic acid (RA) signaling as the upstream
patterning signal of otic posterolateral genes such as tbx1 and her9. Finally, we
show that at the level of the cranial otic field, opposing RA and Hedgehog
signaling position the boundary between the neurogenic and non-neurogenic
compartments. These findings permit modeling of the complex genetic cascade that 
underlies neural patterning of the otic vesicle.

PMID: 21205785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Development. 2011 Jan;138(2):339-48. doi: 10.1242/dev.054056.

Ripply3, a Tbx1 repressor, is required for development of the pharyngeal
apparatus and its derivatives in mice.

Okubo T(1), Kawamura A, Takahashi J, Yagi H, Morishima M, Matsuoka R, Takada S.

Author information: 
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institutes of Natural
Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan.

The pharyngeal apparatus is a transient structure that gives rise to the thymus
and the parathyroid glands and also contributes to the development of arteries
and the cardiac outflow tract. A typical developmental disorder of the pharyngeal
apparatus is the 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS), for which Tbx1 is
responsible. Here, we show that Ripply3 can modulate Tbx1 activity and plays a
role in the development of the pharyngeal apparatus. Ripply3 expression is
observed in the pharyngeal ectoderm and endoderm and overlaps with strong
expression of Tbx1 in the caudal pharyngeal endoderm. Ripply3 suppresses
transcriptional activation by Tbx1 in luciferase assays in vitro.
Ripply3-deficient mice exhibit abnormal development of pharyngeal derivatives,
including ectopic formation of the thymus and the parathyroid gland, as well as
cardiovascular malformation. Corresponding with these defects, Ripply3-deficient 
embryos show hypotrophy of the caudal pharyngeal apparatus. Ripply3 represses
Tbx1-induced expression of Pax9 in luciferase assays in vitro, and
Ripply3-deficient embryos exhibit upregulated Pax9 expression. Together, our
results show that Ripply3 plays a role in pharyngeal development, probably by
regulating Tbx1 activity.

PMID: 21177346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jan 4;108(1):161-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1010547108. 
Epub 2010 Dec 20.

Transient retinoic acid signaling confers anterior-posterior polarity to the
inner ear.

Bok J(1), Raft S, Kong KA, Koo SK, Dräger UC, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, BK21 Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, South Korea. bokj@yuhs.ac

Vertebrate hearing and balance are based in complex asymmetries of inner ear
structure. Here, we identify retinoic acid (RA) as an extrinsic signal that acts 
directly on the ear rudiment to affect its compartmentalization along the
anterior-posterior axis. A rostrocaudal wave of RA activity, generated by tissues
surrounding the nascent ear, induces distinct responses from anterior and
posterior halves of the inner ear rudiment. Prolonged response to RA by posterior
otic tissue correlates with Tbx1 transcription and formation of mostly nonsensory
inner ear structures. By contrast, anterior otic tissue displays only a brief
response to RA and forms neuronal elements and most sensory structures of the
inner ear.

PMCID: PMC3017143
PMID: 21173260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Dev Cell. 2010 Dec 14;19(6):903-12. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.10.022.

Bmp signaling regulates myocardial differentiation from cardiac progenitors
through a MicroRNA-mediated mechanism.

Wang J(1), Greene SB, Bonilla-Claudio M, Tao Y, Zhang J, Bai Y, Huang Z, Black
BL, Wang F, Martin JF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M System Health Science
Center, Houston, 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2010 Dec 14;19(6):787-8.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, noncoding RNAs that regulate gene expression
posttranscriptionally. We investigated the hypothesis that bone morphogenetic
protein (Bmp) signaling regulates miRNAs in cardiac progenitor cells. Bmp2 and
Bmp4 regulate OFT myocardial differentiation via regulation of the miRNA-17-92
cluster. In Bmp mutant embryos, myocardial differentiation was delayed, and
multiple miRNAs encoded by miRNA-17-92 were reduced. We uncovered functional
miRNA-17-92 seed sequences within the 3' UTR of cardiac progenitor genes such as 
Isl1 and Tbx1. In both Bmp and miRNA-17-92 mutant embryos, Isl1 and Tbx1
expression failed to be correctly downregulated. Transfection experiments
indicated that miRNA-17 and miRNA-20a directly repressed Isl1 and Tbx1. Genetic
interaction studies uncovered a synergistic interaction between miRNA-17-92
cluster and Bmp4, providing direct in vivo evidence for the Bmp-miRNA-17-92
regulatory pathway. Our findings indicate that Bmp signaling directly regulates a
miRNA-mediated effector mechanism that downregulates cardiac progenitor genes and
enhances myocardial differentiation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3010389
PMID: 21145505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Cells Tissues Organs. 2011;193(6):393-403. doi: 10.1159/000321170. Epub 2010 Dec 
1.

Inactivation of Bmp4 from the Tbx1 expression domain causes abnormal pharyngeal
arch artery and cardiac outflow tract remodeling.

Nie X(1), Brown CB, Wang Q, Jiao K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research, Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Maldevelopment of outflow tract and aortic arch arteries is among the most common
forms of human congenital heart diseases. Both Bmp4 and Tbx1 are known to play
critical roles during cardiovascular development. Expression of these two genes
partially overlaps in pharyngeal arch areas in mouse embryos. In this study, we
applied a conditional gene inactivation approach to test the hypothesis that Bmp4
expressed from the Tbx1 expression domain plays a critical role for normal
development of outflow tract and pharyngeal arch arteries. We showed that
inactivation of Bmp4 from Tbx1-expressing cells leads to the spectrum of
deformities resembling the cardiovascular defects observed in human DiGeorge
syndrome patients. Inactivation of Bmp4 from the Tbx1 expression domain did not
cause patterning defects, but affected remodeling of outflow tract and pharyngeal
arch arteries. Our further examination revealed that Bmp4 is required for normal 
recruitment/differentiation of smooth muscle cells surrounding the PAA4 and
survival of outflow tract cushion mesenchymal cells.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3124451
PMID: 21123999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mamm Genome. 2010 Dec;21(11-12):556-64. doi: 10.1007/s00335-010-9304-4. Epub 2010
Nov 25.

Manipulation of endogenous regulatory elements and transgenic analyses of the
Tbx1 gene.

Zhang Z(1), Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technologies, Texas A&M University, Houston, TX
77843, USA.

Pharyngeal morphogenesis is a complex process involving precise coordination of
multiple cell types and transcription networks. TBX1 heterozygous mutation causes
DiGeorge Syndrome, a typical disorder of pharyngeal development. In mice, loss of
function of Tbx1 causes severe disruption of pharyngeal development. Therefore,
to understand the regulatory circuits controlling the pharyngeal apparatus, it is
important to understand how Tbx1 is regulated. Transgenic experiments had shown
that a Forkhead (Fox) transcription factor binding site is required for the
activity of a Tbx1 enhancer driving expression in many of the endogenous domains.
In this study we carried out manipulation of regulatory elements of the
endogenous gene in mice and extensive transgenic analysis of the Tbx1 locus.
Results indicated that the Fox binding site is dispensable for Tbx1 gene
expression, but the enhancer within which it is located regulates, to a limited
extent, mesodermal expression of the gene. Transgenic analysis of conserved
noncoding regions within 54 kb of the Tbx1 locus identified a novel pharyngeal
endoderm-specific enhancer and an intronic suppressor element. Overall, our data 
suggest a regulatory architecture of the Tbx1 gene made of tissue-specific
modules and redundant elements that individually contribute, to a modest extent, 
to the expression of the gene.

PMID: 21107579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2011 Feb;23(2):125-30. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2982.2010.01615.x. Epub 2010 Oct 11.

Absence of the vagus nerve in the stomach of Tbx1-/- mutant mice.

Calmont A(1), Thapar N, Scambler PJ, Burns AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Tbx1 is a member of the Tbox family of binding domain transcription
factors. TBX1 maps within the region of chromosome 22q11 deleted in humans with
DiGeorge syndrome (DGS), a common genetic disorder characterized by numerous
physical manifestations including craniofacial and cardiac anomalies. Mice with
homozygous null mutations in Tbx1 phenocopy this disorder and have defects
including abnormal cranial ganglia formation and cardiac neural crest cell
migration. These defects prompted us to investigate whether extrinsic vagus nerve
or intrinsic enteric nervous system abnormalities are prevalent in the
gastrointestinal tract of Tbx1 mutant mice.
METHODS: We used in situ hybridization for Ret, and immunohistochemical staining 
for neurofilament, HuC/D and ßIII-tubulin to study cranial ganglia, vagus nerve, 
and enteric nervous system development in Tbx1 mutant and control mice.
KEY RESULTS: In Tbx1(-/-) embryos, cranial ganglia of the glossopharyngeal (IXth)
and vagus (Xth) nerves were malformed and abnormally fused. In the
gastrointestinal tract, the vagus nerves adjacent to the esophagus were severely 
hypoplastic and they did not extend beyond the gastro-esophageal junction nor
project branches within the stomach wall, as was observed in Tbx1(+/+) mice.
CONCLUSIONS & INFERENCES: Although cranial ganglia morphology appeared normal in 
Tbx1(+/-) mice, these animals had a spectrum of stomach vagus innervation defects
ranging from mild to severe. In all Tbx1 genotypes, the intrinsic enteric nervous
system developed normally. The deficit in vagal innervation of the stomach in
mice mutant for a gene implicated in DGS raises the possibility that similar
defects may underlie a number of as yet unidentified/unreported congenital
disorders affecting gastrointestinal function.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 20939858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Heart. 2010 Oct;96(20):1651-5. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2010.200121.

Systematic survey of variants in TBX1 in non-syndromic tetralogy of Fallot
identifies a novel 57 base pair deletion that reduces transcriptional activity
but finds no evidence for association with common variants.

Griffin HR(1), Töpf A, Glen E, Zweier C, Stuart AG, Parsons J, Peart I, Deanfield
J, O'Sullivan J, Rauch A, Scambler P, Burn J, Cordell HJ, Keavney B, Goodship JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, Central Parkway, Newcastle 
upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK.

BACKGROUND: Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is common in individuals with hemizygous
deletions of chromosome 22q11.2 that remove the cardiac transcription factor
TBX1.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the contribution of common and rare TBX1 genetic variants to
TOF.
DESIGN: Rare TBX1 variants were sought by resequencing coding exons and
splice-site boundaries. Common TBX1 variants were investigated by genotyping 20
haplotype-tagging SNPs capturing all the common variations present at the locus. 
Association analysis was performed using the program UNPHASED.
PATIENTS: TBX1 exons were sequenced in 93 patients with non-syndromic TOF. Single
nucleotide polymorphism analysis was performed in 356 patients with TOF, their
parents and healthy controls.
RESULTS: Three novel variants not present in 1000 chromosomes from healthy
ethnically matched controls were identified. One of these variants, an in-frame
57 base-pair deletion in the third exon which removed 19 evolutionarily conserved
residues, decreased transcriptional activity by 40% in a dual luciferase assay
(p=0.008). Protein expression studies demonstrated that this mutation affected
TBX1 protein stability. After correction for multiple comparisons, no significant
associations between common genetic variants and TOF susceptibility were found.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that rare TBX1 variants with functional
consequences are present in a small proportion of non-syndromic TOF.

PMCID: PMC2976076
PMID: 20937753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Dev Biol. 2010 Nov 15;347(2):289-300. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.08.031. Epub 2010
Sep 15.

Tbx1 regulates progenitor cell proliferation in the dental epithelium by
modulating Pitx2 activation of p21.

Cao H(1), Florez S, Amen M, Huynh T, Skobe Z, Baldini A, Amendt BA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Tbx1(-/-) mice present with phenotypic effects observed in DiGeorge syndrome
patients however, the molecular mechanisms of Tbx1 regulating craniofacial and
tooth development are unclear. Analyses of the Tbx1 null mice reveal incisor
microdontia, small cervical loops and BrdU labeling reveals a defect in
epithelial cell proliferation. Furthermore, Tbx1 null mice molars are lacking
normal cusp morphology. Interestingly, p21 (associated with cell cycle arrest) is
up regulated in the dental epithelium of Tbx1(-/-) embryos. These data suggest
that Tbx1 inhibits p21 expression to allow for cell proliferation in the dental
epithelial cervical loop, however Tbx1 does not directly regulate p21 expression.
A new molecular mechanism has been identified where Tbx1 inhibits Pitx2
transcriptional activity and decreases the expression of Pitx2 target genes, p21,
Lef-1 and Pitx2c. p21 protein is increased in PITX2C transgenic mouse embryo
fibroblasts (MEF) and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate endogenous
Pitx2 binding to the p21 promoter. Tbx1 attenuates PITX2 activation of endogenous
p21 expression and Tbx1 null MEFs reveal increased Pitx2a and activation of
Pitx2c isoform expression. Tbx1 physically interacts with the PITX2 C-terminus
and represses PITX2 transcriptional activation of the p21, LEF-1, and Pitx2c
promoters. Tbx1(-/+)/Pitx2(-/+) double heterozygous mice present with an extra
premolar-like tooth revealing a genetic interaction between these factors. The
ability of Tbx1 to repress PITX2 activation of p21 may promote cell
proliferation. In addition, PITX2 regulation of p21 reveals a new role for PITX2 
in repressing cell proliferation. These data demonstrate new functional
mechanisms for Tbx1 in tooth morphogenesis and provide a molecular basis for
craniofacial defects in DiGeorge syndrome patients.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3334818
PMID: 20816801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010 Nov;49(5):836-40. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2010.08.023. Epub
2010 Aug 31.

Partial rescue of the Tbx1 mutant heart phenotype by Fgf8: genetic evidence of
impaired tissue response to Fgf8.

Vitelli F(1), Lania G, Huynh T, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technologies, Texas A&M University, Houston, TX, 
USA.

Tbx1 is the candidate gene of DiGeorge syndrome and is required in humans and
mice for the development of the cardiac outflow tract (OFT) and aortic arch
arteries. Loss of function mutants present with reduced cell proliferation and
premature differentiation of cardiac progenitor cells of the second heart field
(SHF). Tbx1 regulates Fgf8 expression hence the hypothesis that the proliferation
impairment may contribute to the heart phenotype of mutants. Here we show that
forced Fgf8 expression modifies and partially rescues the OFT septation defects
of Tbx1 mutants but only if there is some residual expression of Tbx1. This
genetic experiment suggests that Tbx1, directly or indirectly, affects tissue
response to Fgf8. Indeed, Tbx1(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts were unable to
respond to Fgf8 added to the culture media and showed defective response of
Erk1/2 and Rsk1. Our data suggest a coordinated pathway modulating Fgf8 ligand
expression and tissue response to it in the SHF.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2981862
PMID: 20807544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Development. 2010 Sep;137(18):3139-50. doi: 10.1242/dev.047894.

The ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling enzyme CHD7 regulates pro-neural gene
expression and neurogenesis in the inner ear.

Hurd EA(1), Poucher HK, Cheng K, Raphael Y, Martin DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109,
USA.

Inner ear neurogenesis is positively regulated by the pro-neural bHLH
transcription factors Ngn1 and NeuroD, but the factors that act upstream of this 
regulation are not well understood. Recent evidence in mouse and Drosophila
suggests that neural development depends on proper chromatin remodeling, both for
maintenance of neural stem cells and for proper neuronal differentiation. Here,
we show that CHD7, an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling enzyme mutated in human 
CHARGE syndrome, is necessary for proliferation of inner ear neuroblasts and
inner ear morphogenesis. Conditional deletion of Chd7 in the developing otocyst
using Foxg1-Cre resulted in cochlear hypoplasia and complete absence of the
semicircular canals and cristae. Conditional knockout and null otocysts also had 
reductions in vestibulo-cochlear ganglion size and neuron number in combination
with reduced expression of Ngn1, Otx2 and Fgf10, concurrent with expansion of the
neural fate suppressor Tbx1 and reduced cellular proliferation. Heterozygosity
for Chd7 mutations had no major effects on expression of otic patterning genes or
on cell survival, but resulted in decreased proliferation within the neurogenic
domain. These data indicate that epigenetic regulation of gene expression by CHD7
must be tightly coordinated for proper development of inner ear neuroblasts.

PMCID: PMC2926962
PMID: 20736290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Dev Biol. 2010 Oct 15;346(2):170-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.028. Epub 2010 
Aug 5.

Paraxial T-box genes, Tbx6 and Tbx1, are required for cranial chondrogenesis and 
myogenesis.

Tazumi S(1), Yabe S, Uchiyama H.

Author information: 
(1)International Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, Yokohama City University, 
22-2 Seto, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0027, Japan.

We previously reported that Tbx6, a T-box transcription factor, is required for
the differentiation of ventral body wall muscle and for segment formation and
somitic muscle differentiation. Here, we show that Tbx6 is also involved, at
later stages, in cartilage differentiation from the cranial neural crest and head
muscle development. In Tbx6 knockdown embryos, the cranial neural crest was shown
to be correctly induced at the border of the neural plate and migrated in a
slightly delayed manner, but finally reached positions in the pharyngeal arches
nearly similar to those in the normal embryos as revealed by in situ
hybridization and the neural crest-transplantation experiments. However, the
neural crest cells failed to maintain Sox9 expression. Tbx6 knockdown also
reduced the expression of Tbx1, another T-box gene expressed in more anterior
paraxial structures. Tbx1 knockdown caused phenotypes milder but similar to those
of Tbx6 morphants, including reduced formation of head muscles and cartilages,
and attenuated Sox9 expression. Furthermore, the phenotypes caused by Tbx6
knockdown were partially rescued by Tbx1 plasmid injection. These results suggest
that Tbx6 is involved in the cranial cartilage and head muscle development by
regulating anterior paraxial genes such as Tbx1 and Sox9.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20692252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Development. 2010 Sep;137(18):3025-35. doi: 10.1242/dev.049528. Epub 2010 Aug 4.

BMPs and FGFs target Notch signalling via jagged 2 to regulate tooth
morphogenesis and cytodifferentiation.

Mitsiadis TA(1), Graf D, Luder H, Gridley T, Bluteau G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oral Biology, ZZMK, Faculty of Medicine, University of Zurich,
8032 Zurich, Switzerland. thimios.mitsiadis@zzmk.uzh.ch

The Notch signalling pathway is an evolutionarily conserved intercellular
signalling mechanism that is essential for cell fate specification and proper
embryonic development. We have analysed the expression, regulation and function
of the jagged 2 (Jag2) gene, which encodes a ligand for the Notch family of
receptors, in developing mouse teeth. Jag2 is expressed in epithelial cells that 
give rise to the enamel-producing ameloblasts from the earliest stages of tooth
development. Tissue recombination experiments showed that its expression in
epithelium is regulated by mesenchyme-derived signals. In dental explants
cultured in vitro, the local application of fibroblast growth factors upregulated
Jag2 expression, whereas bone morphogenetic proteins provoked the opposite
effect. Mice homozygous for a deletion in the Notch-interaction domain of Jag2
presented a variety of severe dental abnormalities. In molars, the crown
morphology was misshapen, with additional cusps being formed. This was due to
alterations in the enamel knot, an epithelial signalling structure involved in
molar crown morphogenesis, in which Bmp4 expression and apoptosis were altered.
In incisors, cytodifferentiation and enamel matrix deposition were inhibited. The
expression of Tbx1 in ameloblast progenitors, which is a hallmark for ameloblast 
differentiation and enamel formation, was dramatically reduced in Jag2(-/-)
teeth. Together, these results demonstrate that Notch signalling mediated by Jag2
is indispensable for normal tooth development.

PMCID: PMC3114538
PMID: 20685737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Immunol. 2010 Sep 1;185(5):2895-902. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001294. Epub 2010
Jul 30.

Intralesional delivery of dendritic cells engineered to express T-bet promotes
protective type 1 immunity and the normalization of the tumor microenvironment.

Qu Y(1), Chen L, Pardee AD, Taylor JL, Wesa AK, Storkus WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

T-bet (Tbx21), a T-box transcription factor, has been previously identified as a 
master regulator of type 1 T cell polarization. We have also recently shown that 
the genetic engineering of human dendritic cells (DCs) to express human T-bet
cDNA yields type 1-polarizing APCs in vitro (1). In the present study, murine
CD11c(+) DCs were transduced with a recombinant adenovirus encoding full-length
murine T-bets (DC.mTbets) and analyzed for their immunomodulatory functions in
vitro and in vivo. Within the range of markers analyzed, DC.mTbets exhibited a
control DC phenotype and were indistinguishable from control DCs in their ability
to promote allogenic T cell proliferation in MLR in vitro. However, DC.mTbets
were superior to control DCs in promoting Th1 and Tc1 responses in vitro via a
mechanism requiring DC-T cell interaction or the close proximity of these two
cell types and that can only partially be explained by the action of
DC-elaborated IL-12p70. When injected into day 7 s.c. CMS4 sarcoma lesions
growing in syngenic BALB/c mice, DC.mTbets dramatically slowed tumor progression 
(versus control DCs) and extended overall survival via a mechanism dependent on
both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells and, to a lesser extent, asialoGM1(+) NK cells.
DC.mTbet-based therapy also promoted superior tumor-specific Tc1 responses in the
spleens and tumor-draining lymph nodes of treated animals, and within the tumor
microenvironment it inhibited the accumulation of CD11b(+)Gr1(+) myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells and normalized CD31(+) vascular structures. These findings
support the potential translational utility of DC.Tbets as a therapeutic modality
in the cancer setting.

PMCID: PMC3151673
PMID: 20675595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Science. 2010 Jul 30;329(5991):565-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1190181.

Early chordate origins of the vertebrate second heart field.

Stolfi A(1), Gainous TB, Young JJ, Mori A, Levine M, Christiaen L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, Division of Genetics, Genomics and
Development, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

The vertebrate heart is formed from diverse embryonic territories, including the 
first and second heart fields. The second heart field (SHF) gives rise to the
right ventricle and outflow tract, yet its evolutionary origins are unclear. We
found that heart progenitor cells of the simple chordate Ciona intestinalis also 
generate precursors of the atrial siphon muscles (ASMs). These precursors express
Islet and Tbx1/10, evocative of the splanchnic mesoderm that produces the lower
jaw muscles and SHF of vertebrates. Evidence is presented that the transcription 
factor COE is a critical determinant of ASM fate. We propose that the last common
ancestor of tunicates and vertebrates possessed multipotent cardiopharyngeal
muscle precursors, and that their reallocation might have contributed to the
emergence of the SHF.

PMID: 20671188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Physiol Genomics. 2010 Sep;42A(1):52-60. doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00073.2010.
Epub 2010 Jun 15.

Multiplexed quantitative real-time PCR to detect 22q11.2 deletion in patients
with congenital heart disease.

Tomita-Mitchell A(1), Mahnke DK, Larson JM, Ghanta S, Feng Y, Simpson PM,
Broeckel U, Duffy K, Tweddell JS, Grossman WJ, Routes JM, Mitchell ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA. amitchell@mcw.edu

22q11.2 Deletion syndrome (22q11.2 DS) [DiGeorge syndrome type 1 (DGS1)] occurs
in ~1:3,000 live births; 75% of children with DGS1 have severe congenital heart
disease requiring early intervention. The gold standard for detection of DGS1 is 
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with a probe at the TUPLE1 gene.
However, FISH is costly and is typically ordered in conjunction with a karyotype 
analysis that takes several days. Therefore, FISH is underutilized and the
diagnosis of 22q11.2 DS is frequently delayed, often resulting in profound
clinical consequences. Our goal was to determine whether multiplexed,
quantitative real-time PCR (MQPCR) could be used to detect the haploinsufficiency
characteristic of 22q11.2 DS. A retrospective blinded study was performed on 382 
subjects who had undergone congenital heart surgery. MQPCR was performed with a
probe localized to the TBX1 gene on human chromosome 22, a gene typically deleted
in 22q11.2 DS. Cycle threshold (C(t)) was used to calculate the relative gene
copy number (rGCN). Confirmation analysis was performed with the Affymetrix 6.0
Genome-Wide SNP Array. With MQPCR, 361 subjects were identified as nondeleted
with an rGCN near 1.0 and 21 subjects were identified as deleted with an rGCN
near 0.5, indicative of a hemizygous deletion. The sensitivity (21/21) and
specificity (361/361) of MQPCR to detect 22q11.2 deletions was 100% at an rGCN
value drawn at 0.7. One of 21 subjects with a prior clinical (not genetically
confirmed) DGS1 diagnosis was found not to carry the deletion, while another
subject, not previously identified as DGS1, was detected as deleted and
subsequently confirmed via microarray. The MQPCR assay is a rapid, inexpensive,
sensitive, and specific assay that can be used to screen for 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome. The assay is readily adaptable to high throughput.

PMCID: PMC2957771
PMID: 20551144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jul;239(7):1988-94. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22334.

A novel role for transcription factor Lmo4 in thymus development through genetic 
interaction with Cited2.

Michell AC(1), Bragança J, Broadbent C, Joyce B, Franklyn A, Schneider JE,
Bhattacharya S, Bamforth SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human
Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Deletion of the transcriptional modulator Cited2 in the mouse results in
embryonic lethality, cardiovascular malformations, adrenal agenesis, cranial
ganglia fusion, exencephaly, and left-right patterning defects, all seen with a
varying degree of penetrance. The phenotypic heterogeneity, observed on different
genetic backgrounds, indicates the existence of both genetic and environmental
modifiers. Mice lacking the LIM domain-containing protein Lmo4 share specific
phenotypes with Cited2 null embryos, such as embryonic lethality, cranial ganglia
fusion, and exencephaly. These shared phenotypes suggested that Lmo4 may be a
potential genetic modifier of the Cited2 phenotype. Examination of Lmo4-deficient
embryos revealed partially penetrant cardiovascular malformations and hypoplastic
thymus. Examination of Lmo4;Cited2 compound mutants indicated that there is a
genetic interaction between Cited2 and Lmo4 in control of thymus development. Our
data suggest that this may occur, in part, through control of expression of a
common target gene, Tbx1, which is necessary for normal thymus development.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3417300
PMID: 20549734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 May 5;123(9):1182-9.

Effect of Tbx1 knock-down on cardiac performance in zebrafish.

Zhang LF(1), Gui YH, Wang YX, Jiang Q, Song HY.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

BACKGROUND: Tbx1 is the major candidate gene for DiGeorge syndrome (DGS). Similar
to defects observed in DGS patients, the structures disrupted in Tbx1(-/-) animal
models are derived from the neural crest cells during development. Although the
morphological phenotypes of some Tbx1 knock-down animal models have been well
described, analysis of the cardiac performance is limited. Therefore, myocardial 
performance was explored in Tbx1 morpholino injected zebrafish embryos.
METHODS: To elucidate these issues, Tbx1 specific morpholino was used to reduce
the function of Tbx1 in zebrafish. The differentiation of the myocardial cells
was observed using whole mount in situ hybridization. Heart rates were observed
and recorded under the microscope from 24 to 72 hours post fertilization (hpf).
The cardiac performance was analyzed by measuring ventricular shortening fraction
and atrial shortening fraction.
RESULTS: Tbx1 morpholino injected embryos were characterized by defects in the
pharyngeal arches, otic vesicle, aortic arches and thymus. In addition, Tbx1
knock down reduced the amount of pharyngeal neural crest cells in zebrafish.
Abnormal cardiac morphology was visible in nearly 20% of the Tbx1 morpholino
injected embryos. The hearts in these embryos did not loop or loop incompletely. 
Importantly, cardiac performance and heart rate were reduced in Tbx1 morpholino
injected embryos.
CONCLUSIONS: Tbx1 might play an essential role in the development of pharyngeal
neural crest cells in zebrafish. Cardiac performance is impaired by Tbx1 knock
down in zebrafish.

PMID: 20529560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jun;239(6):1708-22. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22308.

Canonical Wnt signaling modulates Tbx1, Eya1, and Six1 expression, restricting
neurogenesis in the otic vesicle.

Freyer L(1), Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
USA.

To understand the mechanism by which canonical Wnt signaling sets boundaries for 
pattern formation in the otic vesicle (OV), we examined Tbx1 and Eya1-Six1
downstream of activated beta-catenin. Tbx1, the gene for velo-cardio-facial
syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS), is essential for inner ear development
where it promotes Bmp4 and Otx1 expression and restricts neurogenesis. Using
floxed beta-catenin gain-of-function (GOF) and loss-of-function (LOF) alleles, we
found Tbx1 expression was down-regulated and maintained/enhanced in the two mouse
mutants, respectively. Bmp4 was ectopically expressed and Otx1 was lost in
beta-catenin GOF mutants. Normally, inactivation of Tbx1 causes expanded
neurogenesis, but expression of NeuroD was down-regulated in beta-catenin GOF
mutants. To explain this paradox, Eya1 and Six1, genes for branchio-oto-renal
(BOR) syndrome were down-regulated in the OV of beta-catenin GOF mutants
independently of Tbx1. Overall, this work helps explain the mechanism by which
Wnt signaling modulates transcription factors required for neurogenesis and
patterning of the OV.

PMCID: PMC2987613
PMID: 20503367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Onkologie. 2010;33(5):241-5. doi: 10.1159/000305098. Epub 2010 Apr 21.

Expression of PSCA, PIWIL1, and TBX2 in endometrial adenocarcinoma.

Liu WK(1), Jiang XY, Zhang ZX.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of the Ministry of
Education, School of Life Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University,
Xi'an Shaanxi Province, China. lwk2001@263.net

BACKGROUND: Endometrial cancer is the 4th most common gynecological cancer. The
expression of prostate stem cell antigen (PSCA), piwi-like 1 (PIWIL1), and T-box 
2 (TBX2) in endometrial cancer remains to be elucidated.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The expression of PSCA, PIWIL1, and TBX2 was examined using
the streptavidin-peroxidase method in 64 endometrial endometrioid adenocarcinoma 
(EAC) and paired normal endometrium (NE) samples from the Shaanxi Province in
China.
RESULTS: Positive expression rates of PSCA, PIWIL1, and TBX2 were 75% (48/64),
25% (16/64), and 56% (36/64), respectively in EACs, but 5% (3/64), 6% (4/64), and
2% (1/64), respectively in NEs. The difference was statistically significant (p <
0.05). PSCA was positively correlated with TBX2 (p = 0.003) but not PIWIL1 (p =
0.188). PIWIL1 was positively correlated with TBX2 (p = 0.003). PSCA was
positively correlated with age, tumor grade, and lymph node metastasis (p <
0.05). TBX2 had an association with lymph node metastasis (p = 0.014). PIWIL1 was
not associated with clinicopathological features (p > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: We report the first analysis of PSCA, PIWIL1, and TBX2 expression in
EAC. Our findings suggest that PSCA and TBX2 might be candidate targets for
cancer therapy, and have helped us further understand the carcinogenesis of
endometrial cancer.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20502058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 15;344(2):669-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.05.496. Epub 2010 
May 23.

Mesodermal Tbx1 is required for patterning the proximal mandible in mice.

Aggarwal VS(1), Carpenter C, Freyer L, Liao J, Petti M, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
NY 10461, USA.

Defects in the lower jaw, or mandible, occur commonly either as isolated
malformations or in association with genetic syndromes. Understanding its
formation and genetic pathways required for shaping its structure in mammalian
model organisms will shed light into the pathogenesis of malformations in humans.
The lower jaw is derived from the mandibular process of the first pharyngeal arch
(MdPA1) during embryogenesis. Integral to the development of the mandible is the 
signaling interplay between Fgf8 and Bmp4 in the rostral ectoderm and their
downstream effector genes in the underlying neural crest derived mesenchyme. The 
non-neural crest MdPA1 core mesoderm is needed to form muscles of mastication,
but its role in patterning the mandible is unknown. Here, we show that mesoderm
specific deletion of Tbx1, a T-box transcription factor and gene for
velo-cardio-facial/DiGeorge syndrome, results in defects in formation of the
proximal mandible by shifting expression of Fgf8, Bmp4 and their downstream
effector genes in mouse embryos at E10.5. This occurs without significant changes
in cell proliferation or apoptosis at the same stage. Our results elucidate a new
function for the non-neural crest core mesoderm and specifically, mesodermal
Tbx1, in shaping the lower jaw.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2917794
PMID: 20501333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Clin Genet. 2010 Sep;78(3):201-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01456.x. Epub
2010 Apr 23.

Developmental perspectives on copy number abnormalities of the 22q11.2 region.

Tan TY(1), Gordon CT, Amor DJ, Farlie PG.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Health Services Victoria, Royal Children's Hospital, Flemington Rd,
Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia. tiong.tan@ghsv.org.au

The 22q11.2 chromosomal landscape predisposes to genomic rearrangements that are 
associated with a variety of clinical phenotypes. The most well known of these
include the 22q11.2 deletion and Cat-eye syndromes (CES), but more recently other
copy number abnormalities have been recognised, especially with increased use of 
microarrays in the investigation of patients with congenital malformations or
cognitive impairment. In addition, mutations in the TBX1 gene have been found in 
patients with phenotypes reminiscent of 22q11.2 syndromes. Recent advances in our
understanding of 22q11.2 genes and their interactions provide insight into the
mechanisms underlying the phenotypic variability of the 22q11.2 syndromes, and
suggest a possible common developmental pathway perturbed by copy number
abnormalities of this locus.

PMID: 20497193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Am J Cardiol. 2010 Jun 1;105(11):1617-24. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2010.01.333.

Cardiovascular anomalies associated with chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.

Momma K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Cardiology, Heart Center, Tokyo Women's Medical
University, Tokyo, Japan. kmomma@iris.ocn.ne.jp

Comment in
    Am J Cardiol. 2011 Jan 15;107(2):337-8.

Cardiovascular anomalies are present in 80% of neonates with 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome. Three genes in chromosome 22q11.2 (TBX1, CRKL, and ERK2) have been
identified whose haploinsufficiency causes dysfunction of the neural crest cell
and anterior heart field and anomalies of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. The most
common diseases are conotruncal anomalies, which include tetralogy of Fallot
(TF), TF with pulmonary atresia, truncus arteriosus, and interrupted aortic arch.
A high prevalence of the deletion is noted in patients with TF with absent
pulmonary valve, TF associated with pulmonary atresia and major aortopulmonary
collateral arteries, truncus arteriosus, and type B interruption of aortic arch. 
Right aortic arch, aberrant subclavian artery, cervical origin of the subclavian 
artery, crossing pulmonary arteries, and major aortopulmonary collateral arteries
are frequently associated with cardiovascular anomalies associated with 22q11.2
deletion syndrome. Virtually every type of congenital heart defect has been
described early in the context of a 22q11.2 deletion. In conclusion, conotruncal 
anomaly associated with aortic arch and ductus arteriosus anomalies should
increase the suspicion of 22q11.2 deletion.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20494672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2010 May;235(5):569-76. doi: 10.1258/ebm.2010.009318.

Ash2l interacts with Tbx1 and is required during early embryogenesis.

Stoller JZ(1), Huang L, Tan CC, Huang F, Zhou DD, Yang J, Gelb BD, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and the Penn Cardiovascular
Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. stoller@email.chop.edu

TBX1 encodes a DNA binding transcription factor that is commonly deleted in human
DiGeorge syndrome and plays an important role in heart development. Mechanisms of
Tbx1 function, such as Tbx1 interacting regulatory proteins and transcriptional
target specificity, are largely unknown. Ash2l is the mammalian homolog of
Drosophila Ash2 (absent small homeotic 2) and is a core component of a multimeric
histone methyltransferase complex that epigenetically regulates transcription via
methylation of histone lysine residues. We undertook an unbiased yeast two-hybrid
screen to look for functionally relevant Tbx1-interacting proteins and report a
physical and functional interaction between Tbx1 and Ash2l. Tbx1 interacts with
Ash2l in both yeast and mammalian cells and Ash2l acts as a transcriptional
co-activator in luciferase reporter assays. Expression analysis shows that Tbx1
and Ash2l have overlapping mRNA and protein expression patterns during
development. By generating an Ash2l knockout mouse utilizing gene-trap
technology, we show that although Ash2l heterozygous mice are normal, Ash2l-null 
embryos die early during gestation. Thus, Ash2l is required for the earliest
stages of embryogenesis. Furthermore, our finding of a physical interaction
between Tbx1 and Ash2l suggest that at least some functions of Tbx1 may be
mediated by direct interactions with a histone methyltransferase complex.

PMCID: PMC3017365
PMID: 20463296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Appl Genet. 2010;51(2):219-21. doi: 10.1007/BF03195732.

Investigation of the 22q11.2 candidate region in patients with midline facial
defects with hypertelorism.

Simioni M(1), Freitas EL, Vieira TP, Lopes-Cendes I, Gil-da-Silva-Lopes VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas,
SP, Brazil. msimioni@gmail.com

Midline facial defects with hypertelorism (MFDH) are mainly characterized by
ocular hypertelorism and bifid nose. They are often associated with structural
and functional anomalies of the central nervous system similar to those found in 
22q11.2 deletion syndromes. In addition, there are some isolated reports of MFDH 
and 22q11.2 deletion. These findings suggest that MFDH may be part of the
spectrum of 22q11.2 deletion syndromes. To test this hypothesis, 10 individuals
with MFDH were analyzed by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), but no
22q11.2 deletion was detected. In view of this result, the TBX1 gene located
within the 22q11.2 candidate region was screened. A new sequence variant (1132GA)
was identified in one patient. This variant was not found in 110 control
individuals genotyped. Considering the rarity of this condition and results of
this study, the involvement of the 22q11.2 chromosomal region in the pathogenesis
of MFDH could not be excluded.

PMID: 20453311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Cell Biol. 2010 May 3;189(3):417-24. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200912037.

Tbx1 regulates Vegfr3 and is required for lymphatic vessel development.

Chen L(1), Mupo A, Huynh T, Cioffi S, Woods M, Jin C, McKeehan W, Thompson-Snipes
L, Baldini A, Illingworth E.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Cardiovascular Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

Lymphatic dysfunction causes several human diseases, and tumor lymphangiogenesis 
is implicated in cancer spreading. TBX1 is the major gene for DiGeorge syndrome, 
which is associated with multiple congenital anomalies. Mutation of Tbx1 in mice 
recapitulates the human disease phenotype. In this study, we use molecular,
cellular, and genetic approaches to show, unexpectedly, that Tbx1 plays a
critical role in lymphatic vessel development and regulates the expression of
Vegfr3, a gene that is essential for lymphangiogenesis. Tbx1 activates Vegfr3
transcription in endothelial cells (ECs) by binding to an enhancer element in the
Vegfr3 gene. Conditional deletion of Tbx1 in ECs causes widespread
lymphangiogenesis defects in mouse embryos and perinatal death. Using the
mesentery as a model tissue, we show that Tbx1 is not required for lymphatic EC
differentiation; rather, it is required for the growth and maintenance of
lymphatic vessels. Our findings reveal a novel pathway for the development of the
lymphatic vessel network.

PMCID: PMC2867300
PMID: 20439995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. BMC Genomics. 2010 Mar 15;11:176. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-176.

The embryonic genes Dkk3, Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and Tbx1 identify muscle types in a
diet-independent and fiber-type unrelated way.

de Wilde J(1), Hulshof MF, Boekschoten MV, de Groot P, Smit E, Mariman EC.

Author information: 
(1)Top Institute Food and Nutrition, Nutrigenomics Consortium, Wageningen, the
Netherlands. j.dewilde@hb.unimaas.nl

BACKGROUND: The mouse skeletal muscle is composed of four distinct fiber types
that differ in contractile function, number of mitochondria and metabolism. Every
muscle type has a specific composition and distribution of the four fiber types. 
To find novel genes involved in specifying muscle types, we used microarray
analysis to compare the gastrocnemius with the quadriceps from mice fed a low fat
diet (LFD) or high fat diet (HFD) for 8 weeks. Additional qPCR analysis were
performed in the gastrocnemius, quadriceps and soleus muscle from mice fed an LFD
or HFD for 20 weeks.
RESULTS: In mice fed the 8-week LFD 162 genes were differentially expressed in
the gastrocnemius vs. the quadriceps. Genes with the strongest differences in
expression were markers for oxidative fiber types (e.g. Tnni1) and genes which
are known to be involved in embryogenesis (Dkk3, Hoxd8,Hoxd9 and Tbx1). Also
Dkk2, Hoxa5, Hoxa10, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Hoxc6 and Tbx15 were detectably, but not
differentially expressed in adult muscle tissue. Expression of differentially
expressed genes was not influenced by an 8-week or 20-week HFD. Comparing
gastrocnemius, quadriceps and soleus, expression of Hoxd8 and Hoxd9 was not
related with expression of markers for the four different fiber types. We found
that the expression of both Hoxd8 and Hoxd9 was much higher in the gastrocnemius 
than in the quadriceps or soleus, whereas the expression of Dkk3 was high in
quadriceps, but low in both gastrocnemius and soleus. Finally, expression of Tbx1
was high in quadriceps, intermediate in soleus and low in gastrocnemius.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that genes from the Dkk family, Hox family and Tbx family
are detectably expressed in adult mouse muscle. Interestingly, expression of
Dkk3, Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and Tbx1 was highly different between gastrocnemius,
quadriceps and soleus. In fact, every muscle type showed a unique combination of 
expression of these four genes which was not influenced by diet. Altogether, we
conclude that genes important for embryogenesis identify mouse muscle types in a 
diet-independent and fiber type-unrelated manner.

PMCID: PMC2847971
PMID: 20230627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Development. 2010 Apr;137(7):1137-47. doi: 10.1242/dev.045534.

Beta-catenin deficiency causes DiGeorge syndrome-like phenotypes through
regulation of Tbx1.

Huh SH(1), Ornitz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
St Louis, MO, USA.

DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) is a common genetic disease characterized by pharyngeal
apparatus malformations and defects in cardiovascular, craniofacial and glandular
development. TBX1 is the most likely candidate disease-causing gene and is
located within a 22q11.2 chromosomal deletion that is associated with most cases 
of DGS. Here, we show that canonical Wnt-beta-catenin signaling negatively
regulates Tbx1 expression and that mesenchymal inactivation of beta-catenin
(Ctnnb1) in mice caused abnormalities within the DGS phenotypic spectrum,
including great vessel malformations, hypoplastic pulmonary and aortic arch
arteries, cardiac malformations, micrognathia, thymus hypoplasia and
mislocalization of the parathyroid gland. In a heterozygous Fgf8 or Tbx1 genetic 
background, ectopic activation of Wnt-beta-catenin signaling caused an increased 
incidence and severity of DGS-like phenotypes. Additionally, reducing the gene
dosage of Fgf8 rescued pharyngeal arch artery defects caused by loss of Ctnnb1.
These findings identify Wnt-beta-catenin signaling as a crucial upstream
regulator of a Tbx1-Fgf8 signaling pathway and suggest that factors that affect
Wnt-beta-catenin signaling could modify the incidence and severity of DGS.

PMCID: PMC2835329
PMID: 20215350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mech Dev. 2010 May-Jun;127(5-6):292-300. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2010.03.001. Epub
2010 Mar 7.

Tbx1 is necessary for palatal elongation and elevation.

Goudy S(1), Law A, Sanchez G, Baldwin HS, Brown C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN, USA. steven.l.goudy@vanderbilt.edu <steven.l.goudy@vanderbilt.edu>

The transcription factor TBX1 is a key mediator of developmental abnormalities
associated with DiGeorge/Velocardiofacial Syndrome. Studies in mice have
demonstrated that decreased dosage of Tbx1 results in defects in pharyngeal arch,
cardiovascular, and craniofacial development. The role of Tbx1 in cardiac
development has been intensely studied; however, its role in palatal development 
is poorly understood. By studying the Tbx1-/- mice we found defects during the
critical points of palate elongation and elevation. The intrinsic palate defects 
in the Tbx1-/- mice were determined by measuring changes in palate shelf length, 
proliferation, apoptosis, expression of relevant growth factors, and in palate
fusion assays. Tbx1-/- embryos exhibit cleft palate with failed palate elevation 
in 100% and abnormal palatal-oral fusions in 50%. In the Tbx1-/- mice the palate 
shelf length was reduced and tongue height was greater, demonstrating a physical 
impediment to palate elevation and apposition. In vitro palate fusion assays
demonstrate that Tbx1-/- palate shelves are capable of fusion but a roller
culture assay showed that the null palatal shelves were unable to elongate.
Diminished hyaluronic acid production in the Tbx1-/- palate shelves may explain
failed palate shelf elevation. In addition, cell proliferation and apoptosis were
perturbed in Tbx1-/- palates. A sharp decrease of Fgf8 expression was detected in
the Tbx1-/- palate shelves, suggesting that Fgf8 is dependent on Tbx1 in the
palate. Fgf10 is also up-regulated in the Tbx1-/- palate shelves and tongue.
These data demonstrate that Tbx1 is a critical transcription factor that guides
palatal elongation and elevation and that Fgf8 expression in the palate is
Tbx1-dependent.

PMCID: PMC2871954
PMID: 20214979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Circ Res. 2010 Mar 5;106(4):630-2. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.215319.

DiGeorge syndrome, Tbx1, and retinoic acid signaling come full circle.

Yutzey KE.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2010 Mar 5;106(4):686-94.

PMCID: PMC2842987
PMID: 20203312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Synapse. 2010 Jul;64(7):495-502. doi: 10.1002/syn.20754.

Expression of the NR2B-NMDA receptor subunit and its Tbr-1/CINAP regulatory
proteins in postmortem brain suggest altered receptor processing in
schizophrenia.

Kristiansen LV(1), Patel SA, Haroutunian V, Meador-Woodruff JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurobiology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA. villiam68@gmail.com

Several lines of evidence implicate aberrant glutamate neurotransmission in the
pathophysiology of schizophrenia. In particular, compromised signaling through
the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor has been linked to positive, negative,
and cognitive symptoms of this illness. Studies in postmortem brain have
identified altered expression of several structural and signaling molecules of
the postsynaptic density (PSD), including the abundantly expressed protein
PSD-95, which binds directly to NR2 subunits of the NMDA receptor and regulates
its trafficking, membrane expression, and downstream signaling. Several
mechanisms for functional regulation of the NR2B-containing NMDA receptor, which 
have been linked to cognitive dysfunction in schizophrenia, are well known. To
analyze whether early events in NR2B processing are affected in schizophrenia, we
have isolated a subcellular endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-enriched fraction from
postmortem brain and analyzed expression of the NR1 and NR2B NMDA receptor
subunits as well as PSD-95 in two areas of prefrontal cortex. We found
significantly decreased ER expression of NR2B and PSD-95 in dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia. Analysis in total-cell homogenates from the
same subjects of NR2B and PSD-95 expression, as well as of the CINAP and Tbr-1
transcription regulatory proteins, indicate that changes in NR2B processing in
schizophrenia involve increased ER exit of NR2B containing NMDA receptors.

PMID: 20175224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 9;285(15):11129-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.087429. Epub 2010
Feb 3.

Pitx2-dependent occupancy by histone deacetylases is associated with T-box gene
regulation in mammalian abdominal tissue.

Hilton T(1), Gross MK, Kioussi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factor Pitx2 and the T-box transcription factors
are essential for organogenesis. Pitx2 and T-box genes are induced by growth
factors and function as transcriptional activators or repressors. Gene expression
analyses on abdominal tissue were used to identify seven of the T-box genes of
the genome as Pitx2 target genes in the abdomen at embryonic day.10.5. Pitx2
activated Tbx4, Tbx15, and Mga and repressed Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx5, and Tbx6
expression. As expected, activated genes showed reduced expression patterns, and 
repressed T-box genes showed increased expression patterns in the abdomen of
Pitx2 mutants. Pitx2 occupied chromatin sites near all of these T-box genes.
Co-occupancy by coactivators, corepressors, and histone acetylation at these
sites was frequently Pitx2-dependent. Genes repressed by Pitx2 generally showed
increased histone acetylation and decreased histone deacetylase
(HDAC)/corepressor occupancy in Pitx2 mutants. The lower N-CoR, HDAC1, and HDAC3 
occupancy observed at multiple sites along Tbx1 chromatin in mutants is
consistent with the model that increased histone acetylation and gene expression 
of Tbx1 may result from a loss of recruitment of corepressors by Pitx2. Genes
activated by Pitx2 showed less consistent patterns in chromatin analyses. Reduced
H4 acetylation and increased HDAC1/nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR) occupancy
at some Tbx4 sites were accompanied by increased H3 acetylation and reduced HDAC3
occupancy at the same or other more distal chromatin sites in mutants.
Pitx2-dependent occupancy by corepressors resulted in alteration of the
acetylation levels of several T-box genes, whereas Pitx2-dependent occupancy by
coactivators was more site-localized. These studies will provide the basic
scientific underpinning to understand abdominal wall syndromes.

PMCID: PMC2856990
PMID: 20129917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Sep;18(9). doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.5. Epub 2010 Feb 3.

Clinical utility gene card for: DiGeorge syndrome, velocardiofacial syndrome,
Shprintzen syndrome, chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2, TBX1).

Schwinger E(1), Devriendt K, Rauch A, Philip N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Lübeck,
Germany. schwing@uni-luebeck.de

PMCID: PMC2987430
PMID: 20125192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Dev Biol. 2010 Apr 15;340(2):369-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.01.020. Epub 2010 
Feb 1.

Hes1 expression is reduced in Tbx1 null cells and is required for the development
of structures affected in 22q11 deletion syndrome.

van Bueren KL(1), Papangeli I, Rochais F, Pearce K, Roberts C, Calmont A, Szumska
D, Kelly RG, Bhattacharya S, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London
WC1N 1EH, UK.

22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) is characterised by aberrant development of the
pharyngeal apparatus and the heart with haploinsufficiency of the transcription
factor TBX1 being considered the major underlying cause of the disease. Tbx1
mutations in mouse phenocopy the disorder. In order to identify the
transcriptional dysregulation in Tbx1-expressing lineages we optimised
fluorescent-activated cell sorting of beta-galactosidase expressing cells
(FACS-Gal) to compare the expression profile of Df1/Tbx1(lacZ) (effectively Tbx1 
null) and Tbx1 heterozygous cells isolated from mouse embryos. Hes1, a major
effector of Notch signalling, was identified as downregulated in Tbx1(-)(/)(-)
mutants. Hes1 mutant mice exhibited a partially penetrant range of 22q11DS-like
defects including pharyngeal arch artery (PAA), outflow tract, craniofacial and
thymic abnormalities. Similar to Tbx1 mice, conditional mutagenesis revealed that
Hes1 expression in embryonic pharyngeal ectoderm contributes to thymus and
pharyngeal arch artery development. These results suggest that Hes1 acts
downstream of Tbx1 in the morphogenesis of pharyngeal-derived structures.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2877781
PMID: 20122914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Circ Res. 2010 Mar 5;106(4):686-94. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.205732. Epub 2010
Jan 28.

Decreased levels of embryonic retinoic acid synthesis accelerate recovery from
arterial growth delay in a mouse model of DiGeorge syndrome.

Ryckebüsch L(1), Bertrand N, Mesbah K, Bajolle F, Niederreither K, Kelly RG,
Zaffran S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR S910, Université de la Méditerranée, Faculté de Médecine, 27 Bd.
Jean Moulin, Marseille, France.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2010 Mar 5;106(4):630-2.

RATIONALE: Loss of Tbx1 and decrease of retinoic acid (RA) synthesis result in
DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome (DGS/VCFS)-like phenotypes in mouse models,
including defects in septation of the outflow tract of the heart and anomalies of
pharyngeal arch-derived structures including arteries of the head and neck,
laryngeal-tracheal cartilage, and thymus/parathyroid. Wild-type levels of T-box
transcription factor (Tbx)1 and RA signaling are required for normal pharyngeal
arch artery development. Recent studies have shown that reduction of RA or loss
of Tbx1 alters the contribution of second heart field (SHF) progenitor cells to
the elongating heart tube.
OBJECTIVE: Here we tested whether Tbx1 and the RA signaling pathway interact
during the deployment of the SHF and formation of the mature aortic arch.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Molecular markers of the SHF, neural crest and smooth muscle
cells, were analyzed in Raldh2;Tbx1 compound heterozygous mutants. Our results
revealed that the SHF and outflow tract develop normally in Raldh2(+/-);Tbx1(+/-)
embryos. However, we found that decreased levels of RA accelerate the recovery
from arterial growth delay observed in Tbx1(+/-) mutant embryos. This
compensation coincides with the differentiation of smooth muscle cells in the 4th
pharyngeal arch arteries, and is associated with severity of neural crest cell
migration defects observed in these mutants.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that differences in levels of embryonic RA may
contribute to the variability in great artery anomalies observed in DGS/VCFS
patients.

PMCID: PMC2864540
PMID: 20110535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Pediatr Cardiol. 2010 Apr;31(3):378-90. doi: 10.1007/s00246-009-9613-0.

22q11 deletion syndrome: a role for TBX1 in pharyngeal and cardiovascular
development.

Scambler PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, 30, Guilford St., London
WC1N 1EH, UK. p.scambler@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Tbx1 is a member of the Tbox family of binding domain transcription factors. TBX1
maps within the region of 22q11 deleted in humans with DiGeorge or
velocardiofacial syndrome. Mice haploinsufficient for Tbx1 have phenotypes that
recapitulate major features of the syndrome, notably abnormal growth and
remodelling of the pharyngeal arch arteries. The Tbx1 haploinsufficiency
phenotype is modified by genetic background and by mutations in putative
downstream targets. Homozygous null mutations of Tbx1 have more severe defects
including failure of outflow tract septation, and absence of the caudal
pharyngeal arches. Tbx1 is a transcriptional activator, and loss of this activity
has been linked to alterations in the expression of various genes involved in
cardiovascular morphogenesis. In particular, Fgf and retinoic acid signalling are
dysregulated in Tbx1 mutants. This article summarises the tissue specific and
temporal requirements for Tbx1, and attempts to synthesis what is know about the 
developmental pathways under its control.

PMID: 20054531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Med Genet. 2010 May;47(5):321-31. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.070391. Epub 2009 Nov
30.

Comprehensive genotype-phenotype analysis in 230 patients with tetralogy of
Fallot.

Rauch R(1), Hofbeck M, Zweier C, Koch A, Zink S, Trautmann U, Hoyer J, Kaulitz R,
Singer H, Rauch A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Schorenstrasse 16, CH-8603
Zurich-Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. anita.rauch@medgen.uzh.ch

BACKGROUND: Tetralogy of Fallot (ToF), the most frequent cyanotic congenital
heart disease, is associated with a wide range of intra- and extracardiac
phenotypes. In order to get further insight into genotype-phenotype correlation, 
a large cohort of 230 unselected patients with ToF was comprehensively
investigated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: 230 patients with ToF were studied by karyotyping,
comprehensive 22q11.2 deletion testing and sequencing of TBX1, NKX2.5 and JAG1,
as well as molecular karyotyping in selected patients. Pathogenic genetic
aberrations were found in 42 patients (18%), with 22q11.2 deletion as the most
common diagnosis (7.4%), followed by trisomy 21 (5.2%) and other chromosomal
aberrations or submicroscopic copy number changes (3%). Mutations in JAG1 were
detected in three patients with Alagille syndrome (1.3%), while NKX2.5 mutations 
were seen in two patients with non-syndromic ToF (0.9%). One patient showed a
recurrent polyalanine stretch elongation within TBX1 which represents a true
mutation resulting in loss of transcriptional activity due to cytoplasmatic
protein aggregation.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that 22q11.2 deletion represents the most common
known cause of ToF, and that the associated cardiac phenotype is distinct for
obstruction of the proximal pulmonary artery, hypoplastic central pulmonary
arteries and subclavian artery anomalies. Atrioventricular septal defect
associated with ToF is very suggestive of trisomy 21 and almost excludes 22q11.2 
deletion. We report a further patient with a recurrent polyalanine stretch
elongation within TBX1 and for the first time link TBX1 cytoplasmatic protein
aggregation to congenital heart defects.

PMID: 19948535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Clin Invest. 2009 Nov;119(11):3301-10. doi: 10.1172/JCI37561. Epub 2009 Oct 12.

Great vessel development requires biallelic expression of Chd7 and Tbx1 in
pharyngeal ectoderm in mice.

Randall V(1), McCue K, Roberts C, Kyriakopoulou V, Beddow S, Barrett AN, Vitelli 
F, Prescott K, Shaw-Smith C, Devriendt K, Bosman E, Steffes G, Steel KP, Simrick 
S, Basson MA, Illingworth E, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.

Aortic arch artery patterning defects account for approximately 20% of congenital
cardiovascular malformations and are observed frequently in velocardiofacial
syndrome (VCFS). In the current study, we screened for chromosome rearrangements 
in patients suspected of VCFS, but who lacked a 22q11 deletion or TBX1 mutation. 
One individual displayed hemizygous CHD7, which encodes a chromodomain protein.
CHD7 haploinsufficiency is the major cause of coloboma, heart defect, atresia
choanae, retarded growth and development, genital hypoplasia, and ear
anomalies/deafness (CHARGE) syndrome, but this patient lacked the major
diagnostic features of coloboma and choanal atresia. Because a subset of CHARGE
cases also display 22q11 deletions, we explored the embryological relationship
between CHARGE and VCSF using mouse models. The hallmark of Tbx1
haploinsufficiency is hypo/aplasia of the fourth pharyngeal arch artery (PAA) at 
E10.5. Identical malformations were observed in Chd7 heterozygotes, with
resulting aortic arch interruption at later stages. Other than Tbx1, Chd7 is the 
only gene reported to affect fourth PAA development by haploinsufficiency.
Moreover, Tbx1+/-;Chd7+/- double heterozygotes demonstrated a synergistic
interaction during fourth PAA, thymus, and ear morphogenesis. We could not rescue
PAA morphogenesis by restoring neural crest Chd7 expression. Rather, biallelic
expression of Chd7 and Tbx1 in the pharyngeal ectoderm was required for normal
PAA development.

PMCID: PMC2769172
PMID: 19855134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 22;106(38):16434-45. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0905696106. Epub 2009 Sep 10.

Diminished dosage of 22q11 genes disrupts neurogenesis and cortical development
in a mouse model of 22q11 deletion/DiGeorge syndrome.

Meechan DW(1), Tucker ES, Maynard TM, LaMantia AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology and Neuroscience Center,
University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

The 22q11 deletion (or DiGeorge) syndrome (22q11DS), the result of a 1.5- to
3-megabase hemizygous deletion on human chromosome 22, results in dramatically
increased susceptibility for "diseases of cortical connectivity" thought to arise
during development, including schizophrenia and autism. We show that diminished
dosage of the genes deleted in the 1.5-megabase 22q11 minimal critical deleted
region in a mouse model of 22q11DS specifically compromises neurogenesis and
subsequent differentiation in the cerebral cortex. Proliferation of basal, but
not apical, progenitors is disrupted, and subsequently, the frequency of layer
2/3, but not layer 5/6, projection neurons is altered. This change is paralleled 
by aberrant distribution of parvalbumin-labeled interneurons in upper and lower
cortical layers. Deletion of Tbx1 or Prodh (22q11 genes independently associated 
with 22q11DS phenotypes) does not similarly disrupt basal progenitors. However,
expression analysis implicates additional 22q11 genes that are selectively
expressed in cortical precursors. Thus, diminished 22q11 gene dosage disrupts
cortical neurogenesis and interneuron migration. Such developmental disruption
may alter cortical circuitry and establish vulnerability for developmental
disorders, including schizophrenia and autism.

PMCID: PMC2752572
PMID: 19805316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Circ Res. 2009 Oct 23;105(9):842-51. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.200295. Epub
2009 Sep 10.

Tbx1 regulates proliferation and differentiation of multipotent heart
progenitors.

Chen L(1), Fulcoli FG, Tang S, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

RATIONALE: TBX1 encodes a T-box transcription factor implicated in DiGeorge
syndrome, which affects the development of many organs, including the heart. Loss
of Tbx1 results into hypoplasia of heart regions derived from the second heart
field, a population of cardiac progenitors cells (CPCs). Thus, we hypothesized
that Tbx1 is an important player in the biology of CPCs.
OBJECTIVE: We asked whether Tbx1 is expressed in multipotent CPCs and, if so,
what role it may play in them.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We used clonal analysis of Tbx1-expressing cells and loss
and gain of function models, in vivo and in vitro, to define the role of Tbx1 in 
CPCs. We found that Tbx1 is expressed in multipotent heart progenitors that, in
clonal assays, can give rise to 3 heart lineages expressing endothelial, smooth
muscle and cardiomyocyte markers. In multipotent cells, Tbx1 stimulates
proliferation, explaining why Tbx1(-/-) embryos have reduced proliferation in the
second heart field. In this population, Tbx1 is expressed while cells are
undifferentiated and it disappears with the onset of muscle markers. Loss of Tbx1
results in premature differentiation, whereas gain results in reduced
differentiation in vivo. We found that Tbx1 binds serum response factor, a master
regulator of muscle differentiation, and negatively regulates its level.
CONCLUSIONS: The Tbx1 protein marks CPCs, supports their proliferation, and
inhibits their differentiation. We propose that Tbx1 is a key regulator of CPC
homeostasis as it modulates positively their proliferation and negatively their
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2796444
PMID: 19745164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Development. 2009 Sep;136(18):3173-83. doi: 10.1242/dev.028902.

Tbx1 controls cardiac neural crest cell migration during arch artery development 
by regulating Gbx2 expression in the pharyngeal ectoderm.

Calmont A(1), Ivins S, Van Bueren KL, Papangeli I, Kyriakopoulou V, Andrews WD,
Martin JF, Moon AM, Illingworth EA, Basson MA, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London
WC1N 1EH, UK.

Elucidating the gene regulatory networks that govern pharyngeal arch artery (PAA)
development is an important goal, as such knowledge can help to identify new
genes involved in cardiovascular disease. The transcription factor Tbx1 plays a
vital role in PAA development and is a major contributor to cardiovascular
disease associated with DiGeorge syndrome. In this report, we used various
genetic approaches to reveal part of a signalling network by which Tbx1 controls 
PAA development in mice. We investigated the crucial role played by the
homeobox-containing transcription factor Gbx2 downstream of Tbx1. We found that
PAA formation requires the pharyngeal surface ectoderm as a key signalling centre
from which Gbx2, in response to Tbx1, triggers essential directional cues to the 
adjacent cardiac neural crest cells (cNCCs) en route to the caudal PAAs.
Abrogation of this signal generates cNCC patterning defects leading to PAA
abnormalities. Finally, we showed that the Slit/Robo signalling pathway is
activated during cNCC migration and that components of this pathway are affected 
in Gbx2 and Tbx1 mutant embryos at the time of PAA development. We propose that
the spatiotemporal control of this tightly orchestrated network of genes
participates in crucial aspects of PAA development.

PMCID: PMC2730371
PMID: 19700621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2010 Jan;88(1):54-63. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20604.

Single nucleotide polymorphism discovery in TBX1 in individuals with and without 
22q11.2 deletion syndrome.

Heike CL(1), Starr JR, Rieder MJ, Cunningham ML, Edwards KL, Stanaway IB,
Crawford DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Craniofacial Medicine, University of
Washington and Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington 98105-5371, USA. 
carrie.heike@seattlechildrens.org

BACKGROUND: Children with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) have a wide range
of clinical features. TBX1 has been proposed as a candidate gene for some of the 
features in this condition. Polymorphisms in the nondeleted TBX1, which may
affect the function of the sole TBX1 gene in individuals with the 22q11.2DS, may 
be a key to understanding the phenotypic variability among individuals with a
shared deletion. Comprehensive single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) discovery by 
resequencing candidate genes can identify genetic variants that influence a given
phenotype. The purpose of this study was to further characterize the sequence
variability in TBX1 by identifying all common SNPs in this gene.
METHODS: We resequenced TBX1 in 29 children with a documented 22q11.2 deletion
and 95 nondeleted, healthy individuals. We estimated allele frequencies,
performed tagSNP selection, and inferred haplotypes. We also compared SNP
frequencies between 22q11.2DS and control samples.
RESULTS: We identified 355 biallelic markers among the 190 chromosomes
resequenced in the control panel. The vast majority of the markers identified
were SNPs (n = 331), and the remainder indels (n = 24). We did not identify SNPs 
or indels in the cis- regulatory element (FOX-binding site) upstream of TBX1. In 
children with 22q11.2DS we detected 187 biallelic markers, six of which were
indels. Four of the seven coding SNPs identified in the controls were identified 
in children with 22q11.2DS.
CONCLUSIONS: This comprehensive SNP discovery data can be used to select SNPs to 
genotype for future association studies assessing the role of TBX1 and phenotypic
variability in individuals with 22q11.2DS.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4535433
PMID: 19645056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 25;4(6):e6049. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006049.

Tbx1 regulates the BMP-Smad1 pathway in a transcription independent manner.

Fulcoli FG(1), Huynh T, Scambler PJ, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy.

Tbx1 is a T-box transcription factor implicated in DiGeorge syndrome. The
molecular function of Tbx1 is unclear although it can transactivate reporters
with T-box binding elements. We discovered that Tbx1 binds Smad1 and suppresses
the Bmp4/Smad1 signaling. Tbx1 interferes with Smad1 to Smad4 binding, and a
mutation of Tbx1 that abolishes transactivation, does not affect Smad1 binding
nor does affect the ability to suppress Smad1 activity. In addition, a
disease-associated mutation of TBX1 that does not prevent transactivation,
prevents the TBX1-SMAD1 interaction. Expression of Tbx1 in transgenic mice
generates phenotypes similar to those associated with loss of a Bmp receptor. One
phenotype could be rescued by transgenic Smad1 expression. Our data indicate that
Tbx1 interferes with Bmp/Smad1 signaling and provide strong evidence that a T-box
transcription factor has functions unrelated to transactivation.

PMCID: PMC2698216
PMID: 19557177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Dev Cell. 2009 Jun;16(6):810-21. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.05.008.

Distinct regulatory cascades govern extraocular and pharyngeal arch muscle
progenitor cell fates.

Sambasivan R(1), Gayraud-Morel B, Dumas G, Cimper C, Paisant S, Kelly RG,
Tajbakhsh S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Stem Cells & Development, CNRS URA 2578, Université de la
Méditerranée, Campus de Luminy, Marseille, France.

Erratum in
    Dev Cell. 2009 Jul;17(1):150. Kelly, Robert [corrected to Kelly, Robert G].

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2009 Jun;16(6):779-80.

Genetic regulatory networks governing skeletal myogenesis in the body are well
understood, yet their hierarchical relationships in the head remain unresolved.
We show that either Myf5 or Mrf4 is necessary for initiating extraocular
myogenesis. Whereas Mrf4 is dispensable for pharyngeal muscle progenitor fate,
Tbx1 and Myf5 act synergistically for governing myogenesis in this location. As
in the body, Myod acts epistatically to the initiating cascades in the head.
Thus, complementary pathways, governed by Pax3 for body, and Tbx1 for pharyngeal 
muscles, but absent for extraocular muscles, activate the core myogenic network. 
These diverse muscle progenitors maintain their respective embryonic regulatory
signatures in the adult. However, these signatures are not sufficient to ensure
the specific muscle phenotypes, since the expected differentiated phenotype is
not manifested when satellite cells are engrafted heterotopically. These findings
identify novel genetic networks that may provide insights into myopathies which
often affect only subsets of muscles.

PMID: 19531352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 11;4(6):e5875. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005875.

Systemic disease-induced salivary biomarker profiles in mouse models of melanoma 
and non-small cell lung cancer.

Gao K(1), Zhou H, Zhang L, Lee JW, Zhou Q, Hu S, Wolinsky LE, Farrell J, Eibl G, 
Wong DT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry & Dental Research Institute, University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Saliva (oral fluids) is an emerging biofluid poised for detection of 
clinical diseases. Although the rationale for oral diseases applications (e.g.
oral cancer) is intuitive, the rationale and relationship between systemic
diseases and saliva biomarkers are unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we used mouse models of melanoma
and non-small cell lung cancer and compared the transcriptome biomarker profiles 
of tumor-bearing mice to those of control mice. Microarray analysis showed that
salivary transcriptomes were significantly altered in tumor-bearing mice vs.
controls. Significant overlapping among transcriptomes of mouse tumors, serum,
salivary glands and saliva suggests that salivary biomarkers have multiple
origins. Furthermore, we identified that the expression of two groups of
significantly altered transcription factors (TFs) Runx1, Mlxipl, Trim30 and Egr1,
Tbx1, Nr1d1 in salivary gland tissue of melanoma-bearing mice can potentially be 
responsible for 82.6% of the up-regulated gene expression and 62.5% of the
down-regulated gene expression, respectively, in the saliva of melanoma-bearing
mice. We also showed that the ectopic production of nerve growth factor (NGF) in 
the melanoma tumor tissue as a tumor-released mediator can induce expression of
the TF Egr-1 in the salivary gland.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data support the conclusion that upon systemic
disease development, significant changes can occur in the salivary biomarker
profile. Although the origins of the disease-induced salivary biomarkers may be
both systemic and local, stimulation of salivary gland by mediators released from
remote tumors plays an important role in regulating the salivary surrogate
biomarker profiles.

PMCID: PMC2691577
PMID: 19517020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. BMC Dev Biol. 2009 May 29;9:31. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-9-31.

Tbx1 and Brn4 regulate retinoic acid metabolic genes during cochlear
morphogenesis.

Braunstein EM(1), Monks DC, Aggarwal VS, Arnold JS, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park 
Avenue, Bronx, New York 10461, USA. ebraunst@aecom.yu.edu

BACKGROUND: In vertebrates, the inner ear is comprised of the cochlea and
vestibular system, which develop from the otic vesicle. This process is regulated
via inductive interactions from surrounding tissues. Tbx1, the gene responsible
for velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome in humans, is required for ear 
development in mice. Tbx1 is expressed in the otic epithelium and adjacent
periotic mesenchyme (POM), and both of these domains are required for inner ear
formation. To study the function of Tbx1 in the POM, we have conditionally
inactivated Tbx1 in the mesoderm while keeping expression in the otic vesicle
intact.
RESULTS: Conditional mutants (TCre-KO) displayed malformed inner ears, including 
a hypoplastic otic vesicle and a severely shortened cochlear duct, indicating
that Tbx1 expression in the POM is necessary for proper inner ear formation.
Expression of the mesenchyme marker Brn4 was also lost in the TCre-KO.
Brn4-;Tbx1+/-embryos displayed defects in growth of the distal cochlea. To
identify a potential signal from the POM to the otic epithelium, expression of
retinoic acid (RA) catabolizing genes was examined in both mutants. Cyp26a1
expression was altered in the TCre-KO, while Cyp26c1 showed reduced expression in
both TCre-KO and Brn4-;Tbx1+/- embryos.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that Tbx1 expression in the POM regulates
cochlear outgrowth potentially via control of local retinoic acid activity.

PMCID: PMC2700094
PMID: 19476657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Eur J Med Genet. 2009 Sep-Oct;52(5):321-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.05.010. Epub 
2009 May 23.

Atypical deletion of 22q11.2: detection using the FISH TBX1 probe and molecular
characterization with high-density SNP arrays.

Beaujard MP(1), Chantot S, Dubois M, Keren B, Carpentier W, Mabboux P, Whalen S, 
Vodovar M, Siffroi JP, Portnoï MF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Institut de Puériculture, Paris, France.

Despite the heterogeneous clinical presentations, the majority of patients with
22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2 DS) have either a common recurrent 3 Mb
deletion or a less common, 1.5 Mb nested deletion, with breakpoint sites in
flanking low-copy repeats (LCR) sequences. Only a small number of atypical
deletions have been reported and precisely defined. Haploinsufficiency of the
TBX1 gene was determined to be the likely cause of 22q11.2 DS. The diagnostic
procedure usually used is FISH using commercially probes (N25 or TUPLE1).
However, this test does not contain TBX1, and fails to detect deletions that are 
either proximal or distal to the FISH probes. Here, we report on two patients
with clinical features suggestive of 22q11.2 DS, a male infant with facial
dysmorphia, pulmonary atresia, ventricular septal defect, neonatal hypocalcemia, 
and his affected mother, with facial dysmorphia, learning disabilities, and
hypernasal speech. They were tested negative for 22q11.2 DS using N25 or TUPLE1
probes, but were shown deleted for a probe containing TBX1. Delineation of the
deletion was performed using high-density SNP arrays (Illumina, 370K). This
atypical deletion was spanning 1.89 Mb. The distal breakpoint resided in LCR-D,
sharing the same distal breakpoint with the 3 Mb common deletion. The proximal
breakpoint was located 105 kb telomeric to TUPLE1, representing a new breakpoint 
variant that does not correspond to known LCRs of 22q11.2. We conclude that FISH 
with the TBX1 probe is an accurate diagnostic tool for 22q11.2 DS, with a higher 
sensitivity than FISH using standard probes, detecting all but the rarest
deletions, greatly reducing the false negative rate.

PMID: 19467348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Dev Biol. 2009 Jul 15;331(2):152-66. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.04.029. Epub 2009 
May 3.

The transcription factor Six1a plays an essential role in the craniofacial
myogenesis of zebrafish.

Lin CY(1), Chen WT, Lee HC, Yang PH, Yang HJ, Tsai HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Transcription factor Six1a plays important roles in morphogenesis, organogenesis,
and cell differentiation. However, the role of Six1a during zebrafish cranial
muscle development is still unclear. Here, we demonstrated that Six1a was
required for sternohyoideus, medial rectus, inferior rectus, and all pharyngeal
arch muscle development. Although Six1a was also necessary for myod and myogenin 
expression in head muscles, it did not affect myf5 expression in cranial muscles 
that originate from head mesoderm. Overexpression of myod enabled embryos to
rescue all the defects in cranial muscles induced by injection of
six1a-morpholino (MO), suggesting that myod is directly downstream of six1a in
controlling craniofacial myogenesis. However, overexpression of six1a was unable 
to rescue arch muscle defects in the tbx1- and myf5-morphants, suggesting that
six1a is only involved in myogenic maintenance, not its initiation, during arch
muscle myogenesis. Although the craniofacial muscle defects caused by pax3-MO
phenocopied those induced by six1a-MO, injection of six1a, myod or myf5 mRNA did 
not rescue the cranial muscle defects in pax3 morphants, suggesting that six1a
and pax3 do not function in the same regulatory network. Therefore, we proposed
four putative regulatory pathways to understand how six1a distinctly interacts
with either myf5 or myod during zebrafish craniofacial muscle development.

PMID: 19409884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Dev Biol. 2009 Apr 1;328(1):109-17. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.01.014. Epub 2009
Jan 20.

Early thyroid development requires a Tbx1-Fgf8 pathway.

Lania G(1), Zhang Z, Huynh T, Caprio C, Moon AM, Vitelli F, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, and University Federico II,
Naples, Italy.

The thyroid develops within the pharyngeal apparatus from endodermally-derived
cells. The many derivatives of the pharyngeal apparatus develop at similar times 
and sometimes from common cell types, explaining why many syndromic disorders
express multiple birth defects affecting different structures that share a common
pharyngeal origin. Thus, different derivatives may share common genetic networks 
during their development. Tbx1, the major gene associated with DiGeorge syndrome,
is a key player in the global development of the pharyngeal apparatus, being
required for virtually all its derivatives, including the thyroid. Here we show
that Tbx1 regulates the size of the early thyroid primordium through its
expression in the adjacent mesoderm. Because Tbx1 regulates the expression of
Fgf8 in the mesoderm, we postulated that Fgf8 mediates critical Tbx1-dependent
interactions between mesodermal cells and endodermal thyrocyte progenitors.
Indeed, conditional ablation of Fgf8 in Tbx1-expressing cells caused an early
thyroid phenotype similar to that of Tbx1 mutant mice. In addition, expression of
an Fgf8 cDNA in the Tbx1 domain rescued the early size defect of the thyroid
primordium in Tbx1 mutants. Thus, we have established that a Tbx1->Fgf8 pathway
in the pharyngeal mesoderm is a key size regulator of mammalian thyroid.

PMCID: PMC2705775
PMID: 19389367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Anat Sci Int. 2009 Sep;84(3):88-94. doi: 10.1007/s12565-009-0023-4. Epub 2009 Apr
7.

Molecular embryology for an understanding of congenital heart diseases.

Yamagishi H(1), Maeda J, Uchida K, Tsuchihashi T, Nakazawa M, Aramaki M, Kodo K, 
Yamagishi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Keio University
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. hyamag@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp

Congenital heart diseases (CHD) result from abnormal morphogenesis of the
embryonic cardiovascular system and usually involve defects in specific
structural components of the developing heart and vessels. Therefore, an
understanding of "Molecular Embryology", with specific focus on the individual
modular steps involved in cardiovascular morphogenesis, is particularly relevant 
to those wishing to have a better insight into the origin of CHD. Recent advances
in molecular embryology suggest that the cardiovascular system arises from
multiple distinct embryonic origins, and a population of myocardial precursor
cells in the pharyngeal mesoderm anterior to the early heart tube, denoted the
"second heart field", has been identified. Discovery of the second heart field
has important implications for the interpretation of cardiac outflow tract
development and provides new insights into the morphogenesis of CHD.

PMID: 19347680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Eur J Med Genet. 2009 Mar-Jun;52(2-3):88-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.02.008.
Epub 2009 Feb 28.

Microduplication 22q11.2: a new chromosomal syndrome.

Portnoï MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique et Embryologie médicales, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, 26
rue du Dr Arnold Netter, AP-HP, 75012 Paris, France.
marie-france.portnoi@trs.aphp.fr

The chromosome 22q11.2 region has long been implicated in genomic diseases. The
low-copy repeats spanning the region predispose to homologous recombination
events, and mediate nonallelic homologous recombinations that result in
rearrangements of 22q11.2. Chromosome duplication of the region that is deleted
in patients with DGS/VCFS has been reported, establishing a new genomic
duplication syndrome complementary to the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Recent data 
suggest that the frequency of the microduplications 22q11.2 is approximately half
that of the deletions. Up till now about 50 unrelated cases of 22q11.2
duplications have been reported. A high frequency of familial duplications has
been reported. The phenotype of patients is extremely variable, ranging from
multiple defects to mild learning difficulties, sharing features with DGS/VCFS,
including heart defects, urogenital abnormalities, velopharyngeal insufficiency
with or without cleft palate, and with some individuals being essentially normal.
The basis of phenotype variability remains to be elucidated. The large majority
of affected individuals have identical 3Mb duplications. The 22q11.2
microduplication syndrome can be diagnosed with high accuracy by interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization, and several other molecular laboratory
techniques. The 3Mb duplication encompasses a region containing 40 genes
including the TBX1 gene that has been shown to be the major disease gene
responsible for the DGS/VCFS. Interestingly, TBX1 gain-of-function mutations,
resulting in the same phenotypic spectrum as haploinsufficiency caused by
loss-of-function mutations or deletions, have been observed, confirming that TBX1
overexpression might be responsible for the dup22q11.2 disorder.

PMID: 19254783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Genesis. 2009 Mar;47(3):188-95. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20476.

Gain of function of Tbx1 affects pharyngeal and heart development in the mouse.

Vitelli F, Huynh T, Baldini A.

Mammalian development is highly sensitive to Tbx1 gene dosage reduction. Gene
function insights can also be learned from increased or ectopic expression. The
authors generated a novel mouse transgenic line, named COET, which expresses Tbx1
upon Cre-mediated recombination. The authors crossed this transgenic line with
Tbx1(Cre) animals to activate expression in the Tbx1-expression domain. Compound 
mutant COET;Tbx1(Cre/+) animals died after birth and showed heart enlargement. At
E18.5, compound mutants showed ventricular septal defects and thymic
abnormalities. The authors crossed compound mutants into a Tbx1 null background
to understand whether this phenotype is caused by gene overdosage. Results showed
that gene dosage reduction at the endogenous locus could not rescue heart and
thymic defects, although the transgene rescued the loss of function phenotype.
Thus, the transgenic phenotype appears to be due to gain of function. Resultant
data demonstrate that Tbx1 expression must be tightly regulated to be compatible 
with normal embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2692027
PMID: 19253341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Int J Dev Biol. 2009;53(4):631-9. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082823kh.

The Xenopus Bowline/Ripply family proteins negatively regulate the
transcriptional activity of T-box transcription factors.

Hitachi K(1), Danno H, Tazumi S, Aihara Y, Uchiyama H, Okabayashi K, Kondow A,
Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

Bowline, which is a member of the Xenopus Bowline/Ripply family of proteins,
represses the transcription of somitogenesis-related genes before somite
segmentation, which makes Bowline indispensable for somitogenesis. Although there
are three bowline/Ripply family genes in each vertebrate species, it is not known
whether the Bowline/Ripply family proteins share a common role in development. To
elucidate their developmental roles, we examined the expression patterns and
functions of the Xenopus Bowline/Ripply family proteins Bowline, Ledgerline, and 
a novel member of this protein family, xRipply3. We found that the expression
patterns of bowline and ledgerline overlapped in the presomitic mesoderm (PSM),
whereas ledgerline was additionally expressed in the newly formed somites. In
addition, we isolated xRipply3, which is expressed in the pharyngeal region.
Co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Ledgerline and xRipply3 interacted
with T-box proteins and the transcriptional co-repressor Groucho/TLE. In
luciferase assays, xRipply3 weakly suppressed the transcriptional activity of
Tbx1, while Ledgerline strongly suppressed that of Tbx6. In line with the
repressive role of Ledgerline, knockdown of Ledgerline resulted in enlargement of
expression regions of the somitogenesis-related-genes mespb and Tbx6. Inhibition 
of histone deacetylase activity increased the expression of mespb, as seen in the
Bowline and Ledgerline knockdown experiments. These results suggest that the
Groucho-HDAC complex is required for the repressive activity of Bowline/Ripply
family proteins during Xenopus somitogenesis. We conclude that although the
Xenopus Bowline/Ripply family proteins Bowline, Ledgerline and xRipply3 are
expressed differentially, they all act as negative regulators of T-box proteins.

PMID: 19247927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. PLoS Genet. 2009 Feb;5(2):e1000395. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000395. Epub 2009 
Feb 27.

Chordin is a modifier of tbx1 for the craniofacial malformations of 22q11
deletion syndrome phenotypes in mouse.

Choi M(1), Klingensmith J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.

Point mutations in TBX1 can recapitulate many of the structural defects of 22q11 
deletion syndromes (22q11DS), usually associated with a chromosomal deletion at
22q1.2. 22q11DS often includes specific cardiac and pharyngeal organ anomalies,
but the presence of characteristic craniofacial defects is highly variable. Even 
among family members with a single TBX1 point mutation but no cytological
deletion, cleft palate and low-set ears may or may not be present. In theory,
such differences could depend on an unidentified, second-site lesion that
modifies the craniofacial consequences of TBX1 deficiency. We present evidence
for such a locus in a mouse model. Null mutations of chordin have been reported
to cause severe defects recapitulating 22q11DS, which we show are highly
dependent on genetic background. In an inbred strain in which chordin(-/-) is
fully penetrant, we found a closely linked, strong modifier--a mutation in a Tbx1
intron causing severe splicing defects. Without it, lack of chordin results in a 
low penetrance of mandibular hypoplasia but no cardiac or thoracic organ
malformations. This hypomorphic Tbx1 allele per se results in defects resembling 
22q11DS but with a low penetrance of hallmark craniofacial malformations, unless 
chordin is mutant. Thus, chordin is a modifier for the craniofacial anomalies of 
Tbx1 mutations, demonstrating the existence of a second-site modifier for a
specific subset of the phenotypes associated with 22q11DS.

PMCID: PMC2640462
PMID: 19247433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Dev Biol. 2009 Apr 15;328(2):493-505. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.014. Epub 2009
Feb 20.

Enamel-free teeth: Tbx1 deletion affects amelogenesis in rodent incisors.

Catón J(1), Luder HU, Zoupa M, Bradman M, Bluteau G, Tucker AS, Klein O,
Mitsiadis TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, GKT Dental
Institute, London SE1 9RT, UK.

TBX1 is a principal candidate gene for DiGeorge syndrome, a developmental anomaly
that affects the heart, thymus, parathyroid, face, and teeth. A mouse model
carrying a deletion in a functional region of the Tbx1 gene has been extensively 
used to study anomalies related to this syndrome. We have used the Tbx1 null
mouse to understand the tooth phenotype reported in patients afflicted by
DiGeorge syndrome. Because of the early lethality of the Tbx1-/- mice, we used
long-term culture techniques that allow the unharmed growth of incisors until
their full maturity. All cultured incisors of Tbx1-/- mice were hypoplastic and
lacked enamel, while thorough histological examinations demonstrated the complete
absence of ameloblasts. The absence of enamel is preceded by a decrease in
proliferation of the ameloblast precursor cells and a reduction in amelogenin
gene expression. The cervical loop area of the incisor, which contains the niche 
for the epithelial stem cells, was either severely reduced or completely missing 
in mutant incisors. In contrast, ectopic expression of Tbx1 was observed in
incisors from mice with upregulated Fibroblast Growth Factor signalling and was
closely linked to ectopic enamel formation and deposition in these incisors.
These results demonstrate that Tbx1 is essential for the maintenance of
ameloblast progenitor cells in rodent incisors and that its deletion results in
the absence of enamel formation.

PMCID: PMC2880856
PMID: 19233155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4381. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004381. Epub 2009 Feb 9.

Relationship between neural crest cells and cranial mesoderm during head muscle
development.

Grenier J(1), Teillet MA, Grifone R, Kelly RG, Duprez D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UMR 7622 Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Développement, Université
Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: In vertebrates, the skeletal elements of the jaw, together with the
connective tissues and tendons, originate from neural crest cells, while the
associated muscles derive mainly from cranial mesoderm. Previous studies have
shown that neural crest cells migrate in close association with cranial mesoderm 
and then circumscribe but do not penetrate the core of muscle precursor cells of 
the branchial arches at early stages of development, thus defining a sharp
boundary between neural crest cells and mesodermal muscle progenitor cells.
Tendons constitute one of the neural crest derivatives likely to interact with
muscle formation. However, head tendon formation has not been studied, nor have
tendon and muscle interactions in the head.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Reinvestigation of the relationship between
cranial neural crest cells and muscle precursor cells during development of the
first branchial arch, using quail/chick chimeras and molecular markers revealed
several novel features concerning the interface between neural crest cells and
mesoderm. We observed that neural crest cells migrate into the cephalic mesoderm 
containing myogenic precursor cells, leading to the presence of neural crest
cells inside the mesodermal core of the first branchial arch. We have also
established that all the forming tendons associated with branchiomeric and eye
muscles are of neural crest origin and express the Scleraxis marker in chick and 
mouse embryos. Moreover, analysis of Scleraxis expression in the absence of
branchiomeric muscles in Tbx1(-/-) mutant mice, showed that muscles are not
necessary for the initiation of tendon formation but are required for further
tendon development.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This results show that neural crest cells and muscle
progenitor cells are more extensively mixed than previously believed during arch 
development. In addition, our results show that interactions between muscles and 
tendons during craniofacial development are similar to those observed in the
limb, despite the distinct embryological origin of these cell types in the head.

PMCID: PMC2634972
PMID: 19198652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Proteome Res. 2009 Mar;8(3):1515-26. doi: 10.1021/pr800870d.

Transcription factor TBX1 overexpression induces downregulation of proteins
involved in retinoic acid metabolism: a comparative proteomic analysis.

Caterino M(1), Ruoppolo M, Fulcoli G, Huynth T, Orrù S, Baldini A, Salvatore F.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate scarl, Napoli, Italy, Dipartimento di Biochimica
e Biotecnologie Mediche, Universita di Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy.

TBX1 haploinsufficiency is considered a major contributor to the
del22q11.2/DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) phenotype. We have used proteomic tools to
look at all the major proteins involved in the TBX1-mediated pathways in an
attempt to better understand the molecular interactions instrumental to its
cellular functions. We found more than 90 proteins that could be targeted by TBX1
through different mechanisms. The most interesting observation is that
overexpression of TBX1 results in down-regulation of two proteins involved in
retinoic acid metabolism.

PMCID: PMC2735679
PMID: 19178302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2009 Jan;85(1):42-51. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20571.

Identification of microdeletions in candidate genes for cleft lip and/or palate.

Shi M(1), Mostowska A, Jugessur A, Johnson MK, Mansilla MA, Christensen K, Lie
RT, Wilcox AJ, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies are now used routinely to identify
genes implicated in complex traits. The panels used for such analyses can detect 
single nucleotide polymorphisms and copy number variants, both of which may help 
to identify small deleted regions of the genome that may contribute to a
particular disease.
METHODS: We performed a candidate gene analysis involving 1,221 SNPs in 333
candidate genes for orofacial clefting, using 2,823 samples from 725 two- and
three-generation families with a proband having cleft lip with or without cleft
palate. We used SNP genotyping, DNA sequencing, high-resolution DNA microarray
analysis, and long-range PCR to confirm and characterize the deletion events.
RESULTS: This dataset had a high duplicate reproducibility rate (99.98%), high
Mendelian consistency rate (99.93%), and low missing data rate (0.55%), which
provided a powerful opportunity for deletion detection. Apparent Mendelian
inconsistencies between parents and children suggested deletion events in 15
individuals in 11 genomic regions. We confirmed deletions involving CYP1B1,
FGF10, SP8, SUMO1, TBX1, TFAP2A, and UGT7A1, including both de novo and familial 
cases. Deletions of SUMO1, TBX1, and TFAP2A are likely to be etiologic.
CONCLUSIONS: These deletions suggest the potential roles of genes or regulatory
elements contained within deleted regions in the etiology of clefting. Our
analysis took advantage of genotypes from a candidate-gene-based SNP survey and
proved to be an efficient analytical approach to interrogate genes potentially
involved in clefting. This can serve as a model to find genes playing a role in
complex traits in general.

PMCID: PMC3682790
PMID: 19137569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Immunol. 2008 Dec 15;181(12):8204-8.

Cutting edge: a T-bet-independent role for IFN-alpha/beta in regulating IL-2
secretion in human CD4+ central memory T cells.

Davis AM(1), Ramos HJ, Davis LS, Farrar JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

IL-2 is a hallmark cytokine secreted by central memory CD4(+) T cells (T(CM)).
Although naive cells rapidly secrete IL-2 in response to Ag stimulation, IL-12
inhibits IL-2 secretion in daughter cells as they differentiate into Th1 cells.
In this study, we uncover a unique role for IFN-alpha in regulating IL-2
secretion by human T(CM) cells. IFN-alpha synergized with IL-12 to enhance a
subset of cells that secreted high and sustained levels of IL-2. These
IL-2-secreting cells displayed phenotypic and functional characteristics of T(CM)
and were capable of generating IFN-gamma-secreting effectors upon secondary
activation. T-bet has been implicated in negatively regulating IL-2 secretion in 
murine T cells; however, T-bet expression did not inhibit IFN-alpha-dependent
IL-2 secretion in human T(CM) cells. Thus, our results highlight a unique role
for IFN-alpha in regulating the development of IL-2-secreting human T(CM) cells.

PMCID: PMC2596627
PMID: 19050236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Dev Growth Differ. 2008 Dec;50(9):717-29. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2008.01069.x.

Retinoic acid affects craniofacial patterning by changing Fgf8 expression in the 
pharyngeal ectoderm.

Abe M(1), Maeda T, Wakisaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Osaka University
Graduate School of Dentistry, Suita, Osaka, Japan. m-abe@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp

Retinoic acid signaling plays important roles in establishing normal patterning
and cellular differentiation during embryonic development. In this study, we show
that single administration of retinoic acid at embryonic day 8.5 causes homeotic 
transformation of the lower jaw into upper jaw-like structures. This homeosis was
preceded by downregulation of Fgf8 and Sprouty expression in the proximal domain 
of the first pharyngeal arch. Downregulation of mesenchymal genes such as Dlx5,
Hand2, Tbx1 and Pitx2 was also observed. The oropharynx in retinoic acid-treated 
embryos was severely constricted. Consistent with this observation, Patched
expression in the arch endoderm and mesenchyme was downregulated. Thus, retinoic 
acid affects the expression of subsets of epithelial and mesenchymal genes,
possibly disrupting the regional identity of the pharyngeal arch.

PMID: 19046160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Schizophr Bull. 2010 Jul;36(4):756-65. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbn160. Epub 2008 Nov 
14.

Supportive evidence for reduced expression of GNB1L in schizophrenia.

Ishiguro H(1), Koga M, Horiuchi Y, Noguchi E, Morikawa M, Suzuki Y, Arai M,
Niizato K, Iritani S, Itokawa M, Inada T, Iwata N, Ozaki N, Ujike H, Kunugi H,
Sasaki T, Takahashi M, Watanabe Y, Someya T, Kakita A, Takahashi H, Nawa H,
Arinami T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.
hishigur@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Chromosome 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) increases the risk of
development of schizophrenia more than 10 times compared with that of the general
population, indicating that haploinsufficiency of a subset of the more than 20
genes contained in the 22q11DS region could increase the risk of schizophrenia.
In the present study, we screened for genes located in the 22q11DS region that
are expressed at lower levels in postmortem prefrontal cortex of patients with
schizophrenia than in those of controls.
METHODS: Gene expression was screened by Illumina Human-6 Expression BeadChip
arrays and confirmed by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
assays and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Expression of GNB1L was lower in patients with schizophrenia than in
control subjects in both Australian (10 schizophrenia cases and 10 controls) and 
Japanese (43 schizophrenia cases and 11 controls) brain samples. TBX1 could not
be evaluated due to its low expression levels. Expression levels of the other
genes were not significantly lower in patients with schizophrenia than in control
subjects. Association analysis of tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the
GNB1L gene region did not confirm excess homozygosity in 1918 Japanese
schizophrenia cases and 1909 Japanese controls. Haloperidol treatment for 50
weeks increased Gnb1l gene expression in prefrontal cortex of mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together with the impaired prepulse inhibition observed in
heterozygous Gnb1l knockout mice reported by the previous study, the present
findings support assertions that GNB1L is one of the genes in the 22q11DS region 
responsible for increasing the risk of schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC2894596
PMID: 19011233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Gene. 2008 Dec 31;427(1-2):42-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.09.014. Epub 2008 Sep
24.

Candidate EDA targets revealed by expression profiling of primary keratinocytes
from Tabby mutant mice.

Esibizione D(1), Cui CY, Schlessinger D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, NIH Biomedical Research
Center, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Suite 100, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

EDA, the gene mutated in anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, encodes ectodysplasin, 
a TNF superfamily member that activates NF-kB mediated transcription. To identify
EDA target genes, we have earlier used expression profiling to infer genes
differentially expressed at various developmental time points in Tabby
(Eda-deficient) compared to wild-type mouse skin. To increase the resolution to
find genes whose expression may be restricted to epidermal cells, we have now
extended studies to primary keratinocyte cultures established from E19 wild-type 
and Tabby skin. Using microarrays bearing 44,000 gene probes, we found 385
preliminary candidate genes whose expression was significantly affected by Eda
loss. By comparing expression profiles to those from Eda-A1 transgenic skin, we
restricted the list to 38 "candidate EDA targets", 14 of which were already known
to be expressed in hair follicles or epidermis. We confirmed expression changes
for 3 selected genes, Tbx1, Bmp7, and Jag1, both in keratinocytes and in whole
skin, by Q-PCR and Western blotting analyses. Thus, by the analysis of
keratinocytes, novel candidate pathways downstream of EDA were detected.

PMCID: PMC2635485
PMID: 18848976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Dev Dyn. 2008 Oct;237(10):3059-70. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21715.

Retinoic acid down-regulates Tbx1 expression and induces abnormal differentiation
of tongue muscles in fetal mice.

Okano J(1), Sakai Y, Shiota K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. okanoj@mail.gov.nih

Excess retinoic acid (RA) during pregnancy can cause various developmental
anomalies in both humans and rodents. We investigated the mechanisms underlying
the aberrant differentiation of tongue muscles in fetal mice exposed to exogenous
RA in utero. RA-degrading enzymes (Cyp26a1 and Cyp26b1) were expressed at early
stages of normal tongue development, but exogenous RA perturbed their expression 
in the fetal tongue. RA is normally distributed in the developing tongue muscles 
but its localization was disrupted by exogenous RA. After RA treatment, myogenic 
determination factors were reduced and the differentiation was significantly
suppressed in tongue muscles. Tbx1, a candidate gene of DiGeorge syndrome, was
down-regulated in the fetal tongue in response to excess RA. Moreover, Tbx1 as
well as myogenic determination factors were not observed in tongue muscle
primordia of Cyp26b1-/- fetuses. Our study suggests that RA signaling may play an
essential role in tongue muscle differentiation via the regulation of Tbx1.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18816858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Dev Dyn. 2008 Oct;237(10):3071-8. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21718.

Properties of branchiomeric and somite-derived muscle development in Tbx1 mutant 
embryos.

Grifone R(1), Jarry T, Dandonneau M, Grenier J, Duprez D, Kelly RG.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm Avenir group, Developmental Biology Institute of Marseilles-Luminy, UMR
CNRS 6216 Université de la Méditerranée, Campus de Luminy, Marseille, France.

Vertebrate craniofacial and trunk myogenesis are regulated by distinct genetic
programs. Tbx1, homologue of the del22q11.2 syndrome candidate gene TBX1,
controls branchiomeric craniofacial muscle development. Here, we demonstrate
using immunohistochemistry that myogenic regulatory factors are activated in
Tbx1-positive cells within pharyngeal mesoderm. These cells are also Islet1 and
Capsulin-positive and in the absence of Tbx1 persist in the core of the first
arch. Sporadic hypoplastic mandibular muscles in Tbx1-/- embryos contain
Pax7-positive myocytes with indistinguishable differentiation properties from
wild-type muscles and have normal tendon attachments and fiber-type patterning.
In contrast to TBX1 haploinsufficient del22q11.2 syndrome patients, no alteration
in fiber-type distribution was detected in Tbx1+/- adult masseter and pharyngeal 
constrictor muscles. Furthermore, Tbx1-expressing limb muscles display normal
patterning, differentiation, fiber-type growth, fiber-type distribution and fetal
maturation in the absence of Tbx1. The critical requirement for Tbx1 during
muscle development is thus in the robust onset of myogenic specification in
pharyngeal mesoderm.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18816853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2008 Jul;17(4):353-6. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0b013e328304651c.

The development of the parathyroid gland: from fish to human.

Zajac JD(1), Danks JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Austin Health & Northern
Health, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia. j.zajac@unimelb.edu.au

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to describe the development and 
function of the parathyroid gland from fish to mammals. We describe the molecular
mechanisms regulating parathyroid gland embryogenesis and the clinical syndromes 
related to mutations in control genes.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies have shown that fish express parathyroid hormone.
This is contrary to the long held view that the earliest animals to possess
parathyroid hormone were amphibians. Two fish species have been demonstrated to
express parathyroid hormone but the source and physiological function of this
peptide in fish remains to be determined. There is strong recent evidence that
regulation and development of the parathyroid gland in mammals is controlled by a
cascade of genes. A number of these regulatory factors have been identified using
genetically modified mouse models or as genes causing human disease. These
include, Gcm2/GCMB, Pax1 and Pax9, Hox3a, Tbx1, GATA3, TBCE, Sox3, Eya1 and
Six1/4. Expression of a number of these factors occurs in the gill in fish.
SUMMARY: The function of parathyroid hormone and the parathyroid gland in humans 
is to regulate serum calcium levels to maintain homeostasis. Parathyroid hormone 
genes are present in fish but their function remains to be elucidated.
Parathyroid development is regulated by a cascade of genes, which are now being
rapidly defined in mouse models and in human mutations.

PMID: 18660669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Dev Disabil Res Rev. 2008;14(1):26-34. doi: 10.1002/ddrr.5.

Candidate genes and the behavioral phenotype in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.

Prasad SE(1), Howley S, Murphy KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Education and 
Research Centre, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin 9, Republic of Ireland.
sprasad@rcsi.ie

There is an overwhelming evidence that children and adults with 22q11.2 deletion 
syndrome (22q11.2DS) have a characteristic behavioral phenotype. In particular,
there is a growing body of evidence that indicates an unequivocal association
between 22q11.2DS and schizophrenia, especially in adulthood. Deletion of 22q11.2
is the third highest risk for the development of schizophrenia, with only a
greater risk conferred by being the child of two parents with schizophrenia or
the monozygotic co-twin of an affected individual. Both linkage and association
studies of people with schizophrenia have implicated several susceptibility
genes, of which three are in the 22q11.2 region; catechol-o-methyltransferase
(COMT), proline dehydrogenase (PRODH), and Gnb1L. In addition, variation in Gnb1L
is associated with the presence of psychosis in males with 22q11.2DS. In mouse
models of 22q11.2DS, haploinsufficiency of Tbx1 and Gnb1L is associated with
reduced prepulse inhibition, a schizophrenia endophenotype. The study of
22q11.2DS provides an attractive model to increase our understanding of the
development and pathogenesis of schizophrenia and other psychiatric disorders in 
22q11.2DS and in wider population.

PMID: 18636634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Dev Disabil Res Rev. 2008;14(1):19-25. doi: 10.1002/ddrr.4.

Genetic modifiers of the physical malformations in velo-cardio-facial
syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome.

Aggarwal VS(1), Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
NY 10461, USA.

Velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS), the most common
micro-deletion disorder in humans, is characterized by craniofacial, parathyroid,
and thymic defects as well as cardiac outflow tract malformations. Most patients 
have a similar hemizygous 3 million base pair deletion on 22q11.2. Studies in
mouse have shown that Tbx1, a T-box containing transcription factor present on
the deleted region, is likely responsible for the etiology of the syndrome.
Furthermore, mutations in TBX1 have been found in rare non-deleted patients.
Despite having the same sized deletion, most VCFS/DGS patients exhibit
significant clinical variability. Stochastic, environmental and genetic factors
likely modify the phenotype of patients with the disorder. Here, we review mouse 
genetics studies, which may help identify possible genetic modifiers for the
physical malformations in VCFS/DGS.

PMCID: PMC2818567
PMID: 18636633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Circ Res. 2008 Jul 18;103(2):142-8. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.172189. Epub 2008
Jun 26.

The del22q11.2 candidate gene Tbx1 controls regional outflow tract identity and
coronary artery patterning.

Théveniau-Ruissy M(1), Dandonneau M, Mesbah K, Ghez O, Mattei MG, Miquerol L,
Kelly RG.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Institute of Marseilles-Luminy, Inserm Avenir group, UMR
6216 CNRS-Université de la Méditerrané, Campus de Luminy, Marseille Cedex 9,
France.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 Aug 15;103(4):337-9.

TBX1, encoding a T-box containing transcription factor, is the major candidate
gene for del22q11.2 or DiGeorge syndrome, characterized by craniofacial and
cardiovascular defects including tetralogy of Fallot and common arterial trunk.
Mice lacking Tbx1 have severe defects in the development of pharyngeal
derivatives including cardiac progenitor cells of the second heart field that
contribute to the arterial pole of the heart. The outflow tract of Tbx1 mutant
embryos is short and narrow resulting in common arterial trunk. Here we show by a
series of genetic crosses using transgene markers of second heart field derived
myocardium and coronary endothelial cells that a subdomain of myocardium normally
observed at the base of the pulmonary trunk is reduced and malpositioned in Tbx1 
mutant hearts. This defect is associated with anomalous coronary artery
patterning. Both right and left coronary ostia form predominantly at the
right/ventral sinus in mutant hearts, proximal coronary arteries coursing across 
the normally coronary free ventral region of the heart. We have identified
Semaphorin3c as a Tbx1-dependent gene expressed in subpulmonary myocardium. Our
results implicate second heart field development in coronary artery patterning
and provide new insights into the association between conotruncal defects and
coronary artery anomalies.

PMID: 18583714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Dev Biol. 2008 Aug 1;320(1):39-48. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.006. Epub 2008
Apr 16.

A regulatory relationship between Tbx1 and FGF signaling during tooth
morphogenesis and ameloblast lineage determination.

Mitsiadis TA(1), Tucker AS, De Bari C, Cobourne MT, Rice DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orofacial Development and Structure, Institute of Oral Biology, 
ZZMK, Faculty of Medicine, University of Zurich, Plattenstrasse 11, CH 8032
Zurich, Switzerland. thimios.mitsiadis@zzmk.uzh.ch

Erratum in
    Dev Biol. 2009 Feb 15;326(2):482.

The Tbx1 gene is a transcriptional regulator involved in the DiGeorge syndrome,
which affects normal facial and tooth development. Several clinical reports point
to a common enamel defect in the teeth of patients with DiGeorge syndrome. Here, 
we have analyzed the expression, regulation, and function of Tbx1 during mouse
molar development. Tbx1 expression is restricted to epithelial cells that give
rise to the enamel producing ameloblasts and correlates with proliferative
events. Tbx1 expression in epithelium requires mesenchyme-derived signals: dental
mesenchyme induces expression of Tbx1 in recombined dental and non-dental
epithelia. Bead implantation experiments show that FGF molecules are able to
maintain epithelial Tbx1 expression during odontogenesis. Expression of Tbx1 in
dental epithelium of FGF receptor 2b(-/-) mutant mice is downregulated, showing a
genetic link between FGF signaling and Tbx1 in teeth. Forced expression of Tbx1
in dental explants activates amelogenin expression. These results indicate that
Tbx1 expression in developing teeth is under control of FGF signaling and
correlates with determination of the ameloblast lineage.

PMID: 18572158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2008 Sep;61(9):1016-23. doi:
10.1016/j.bjps.2008.02.007. Epub 2008 Jun 12.

Possible mechanisms and gene involvement in speech problems in the 22q11.2
deletion syndrome.

Widdershoven JC(1), Beemer FA, Kon M, Dejonckere PH, Mink van der Molen AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic, Reconstructive and Hand Surgery, University Medical
Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. j.c.c.widdershoven@students.uu.nl

SUMMARY: The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome represents a contiguous gene syndrome with
a highly variable phenotype. To date, over 180 clinical features have been
described. Studies have been done in order to identify the responsible genes.
Several candidate genes such as TBX1 and COMT seem to be important in the
development of the phenotype. One of the prevalent and serious problems
encountered by patients with the 22q11.2 deletion is difficulty with speech. This
may be due to a number of factors such as adenoid hypoplasia, muscle hypotonia,
platybasia, upper airway asymmetry, and neuroanatomical abnormalities. The
complex interaction of these factors leads to less favourable results after
surgery to correct velopharyngeal insufficiency. This article offers a
theoretical overview and proposes future research to investigate which factors
are indeed responsible for the speech problems encountered by patients with the
22q11.2 deletion and identify responsible genes.

PMID: 18554997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Jul 15;146A(14):1871-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32392.

Partial trisomy of chromosome 22 resulting from a supernumerary marker chromosome
22 in a child with features of cat eye syndrome.

Bélien V(1), Gérard-Blanluet M, Serero S, Le Dû N, Baumann C, Jacquemont ML,
Dupont C, Krabchi K, Drunat S, Elbez A, Janaud JC, Benzacken B, Verloes A, Tabet 
AC, Aboura A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical genetics, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France.

Small supernumerary marker chromosomes are present in about 0.05% of the human
population. In approximately 28% of persons with these markers (excluding the
approximately 60% derived from one of the acrocentric chromosomes), an abnormal
phenotype is observed. We report on a 3-month-old girl with intrauterine growth
retardation, craniofacial features, hypotonia, partial coloboma of iris and total
anomalous pulmonary venous return. Cytogenetic analysis showed the presence of a 
supernumerary marker chromosome, identified by fluorescence in situ hybridization
as part of chromosome 22, and conferring a proximal partial trisomy 22q22.21, not
encompassing the DiGeorge critical region (RP11-154H4 + , TBX1-). This
observation adds new information relevant to cat eye syndrome and partial trisomy
of 22q.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18553551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2008 Jun 15;310(4):355-69. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.21215.

Mandibular arch muscle identity is regulated by a conserved molecular process
during vertebrate development.

Knight RD(1), Mebus K, Roehl HH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, Kings College London, London, UK.
robert.knight@kcl.ac.uk

Vertebrate head muscles exhibit a highly conserved pattern of innervation and
skeletal connectivity and yet it is unclear whether the molecular basis of their 
development is likewise conserved. Using the highly conserved expression of
Engrailed 2 (En2) as a marker of identity in the dorsal mandibular muscles of
zebrafish, we have investigated the molecular signals and tissues required for
patterning these muscles. We show that muscle En2 expression is not dependent on 
signals from the adjacent neural tube, pharyngeal endoderm or axial mesoderm and 
that early identity of head muscles does not require bone morphogenetic pathway, 
Notch or Hedgehog (Hh) signalling. However, constrictor dorsalis En2 expression
is completely lost after a loss of fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) signalling and 
we show that is true throughout head muscle development. These results suggest
that head muscle identity is dependent on Fgf signalling. Data from experiments
performed in chick suggest a similar regulation of En2 genes by Fgf signalling
revealing a conserved mechanism for specifying head muscle identity. We present
evidence that another key gene important in the development of mouse head
muscles, Tbx1, is also critical for specification of mandibular arch muscle
identity and that this is independent of Fgf signalling. These data imply that
dorsal mandibular arch muscle identity in fish, chick and mouse is specified by a
highly conserved molecular process despite differing functions of these muscles
in different lineages.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18338789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Dev Biol. 2008 Apr 15;316(2):524-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.01.037. Epub 2008 
Feb 13.

Identification of downstream genetic pathways of Tbx1 in the second heart field.

Liao J(1), Aggarwal VS, Nowotschin S, Bondarev A, Lipner S, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Ave., Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Tbx1, a T-box transcription factor, and an important gene for velo-cardio-facial 
syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS) in humans, causes outflow tract (OFT) heart
defects when inactivated in the mouse. Tbx1 is expressed in the second heart
field (SHF) and is required in this tissue for OFT development. To identify Tbx1 
regulated genetic pathways in the SHF, we performed gene expression profiling of 
the caudal pharyngeal region in Tbx1(-/-) and wild type embryos. Isl1, a key
marker for the SHF, as well as Hod and Nkx2-6, were downregulated in Tbx1(-/-)
mutants, while genes required for cardiac morphogenesis, such as Raldh2, Gata4,
and Tbx5, as well as a subset of muscle contractile genes, signifying myocardial 
differentiation, were ectopically expressed. Pan-mesodermal ablation of Tbx1
resulted in similar gene expression changes, suggesting cell-autonomous roles of 
Tbx1 in regulating these genes. Opposite expression changes concomitant with
SHF-derived cardiac defects occurred in TBX1 gain-of-function mutants, indicating
that appropriate levels of Tbx1 are required for heart development. When taken
together, our studies show that Tbx1 acts upstream in a genetic network that
positively regulates SHF cell proliferation and negatively regulates
differentiation, cell-autonomously in the caudal pharyngeal region.

PMCID: PMC2494702
PMID: 18328475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 26;105(8):2913-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0712344105. Epub 2008 Feb 19.

Retinoic acid deficiency alters second heart field formation.

Ryckebusch L(1), Wang Z, Bertrand N, Lin SC, Chi X, Schwartz R, Zaffran S,
Niederreither K.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Institute of Marseille-Luminy, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 6216, Campus de Luminy Case 907, 
13009 Marseille, France.

Retinoic acid (RA), the active derivative of vitamin A, has been implicated in
various steps of cardiovascular development. The retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2
(RALDH2) enzyme catalyzes the second oxidative step in RA biosynthesis and its
loss of function creates a severe embryonic RA deficiency. Raldh2(-/-) knockout
embryos fail to undergo heart looping and have impaired atrial and sinus venosus 
development. To understand the mechanism(s) producing these changes, we examined 
the contribution of the second heart field (SHF) to pharyngeal mesoderm, atria,
and outflow tract in Raldh2(-/-) embryos. RA deficiency alters SHF gene
expression in two ways. First, Raldh2(-/-) embryos exhibited a posterior
expansion of anterior markers of the SHF, including Tbx1, Fgf8, and the
Mlc1v-nlacZ-24/Fgf10 reporter transgene as well as of Islet1. This occurred at
early somite stages, when cardiac defects became irreversible in an avian vitamin
A-deficiency model, indicating that endogenous RA is required to restrict the SHF
posteriorly. Explant studies showed that this expanded progenitor population
cannot differentiate properly. Second, RA up-regulated cardiac Bmp expression
levels at the looping stage. The contribution of the SHF to both inflow and
outflow poles was perturbed under RA deficiency, creating a disorganization of
the heart tube. We also investigated genetic cross-talk between Nkx2.5 and RA
signaling by generating double mutant mice. Strikingly, Nkx2.5 deficiency was
able to rescue molecular defects in the posterior region of the Raldh2(-/-)
mutant heart, in a gene dosage-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC2268559
PMID: 18287057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2008 Mar;9(1):33-43. doi: 10.1007/s10162-008-0110-6.
Epub 2008 Jan 30.

Cooperative function of Tbx1 and Brn4 in the periotic mesenchyme is necessary for
cochlea formation.

Braunstein EM(1), Crenshaw EB 3rd, Morrow BE, Adams JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The T-box transcription factor TBX1 has been identified as the major gene
responsible for the etiology of velocardiofacial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome
(VCFS/DGS). Conductive hearing loss occurs in a majority of patients with this
syndrome, while sensorineural deafness has also been reported in some cases.
Mutations in POU3F4/BRN4, a POU domain transcription factor, cause DFN3, an
X-linked nonsyndromic form of deafness characterized by mixed conductive and
sensorineural hearing loss. Inactivation of the murine orthologues of these genes
causes similar defects to those seen in humans and has provided excellent models 
for the study of inner ear development. Tbx1 and Brn4 are expressed in the
mesenchymal cells surrounding the otic vesicle and have been shown to play roles 
in cochlear outgrowth. Furthermore, expression of Brn4 is reduced in Tbx1 null
mutants, suggesting a possible genetic interaction between these genes. To test
whether Tbx1 and Brn4 function in a common pathway, mice mutant for both genes
were generated and analyzed for inner ear defects. Brn4-;Tbx1+/- mutants
displayed a significant reduction in the number of turns of the cochlea compared 
to Brn4- or Tbx1+/- mice. In addition, Brn4-;Tbx1+/- mice displayed structural
defects in the apical cochlea indicative of Mondini dysplasia found in patients
with either VCFS/DGS or DFN3. These data establish a genetic interaction between 
Tbx1 and Brn4 relevant to human disease and indicate a function of these genes in
signaling from the periotic mesenchyme to the otic vesicle to direct proper
coiling of the cochlear duct.

PMCID: PMC2536808
PMID: 18231833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 15;313(2):887-96. Epub 2007 Nov 17.

Deletion of the Pitx1 genomic locus affects mandibular tooth morphogenesis and
expression of the Barx1 and Tbx1 genes.

Mitsiadis TA(1), Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Orofacial Development, Institute of Oral Biology,
ZZMK, Faculty of Medicine, University of Zurich, Plattenstrasse 11, 8032 Zurich, 
Switzerland. thimios.mitsiadis@zzmk.uzh.ch

Pitx1 is a bicoid-related homeodomain factor that exhibits preferential
expression in the developing hindlimb, mandible, pituitary gland and teeth. Pitx1
gene-deleted mice exhibit striking abnormalities in morphogenesis and growth of
both hindlimb and mandible, suggesting a proliferative defect in these two
structures. Here, we studied the expression and regulation of Pitx1 in both
mandible and developing teeth and analyzed tooth morphology, cell proliferation, 
apoptosis and expression of Pitx2, Barx1 and Tbx1 in dental tissues of Pitx1-/-
mouse embryos. Pitx1 expression is restricted to the epithelium of the growing
tooth anlagen. Tissue recombination and bead implantation experiments
demonstrated that bone morphogenetic protein-4 down-regulates Pitx1 expression in
both mandibular mesenchyme and dental epithelium. Deletion of the Pitx1 locus
results in micrognathia and abnormal morphology of the mandibular molars.
Although Pitx2 expression in teeth of Pitx1-/- embryos is not altered, expression
of Barx1 decreased in the mesenchyme of the mandibular molars. Furthermore, Pitx1
deletion results in suppression of Tbx1 expression in dental epithelium. Taken
together, these results indicate that independent genetic pathways in mandibular 
and maxillary processes determine tooth development and morphology.

PMID: 18082678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Feb 15;17(4):555-66. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

Strong evidence that GNB1L is associated with schizophrenia.

Williams NM(1), Glaser B, Norton N, Williams H, Pierce T, Moskvina V, Monks S,
Del Favero J, Goossens D, Rujescu D, Giegling I, Kirov G, Craddock N, Murphy KC, 
O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, Wales School of Medicine, Cardiff
University, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK. williamsnm@cf.ac.uk

Evidence that a gene or genes on chromosome 22 is involved in susceptibility to
schizophrenia comes from two sources: the increased incidence of schizophrenia in
individuals with 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) and genetic linkage studies.
In mice, hemizygous deletion of either Tbx1 or Gnb1l can cause deficits in
pre-pulse inhibition, a sensory motor gating defect which is associated with
schizophrenia. We tested the hypothesis that variation at this locus confers risk
of schizophrenia and related disorders in a series of case-control association
studies. First, we found evidence for a male-specific genotypic association (P = 
0.00017) TBX1/GNB1L in 662 schizophrenia cases and 1416 controls from the UK.
Moreover, we replicated this finding in two independent case-control samples
(additional 746 cases and 1330 controls) (meta analysis P = 1.8 x 10(-5)) and
also observed significant evidence for genotypic association in an independent
sample of 480 schizophrenia parent-proband trios from Bulgaria with markers at
this locus, which was again strongest in the male probands (P = 0.004).
Genotyping the most significant SNPs in a sample of 83 subjects with 22q11DS with
and without psychosis again revealed a significant allelic association with
psychosis in males with 22q11DS (P = 0.01). Finally, using allele specific
expression analysis, we have shown that the markers associated with psychosis are
also correlated with alterations in GNB1L expression, raising the hypothesis that
the risk to develop psychosis at this locus could be mediated in a dose sensitive
manner via gene expression. However, other explanations are possible, and further
analyses will be required to clarify the correct functional mechanism.

PMID: 18003636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Acta Histochem. 2008;110(2):97-108. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

Muscle development: forming the head and trunk muscles.

Shih HP(1), Gross MK, Kioussi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.

The morphological events forming the body's musculature are sensitive to genetic 
and environmental perturbations with high incidence of congenital myopathies,
muscular dystrophies and degenerations. Pattern formation generates branching
series of states in the genetic regulatory network. Different states of the
network specify pre-myogenic progenitor cells in the head and trunk. These
progenitors reveal their myogenic nature by the subsequent onset of expression of
the master switch gene MyoD and/or Myf5. Once initiated, the myogenic progression
that ultimately forms mature muscle appears to be quite similar in head and trunk
skeletal muscle. Several genes that are essential in specifying pre-myogenic
progenitors in the trunk are known. Pax3, Lbx1, and a number of other homeobox
transcription factors are essential in specifying pre-myogenic progenitors in the
dermomyotome, from which the epaxial and hypaxial myoblasts, which express
myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs), emerge. The proteins involved in specifying
pre-myogenic progenitors in the head are just beginning to be discovered and
appear to be distinct from those in the trunk. The homeobox gene Pitx2, the T-box
gene Tbx1, and the bHLH genes Tcf21 and Msc encode transcription factors that
play roles in specifying progenitor cells that will give rise to branchiomeric
muscles of the head. Pitx2 is expressed well before the onset of myogenic
progression in the first branchial arch (BA) mesodermal core and is essential for
the formation of first BA derived muscle groups. Anterior-posterior patterning
events that occur during gastrulation appear to initiate the Pitx2 expression
domain in the cephalic and BA mesoderm. Pitx2 therefore contributes to the
establishment of network states, or kernels, that specify pre-myogenic
progenitors for extraocular and mastication muscles. A detailed understanding of 
the molecular mechanisms that regulate head muscle specification and formation
provides the foundation for understanding congenital myopathies. Current
technology and mouse model systems help to elucidate the molecular basis on
etiology and repair of muscular degenerative diseases.

PMID: 17945333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Jan 1;17(1):150-7. Epub 2007 Oct 4.

In vivo response to high-resolution variation of Tbx1 mRNA dosage.

Zhang Z(1), Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Sciences 
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mouse modeling of haploinsufficiency syndromes and, in general, of syndromes
caused by gene dosage imbalance, is often unsatisfactory because loss (or gain)
of one copy of the gene of interest is insufficient to recapitulate the disease
phenotype. In this study, we use Tbx1 mutants, which model one of the most common
haploinsufficiency disorders, the 22q11.2DS/DiGeorge/Velocardiofacial syndrome,
to test the feasibility of high resolution dosage manipulation to generate mouse 
models that more closely resemble the human syndrome. We used nine different
genotypes at the Tbx1 locus that are associated with progressively lower mRNA
levels in vivo. We show that penetrance and expressivity of different phenotypic 
features became more severe as the dosage diminished, as expected, but the
response was strikingly non-linear, with extreme examples such as neonatal
lethality, which changed from 2 to 100% after a dosage reduction of just
approximately 16%. Furthermore, heart phenotype variability, extreme in the human
syndrome but very limited, or absent, in the standard knockout model, was seen
when mRNA level was approximately 20% of normal level, suggesting that there is a
threshold level associated with unstable balance, which can be perturbed by
chance events. Overall, our data suggest that there are developmental
process-specific gene dosage thresholds beyond which the phenotype worsens very
rapidly with very small mRNA level reductions.

PMID: 17916582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Dev Genes Evol. 2007 Oct;217(10):691-7. Epub 2007 Sep 15.

Identification and developmental expression of two Tbx1/10-related genes in the
agnathan Lethenteron japonicum.

Tiecke E(1), Matsuura M, Kokubo N, Kuraku S, Kusakabe R, Kuratani S, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, B-17, 4259 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama, 226-8501, Japan.

We have identified two Tbx1/10-related genes, LjTbx1/10A and LjTbx1/10B, from the
Japanese river lamprey Lethenteron japonicum. We used in situ hybridization to
characterize their expression pattern during embryonic development. LjTbx1/10A
and LjTbx1/10B shared common expression in the pharyngeal arches and otic
vesicle, although their levels and timing of expression differed markedly.
LjTbx1/10A was highly expressed in the mesodermal core of pharyngeal arches and
the adjacent endoderm throughout pharyngeal arch development, whereas LjTbx1/10B 
expression was only transiently upregulated in forming pharyngeal pouches.
LjTbx1/10A transcripts first appeared at stage 25 in otic vesicles, whereas
LjTbx1/10B transcripts could already be detected in the developing otic placode
at stage 20. These results suggest that lamprey LjTbx1/10A and LjTbx1/10B may
play distinct roles in the patterning and development of the pharyngeal
apparatus. It appears that lamprey Tbx1/10 genes have undergone
subfunctionalization independent from gnathostomes, with regard to both
regulation and function.

PMID: 17874129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Neurosci Lett. 2007 Oct 2;425(3):146-50. Epub 2007 Aug 15.

An association study between the genetic polymorphisms within TBX1 and
schizophrenia in the Chinese population.

Ma G(1), Shi Y, Tang W, He Z, Huang K, Li Z, He G, Feng G, Li H, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Center, PO Box 501, Hao Ran Building, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
1954 Hua Shan Road, Shanghai 200030, China.

The strong association between common psychiatric disorders and the 22q11.2
microdeletion suggests that haploinsufficiency of one or more genes in the region
confers susceptibility to these disorders. Recent mouse studies have shown that
the T-box 1 (TBX1) gene in the 22q11.2 region can cause prepulse inhibition (PPI)
impairment in the heterozygous state. A study has also shown that phenotypic
features of 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) were segregated with an
inactivating mutation of TBX1 in one family, suggesting that the TBX1 gene plays 
a role in the pathogenesis of some psychiatric disorders. We performed an
association study between three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
TBX1 gene and schizophrenia. However, we found no significant difference in the
genotype or allele distributions between the 328 schizophrenics and 288 controls 
for any of the polymorphisms, nor was there any haplotype association. Our data
suggest that the genetic polymorphisms within TBX1 do not confer an increased
susceptibility to schizophrenia in the Chinese population.

PMID: 17850965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Dev Biol. 2007 Oct 15;310(2):329-40. Epub 2007 Aug 9.

In vivo genetic ablation of the periotic mesoderm affects cell proliferation
survival and differentiation in the cochlea.

Xu H(1), Chen L, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Tbx1 is required for ear development in humans and mice. Gene manipulation in the
mouse has discovered multiple consequences of loss of function on early
development of the inner ear, some of which are attributable to a cell autonomous
role in maintaining cell proliferation of epithelial progenitors of the cochlear 
and vestibular apparata. However, ablation of the mesodermal domain of the gene
also results in severe but more restricted abnormalities. Here we show that Tbx1 
has a dynamic expression during late development of the ear, in particular, is
expressed in the sensory epithelium of the vestibular organs but not of the
cochlea. Vice versa, it is expressed in the condensed mesenchyme that surrounds
the cochlea but not in the one that surrounds the vestibule. Loss of Tbx1 in the 
mesoderm disrupts this peri-cochlear capsule by strongly reducing the
proliferation of mesenchymal cells. The organogenesis of the cochlea, which
normally occurs inside the capsule, was dramatically affected in terms of growth 
of the organ, as well as proliferation, differentiation and survival of its
epithelial cells. This model provides a striking demonstration of the essential
role played by the periotic mesenchyme in the organogenesis of the cochlea.

PMCID: PMC2223065
PMID: 17825816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Apr;45(4):267-71.

[Effect of external retinoic acid on Tbx1 gene during zebrafish embryogenesis].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang LF(1), Gui YH, Zhong T, Wang YX, Qian LX, Dong YX, Jiang Q, Sun SN, Song
HY.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China.

OBJECTIVE: DiGeorge/del22q11 syndrome is one of the most common genetic causes of
outflow tract and aortic arch defects in human. DiGeorge/del22q11 is thought to
involve an embryonic defect restricted to the pharyngeal arches and the
corresponding pharyngeal pouches. Previous studies have evidenced that retinoic
acid (RA) signaling is definitely indispensable for the development of the
pharyngeal arches. Tbx1, one of the T-box containing genes, is proved to be the
most attractive candidate gene for DiGeorge/del22q11 syndrome. However, the
interaction between RA and Tbx1 has not been fully investigated. Exploring the
interaction will contribute to discover the molecular pathways disrupted in
DiGeorge/del22q11 syndrome, and will also be essential for understanding genetic 
basis for congenital heart disease. It now seems possible that genes and
molecular pathways disrupted in DiGeorge syndrome will also account for some
isolated cases of congenital heart disease. Accordingly, the present study aimed 
to extensively study the effects of external RA on the cardiac development and
Tbx1 expression during zebrafish embryogenesis.
METHODS: The chemical genetics approach was applied by treating zebrafish embryos
with 5 x 10(-8) mol/L RA and 10(-7) mol/L RA at 12.5 hour post fertilization
(hpf). The expression patterns of Tbx1 were monitored by whole-mount in situ
hybridization and quantitative real-time RT-PCR, respectively.
RESULTS: The zebrafish embryos treated with 5 x 10(-8) mol/L RA and 10(-7) mol/L 
RA for 1.5 h at 12.5 hpf exhibited selective defects of abnormal heart tube. The 
results of whole-mount in situ hybridization with Tbx1 RNA probe showed that Tbx1
was expressed in cardiac region, pharyngeal arches and otic vesicle during
zebrafish embryogenesis. RA treatment led to a distinct spatio-temporal
expression pattern for Tbx1 from that in wild type embryo. The real-time PCR
analysis showed that Tbx1 expression levels were markedly reduced by RA
treatment. Tbx1 expression in the pharyngeal arches and heart were obviously down
regulated compared to the wild type embryos. In contrast to 5 x 10(-8) mol/L
RA-treated groups, 10(-7) mol/L RA caused a more severe effect on the Tbx1
expression level.
CONCLUSION: These results suggested that there was a genetic link between RA and 
Tbx1 during development of zebrafish embryo. RA could produce an altered Tbx1
expression pattern in zebrafish. RA may regulate the Tbx1 expression in a
dose-dependant manner. RA could represent a major epigenetic factor to cause
abnormal expression of Tbx1, secondarily, disrupt the pharyngeal arch and heart
development.

PMID: 17706063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Aug;81(2):280-91. Epub 2007 Jun 15.

Mutations in cardiac T-box factor gene TBX20 are associated with diverse cardiac 
pathologies, including defects of septation and valvulogenesis and
cardiomyopathy.

Kirk EP(1), Sunde M, Costa MW, Rankin SA, Wolstein O, Castro ML, Butler TL, Hyun 
C, Guo G, Otway R, Mackay JP, Waddell LB, Cole AD, Hayward C, Keogh A, Macdonald 
P, Griffiths L, Fatkin D, Sholler GF, Zorn AM, Feneley MP, Winlaw DS, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, 2010, 
Australia.

The T-box family transcription factor gene TBX20 acts in a conserved regulatory
network, guiding heart formation and patterning in diverse species. Mouse Tbx20
is expressed in cardiac progenitor cells, differentiating cardiomyocytes, and
developing valvular tissue, and its deletion or RNA interference-mediated
knockdown is catastrophic for heart development. TBX20 interacts physically,
functionally, and genetically with other cardiac transcription factors, including
NKX2-5, GATA4, and TBX5, mutations of which cause congenital heart disease (CHD).
Here, we report nonsense (Q195X) and missense (I152M) germline mutations within
the T-box DNA-binding domain of human TBX20 that were associated with a family
history of CHD and a complex spectrum of developmental anomalies, including
defects in septation, chamber growth, and valvulogenesis. Biophysical
characterization of wild-type and mutant proteins indicated how the missense
mutation disrupts the structure and function of the TBX20 T-box. Dilated
cardiomyopathy was a feature of the TBX20 mutant phenotype in humans and mice,
suggesting that mutations in developmental transcription factors can provide a
sensitized template for adult-onset heart disease. Our findings are the first to 
link TBX20 mutations to human pathology. They provide insights into how mutation 
of different genes in an interactive regulatory circuit lead to diverse clinical 
phenotypes, with implications for diagnosis, genetic screening, and patient
follow-up.

PMCID: PMC1950799
PMID: 17668378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Clin Calcium. 2007 Aug;17(8):1206-13.

[Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism due to abnormalities in parathyroid
organogenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Japan.

Recent advance in mouse genomics has provided us lots of information concerning
genes playing critical roles during organogenesis of parathyroid gland. And human
counterparts of murine hypoparathyroidism produced by gene manipulation have been
identified. Large part of genes which is responsible for hypoparathyroidism
consisted from transcription factors such as TBX1, GATA3, SOX3. This may
contribute to the abnormalities in the other organogenesis. Systematic survey of 
the anomalies in face and the other organ is important to confirm the diagnosis. 
And people should keep in mind that PTH could not be produced only in parathyroid
in parathyroid agenesis.

PMID: 17660617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Med. 2007 Jul-Aug;13(7-8):407-14.

Analysis of TBX1 variation in patients with psychotic and affective disorders.

Funke BH(1), Lencz T, Finn CT, DeRosse P, Poznik GD, Plocik AM, Kane J, Rogus J, 
Malhotra AK, Kucherlapati R.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Partners Center for Genetics and Genomics, Boston, MA 02139, USA.
bfunke@partners.org

A significant portion of patients with 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) develop 
psychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia and other psychotic and affective 
symptoms, and the responsible gene/s are assumed to also play a significant role 
in the etiology of nonsyndromic psychiatric disease. The most common psychiatric 
diagnosis among patients with 22q11DS is schizophrenia, thought to result from
neurotransmitter imbalances and also from disturbed brain development. Several
genes in the 22q11 region with known or suspected roles in neurotransmitter
metabolism have been analyzed in patients with isolated schizophrenia; however,
their contribution to the disease remains controversial. Haploinsufficiency of
the TBX1 gene has been shown to be sufficient to cause the core physical
malformations associated with 22q11DS in mice and humans and via abnormal brain
development could contribute to 22q11DS-related and isolated psychiatric disease.
22q11DS populations also have increased rates of psychiatric conditions other
than schizophrenia, including mood disorders. We therefore analyzed variations at
the TBX1 locus in a cohort of 446 white patients with psychiatric disorders
relevant to 22q11DS and 436 ethnically matched controls. The main diagnoses
included schizophrenia (n = 226), schizoaffective disorder (n = 67), bipolar
disorder (n = 82), and major depressive disorder (n = 29). We genotyped nine tag 
SNPs in this sample but did not observe significant differences in allele or
haplotype frequencies in any of the analyzed groups (all affected, schizophrenia 
and schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia alone, and bipolar disorder and major
depressive disorder) compared with the control group. Based on these results we
conclude that TBX1 variation does not make a strong contribution to the genetic
etiology of nonsyndromic forms of psychiatric disorders commonly seen in patients
with 22q11DS.

PMCID: PMC1952674
PMID: 17622328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Genesis. 2007 Jul;45(7):470-5.

A fate map of Tbx1 expressing cells reveals heterogeneity in the second cardiac
field.

Huynh T(1), Chen L, Terrell P, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Sciences 
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Tbx1 is required for the expansion of second heart field (SHF) cardiac
progenitors destined to the outflow tract of the heart. Loss of Tbx1 causes heart
defects in humans and mice. We report a novel Tbx1(Cre) knock-in allele that we
use to fate map Tbx1-expressing cells during development in conjunction with a
reporter and 3D image reconstruction. Tbx1 descendants constitute a mesodermal
cell population that surrounds the primitive pharynx and approaches the arterial 
pole of the heart from lateral and posterior, but not anterior directions. These 
cells populate most of the outflow tract with the exception of the anterior
portion, thus identifying a population of the SHF of distinct origin. Both
myocardial and underlying endocardial layers were labeled, suggesting a common
origin of these cell types. Finally, we show that Tbx1(Cre)-positive and
Tbx1(Cre)-negative cell descendants occupy discrete domains in the outflow tract 
throughout development.

PMID: 17610275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Nihon Naika Gakkai Zasshi. 2007 Apr 10;96(4):707-12.

[Progress in diagnosis and therapy: Hypocalcemia due to idiopathic
hypoparathyroidism].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka H.

PMID: 17506308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Turk J Pediatr. 2007 Jan-Mar;49(1):61-8.

TBX1 gene mutation screening in patients with non-syndromic Fallot tetralogy.

Cabuk F(1), Karabulut HG, Tuncali T, Karademir S, Bozdayi M, Tükün A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Dr. Sami Ulus Children's Hospital, Ankara,
Turkey.

Fallot tetralogy (FT) is the most frequently observed conotruncal heart defect
(CTHD) and accompanies 15% of the 22q11 deletion syndromes, DiGeorge/
velocardiofacial (DGS/VCFS) syndromes. TBX1 is a gene located in the 22q11 region
and has a role in neural crest migration and conotruncal development. The mouse
Tbx1 locus shows 98% homology with TBX1. DGS/VCFS-like aortic arch abnormalities 
in the mouse were attributed to deletions in this locus. The T-box region, common
to both mice and humans, is part of TBX1 with proven effects on heart outflow
track anomalies. The role of TBX1 in non-syndromic CTHDs is still unclear. In
this study, we screened the TBX1 gene T-box region exons in 50 FT patients
without 22q11 deletion and in 50 healthy volunteers. Our study did not show any
disease causing mutations, but one polymorphic change. These results do not
support a major role of the T-box region in the etiology of isolated FT.
Furthermore, this study also confirms that mouse cardiac-development study models
do not always provide an explanation for human phenotype-genotype correlations.

PMID: 17479646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Apr 3;104(14):5907-12. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Cranial muscle defects of Pitx2 mutants result from specification defects in the 
first branchial arch.

Shih HP(1), Gross MK, Kioussi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, College of
Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.

Pitx2 expression is observed during all states of the myogenic progression in
embryonic muscle anlagen and persists in adult muscle. Pitx2 mutant mice form all
but a few muscle anlagen. Loss or degeneration in muscle anlagen could generally 
be attributed to the loss of a muscle attachment site induced by some other
aspect of the Pitx2 phenotype. Muscles derived from the first branchial arch were
absent, whereas muscles derived from the second branchial arch were merely
distorted in Pitx2 mutants at midgestation. Pitx2 was expressed well before, and 
was required for, initiation of the myogenic progression in the first, but not
second, branchial arch mesoderm. Pitx2 was also required for expression of
premyoblast specification markers Tbx1, Tcf21, and Msc in the first, but not
second, branchial arch. First, but not second, arch mesoderm of Pitx2 mutants
failed to enlarge after embryonic day 9.5, well before the onset of the myogenic 
progression. Thus, Pitx2 contributes to specification of first, but not second,
arch mesoderm. The jaw of Pitx2 mutants was vestigial by midgestation, but
significant size reductions were observed as early as embryonic day 10.5. The
diminutive first branchial arch of mutants could not be explained by loss of
mesoderm alone, suggesting that Pitx2 contributes to the earliest specification
of jaw itself.

PMCID: PMC1851590
PMID: 17384148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Jun;15(6):658-63. Epub 2007 Mar 21.

Mutations in TBX1 genocopy the 22q11.2 deletion and duplication syndromes: a new 
susceptibility factor for mental retardation.

Torres-Juan L(1), Rosell J, Morla M, Vidal-Pou C, García-Algas F, de la Fuente
MA, Juan M, Tubau A, Bachiller D, Bernues M, Perez-Granero A, Govea N, Busquets
X, Heine-Suñer D.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Genetics, Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Andrea Doria 55, Palma 
de Mallorca 07014, Balearic Islands, Spain.

A screen for TBX1 gene mutations identified two mutations in patients with some
features compatible with the 22q11.2-deletion syndrome but with no deletions. One
is a de novo missense mutation and the other is a 5' untranslated region (5'UTR) 
C>T change that affects a nucleotide with a remarkable trans-species
conservation. Computer modelling shows that the 5'UTR change is likely to affect 
the mRNA structure and in vitro translation experiments demonstrate that it
produces a twofold increase in translation efficiency. Recently, duplications in 
the 22q11.2 region were reported in patients referred for fragile-X determination
because of cognitive and behavioural problems. Because the 5'UTR nucleotide
change may be a functional equivalent of a duplication of the TBX1 gene, we
decided to screen 200 patients who had been referred for fragile-X determination 
and 400 healthy control individuals. As a result, we found the 5'UTR mutation to 
be present in three patients with mental retardation or behavioural problems and 
absent in control individuals of the same ethnic background. This observation
suggests that it may be reasonable to screen for such mutation among patients
with unspecific cognitive deficits and we provide an easy and quick way to do it 
with an amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) approach. To our
knowledge, this is the first human mutation showing that TBX1 is a candidate
causing mental retardation associated with the 22q11.2 duplication syndrome.

PMID: 17377518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Gene. 2007 Apr 15;391(1-2):91-102. Epub 2007 Jan 19.

Dynamic changes in gene expression profiles of 22q11 and related orthologous
genes during mouse development.

Amati F(1), Biancolella M, Farcomeni A, Giallonardi S, Bueno S, Minella D,
Vecchione L, Chillemi G, Desideri A, Novelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopathology and Diagnostic Imaging, Tor Vergata University,
Rome, Italy. amati@med.uniroma2.it

22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) is a developmental anomaly caused by a
microdeletion on human chromosome 22q11. Although mouse models indicate that Tbx1
is the gene responsible for the syndrome, the phenotypic spectrum of del22q11
patients is complex suggesting that gene-gene and gene-environment interactions
are operative in delineating the pathogenesis of 22q11DS. In order to study the
regulatory effects of 22q11 haploinsufficiency during development, the expression
pattern of the orthologous MM16 genes was analysed in total embryos at different 
stages (from 4.5 dpc to 14.5 dpc; corresponding to pharyngeal development) by
using a low-density oligonucleotide microarray (the "22q11DS-chip"). This
microarray consists of 39 mouse genes orthologous to the 22q11 human ones and 29 
mouse target genes selected on the basis of their potential involvement in
biological pathways regarding 22q11 gene products. Expression level filtering and
statistical analysis identified a set of genes that was consistently
differentially expressed (FC>+/-2) during specific developmental stages. These
genes show a similar profile in expression (overexpression or underexpression).
Quantitative real-time PCR analyses showed an identical expression pattern to
that found by microarrays. A bioinformatic screening of regulative sequence
elements in the promoter region of these genes, revealed the existence of
conserved transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) in co-regulated genes which 
are functionally active at 4.5, 8.5 and 14.5 dpc. These data are likely to be
helpful in studying developmental anomalies detected in del22q11 patients.

PMID: 17321697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Mar;80(3):510-7. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

Human TBX1 missense mutations cause gain of function resulting in the same
phenotype as 22q11.2 deletions.

Zweier C(1), Sticht H, Aydin-Yaylagül I, Campbell CE, Rauch A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany.

Deletion 22q11.2 syndrome is the most frequent known microdeletion syndrome and
is associated with a highly variable phenotype, including DiGeorge and Shprintzen
(velocardiofacial) syndromes. Although haploinsufficiency of the T-box
transcription factor gene TBX1 is thought to cause the phenotype, to date, only
four different point mutations in TBX1 have been reported in association with six
of the major features of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Although, for the two
truncating mutations, loss of function was previously shown, the pathomechanism
of the missense mutations remains unknown. We report a novel heterozygous
missense mutation, H194Q, in a familial case of Shprintzen syndrome and show that
this and the two previously reported missense mutations result in gain of
function, possibly through stabilization of the protein dimer DNA complex. We
therefore conclude that TBX1 gain-of-function mutations can result in the same
phenotypic spectrum as haploinsufficiency caused by loss-of-function mutations or
deletions.

PMCID: PMC1821102
PMID: 17273972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Dev Dyn. 2007 Mar;236(3):821-8.

Visualization of outflow tract development in the absence of Tbx1 using an FgF10 
enhancer trap transgene.

Kelly RG(1), Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY,
USA. kelly@ibdml.univ-mrs.fr

Tbx1, the major gene underlying del22q11.2 or DiGeorge syndrome in humans, is
required for normal development and septation of the cardiac outflow tract. The
fibroblast growth factor 10 gene (Fgf10) and an Fgf10 enhancer trap transgene are
expressed in outflow tract myocardial progenitor cells of the anterior heart
field. To visualize outflow tract development in the absence of Tbx1, we have
analyzed the expression profile of the Fgf10 enhancer trap transgene during
outflow tract development in Tbx1(-/-) embryos. Transgene expression confirms
hypoplasia of the distal outflow tract in the absence of Tbx1, and altered
expression in pharyngeal mesoderm reveals loss of specific bilateral
subpopulations of outflow tract progenitor cells and disruption of the posterior 
boundary of the anterior heart field. Our results support the conclusion that
Tbx1 controls deployment of Fgf10-expressing progenitor cells during heart tube
extension. Furthermore, although normal Fgf10 levels are dependent on Tbx1, loss 
of Fgf10 alleles does not significantly modify the cardiac phenotype of Tbx1
heterozygous or homozygous mutant embryos.

PMID: 17238155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. ScientificWorldJournal. 2006 May 1;6:1881-7.

The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome: a gene dosage perspective.

Baldini A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Cardiology) and Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. baldini@bcm.tmc.edu

The 22q11.2 deletion/DiGeorge syndrome is a relatively common "genomic" disorder 
that results from heterozygous deletion of a 3-Mbp segment of chromosome 22. Of
the more than 30 genes deleted in this syndrome, TBX1 is the only one that has
been found to be mutated in some patients with a phenotype that is very similar
to that of patients with the full deletion, suggesting that TBX1
haploinsufficiency is a major contributor to the syndrome's phenotype. Multi- and
single-gene mouse models have provided a considerable amount of information about
the consequences of decreased and increased dosage of the genomic region (and in 
particular of the Tbx1 gene) on mouse embryonic development. Modified alleles of 
Tbx1, as well as conditional ablation strategies have been utilized to map in
vivo the tissues and developmental stages most sensitive to gene dosage. These
experiments have revealed substantially different sensitivity to gene dosage in
different tissues and at different times, underlying the importance of the
developmental context within which gene dosage reduction occurs.

PMID: 17205194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Feb 1;16(3):276-85. Epub 2006 Dec 12.

The 22q11 deletion syndrome candidate gene Tbx1 determines thyroid size and
positioning.

Fagman H(1), Liao J, Westerlund J, Andersson L, Morrow BE, Nilsson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry and Cell Biology, Institute of Biomedicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy at Göteborg University, SE-40530, Göteborg, Sweden.
henrik.fagman@anatcell.gu.se

Thyroid dysgenesis is the major cause of congenital hypothyroidism in humans. The
underlying molecular mechanism is in most cases unknown, but the frequent
co-incidence of cardiac anomalies suggests that the thyroid morphogenetic process
may depend on proper cardiovascular development. The T-box transcription factor
TBX1, which is the most probable gene for the 22q11 deletion syndrome
(22q11DS/DiGeorge syndrome/velo-cardio-facial syndrome), has emerged as a central
player in the coordinated formation of organs and tissues derived from the
pharyngeal apparatus and the adjacent secondary heart field from which the
cardiac outflow tract derives. Here, we show that Tbx1 impacts greatly on the
developing thyroid gland, although it cannot be detected in the thyroid
primordium at any embryonic stage. Specifically, in Tbx1-/- mice, the downward
translocation of Titf1/Nkx2.1-expressing thyroid progenitor cells is much
delayed. In late mutant embryos, the thyroid fails to form symmetric lobes but
persists as a single mass approximately one-fourth of the normal size. The
hypoplastic gland mostly attains a unilateral position resembling thyroid
hemiagenesis. The data further suggest that failure of the thyroid primordium to 
re-establish contact with the aortic sac is a key abnormality preventing normal
growth of the midline anlage along the third pharyngeal arch arteries. In normal 
development, this interaction may be facilitated by Tbx1-expressing mesenchyme
filling the gap between the pharyngeal endoderm and the detached thyroid
primordium. The findings indicate that Tbx1 regulates intermediate steps of
thyroid development by a non-cell-autonomous mechanism. Thyroid dysgenesis
related to Tbx1 inactivation may explain an overrepresentation of hypothyroidism 
occurring in patients with the 22q11DS.

PMID: 17164259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Dev Dyn. 2007 Feb;236(2):353-63.

Tbx1 regulation of myogenic differentiation in the limb and cranial mesoderm.

Dastjerdi A(1), Robson L, Walker R, Hadley J, Zhang Z, Rodriguez-Niedenführ M,
Ataliotis P, Baldini A, Scambler P, Francis-West P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Guy's Tower,
London Bridge, United Kingdom.

The T-box transcription factor Tbx1 has been implicated in DiGeorge syndrome, the
most frequent syndrome due to a chromosomal deletion. Gene inactivation of Tbx1
in mice results in craniofacial and branchial arch defects, including myogenic
defects in the first and second branchial arches. A T-box binding site has been
identified in the Xenopus Myf5 promoter, and in other species, T-box genes have
been implicated in myogenic fate. Here we analyze Tbx1 expression in the
developing chick embryo relating its expression to the onset of myogenic
differentiation and cellular fate within the craniofacial mesoderm. We show that 
Tbx1 is expressed before capsulin, the first known marker of branchial arch 1 and
2 muscles. We also show that, as in the mouse, Tbx1 is expressed in endothelial
cells, another mesodermal derivative, and, therefore, Tbx1 alone cannot specify
the myogenic lineage. In addition, Tbx1 expression was identified in both chick
and mouse limb myogenic cells, initially being restricted to the dorsal muscle
mass, but in contrast, to the head, here Tbx1 is expressed after the onset of
myogenic commitment. Functional studies revealed that loss of Tbx1 function
reduces the number of myocytes in the head and limb, whereas increasing Tbx1
activity has the converse effect. Finally, analysis of the Tbx1-mesoderm-specific
knockout mouse demonstrated the cell autonomous requirement for Tbx1 during
myocyte development in the cranial mesoderm.

PMID: 17117436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Development. 2006 Dec;133(24):4891-9. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Pitx2 promotes development of splanchnic mesoderm-derived branchiomeric muscle.

Dong F(1), Sun X, Liu W, Ai D, Klysik E, Lu MF, Hadley J, Antoni L, Chen L,
Baldini A, Francis-West P, Martin JF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M System Health Science
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Recent experiments, showing that both cranial paraxial and splanchnic mesoderm
contribute to branchiomeric muscle and cardiac outflow tract (OFT) myocardium,
revealed unexpected complexity in development of these muscle groups. The Pitx2
homeobox gene functions in both cranial paraxial mesoderm, to regulate eye
muscle, and in splanchnic mesoderm to regulate OFT development. Here, we
investigated Pitx2 in branchiomeric muscle. Pitx2 was expressed in branchial arch
core mesoderm and both Pitx2 null and Pitx2 hypomorphic embryos had defective
branchiomeric muscle. Lineage tracing with a Pitx2cre allele indicated that Pitx2
mutant descendents moved into the first branchial arch. However, markers of both 
undifferentiated core mesoderm and specified branchiomeric muscle were absent.
Moreover, lineage tracing with a Myf5cre allele indicated that branchiomeric
muscle specification and differentiation were defective in Pitx2 mutants.
Conditional inactivation in mice and manipulation of Pitx2 expression in chick
mandible cultures revealed an autonomous function in expansion and survival of
branchial arch mesoderm.

PMID: 17107996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 15;302(2):670-82. Epub 2006 Oct 6.

Tbx1 regulates population, proliferation and cell fate determination of otic
epithelial cells.

Xu H(1), Viola A, Zhang Z, Gerken CP, Lindsay-Illingworth EA, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technologies, Texas A&M University System, 2121
W. Holcombe, Room 820C, TX, USA.

The T-box transcription factor Tbx1 is required for inner ear morphogenesis. Tbx1
null mutants have a small otocyst that fails to grow and remodel and does not
give rise to the vestibular and cochlear apparata. Here we show that Tbx1
expression-driven cell tracing identifies a population of otic epithelial cells
that contributes to most of the otocyst. Tbx1 is essential for the contribution
of this population to the inner ear. Ablation of Tbx1 after this cell population 
has established itself in the otocyst, restores marker expression lost in germ
line mutants, but causes severe reduction in mitotic activity, cell autonomously.
Furthermore, timed cell fate mapping demonstrates that loss of Tbx1 switches the 
fate of some members of the Tbx1-dependent cell population, from non-neurogenic
to neurogenic, an event associated with activation of the Delta-Notch pathway.
Finally, tissue-specific ablation of Tbx1 demonstrates that, while the
abovementioned phenotypic abnormalities are due to loss of epithelial expression 
of Tbx1, cochlear morphogenesis requires mesodermal Tbx1 expression. We conclude 
that the main functions of Tbx1 in the inner ear are to control,
cell-autonomously, contribution, size and fate of a large population of otic
epithelial cells, and, cell non-autonomously, cochlear morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1850623
PMID: 17074316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Dec 1;15(23):3394-410. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

Cyp26 genes a1, b1 and c1 are down-regulated in Tbx1 null mice and inhibition of 
Cyp26 enzyme function produces a phenocopy of DiGeorge Syndrome in the chick.

Roberts C(1), Ivins S, Cook AC, Baldini A, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

Cyp26a1, a gene required for retinoic acid (RA) inactivation during
embryogenesis, was previously identified as a potential Tbx1 target from a
microarray screen comparing wild-type and null Tbx1 mouse embryo pharyngeal
arches (pa) at E9.5. Using real-time PCR and in situ hybridization analysis of
Cyp26a1 and its two functionally related family members Cyp26b1 and c1, we
demonstrate reduced and/or altered expression for all three genes in pharyngeal
tissues of Tbx1 null embryos. Blockade of Cyp26 function in the chick embryo
using R115866, a specific inhibitor of Cyp26 enzyme function, resulted in a
dose-dependent phenocopy of the Tbx1 null mouse including loss of caudal pa and
pharyngeal arch arteries (paa), small otic vesicles, loss of head mesenchyme and,
at later stages, DiGeorge Syndrome-like heart defects, including common arterial 
trunk and perimembranous ventricular septal defects. Molecular markers revealed a
serious disruption of pharyngeal pouch endoderm (ppe) morphogenesis and reduced
staining for smooth muscle cells in paa. Expression of the RA synthesizing enzyme
Raldh2 was also up-regulated and altered Hoxb1 expression indicated that RA
levels are raised in R115866-treated embryos as reported for Tbx1 null mice.
Down-regulation of Tbx1 itself was observed, in accordance with previous
observations that RA represses Tbx1 expression. Thus, by specifically blocking
the action of the Cyp26 enzymes we can recapitulate many elements of the Tbx1
mutant mouse, supporting the hypothesis that the dysregulation of RA-controlled
morphogenesis contributes to the Tbx1 loss of function phenotype.

PMID: 17047027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Hum Genet. 2007 Feb;120(6):837-45. Epub 2006 Oct 7.

Molecular characterization of deletion breakpoints in adults with 22q11 deletion 
syndrome.

Weksberg R(1), Stachon AC, Squire JA, Moldovan L, Bayani J, Meyn S, Chow E,
Bassett AS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, The
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Ave., M5G 1X8, Toronto, ON, Canada.

22q11 Deletion syndrome (22q11DS) is a common microdeletion syndrome with
variable expression, including congenital and later onset conditions such as
schizophrenia. Most studies indicate that expression does not appear to be
related to length of the deletion but there is limited information on the
endpoints of even the common deletion breakpoint regions in adults. We used a
real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) approach to fine map 22q11.2 deletions in 44
adults with 22q11DS, 22 with schizophrenia (SZ; 12 M, 10 F; mean age 35.7 SD 8.0 
years) and 22 with no history of psychosis (NP; 8 M, 14 F; mean age 27.1 SD 8.6
years). QPCR data were consistent with clinical FISH results using the TUPLE1 or 
N25 probes. Two subjects (one SZ, one NP) negative for clinical FISH had atypical
22q11.2 deletions confirmed by FISH using the RP11-138C22 probe. Most (n = 34; 18
SZ, 16 NP) subjects shared a common 3 Mb hemizygous 22q11.2 deletion. However,
eight subjects showed breakpoint variability: a more telomeric proximal
breakpoint (n = 2), or more centromeric (n = 3) or more telomeric distal
breakpoint (n = 3). One NP subject had a proximal nested 1.4 Mb deletion. COMT
and TBX1 were deleted in all 44 subjects, and PRODH in 40 subjects (19 SZ, 21
NP). The results delineate proximal and distal breakpoint variants in 22q11DS.
Neither deletion extent nor PRODH haploinsufficiency appeared to explain the
clinical expression of schizophrenia in the present study. Further studies are
needed to elucidate the molecular basis of schizophrenia and clinical
heterogeneity in 22q11DS.

PMCID: PMC3139629
PMID: 17028864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Nov 1;15(21):3219-28. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

Dissection of Tbx1 and Fgf interactions in mouse models of 22q11DS suggests
functional redundancy.

Aggarwal VS(1), Liao J, Bondarev A, Schimmang T, Lewandoski M, Locker J, Shanske 
A, Campione M, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) is characterized by abnormal development of
the pharyngeal apparatus. Mouse genetic studies have identified Tbx1 as a key
gene in the etiology of the syndrome, in part, via interaction with the
fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) genes. Three murine Fgfs, Fgf3, Fgf8 and Fgf10 are
coexpressed in different combinations with Tbx1. They are all strongly
downregulated in Tbx1-/- embryos, implicating epistatic interactions. Supporting 
this, Tbx1 and Fgf8 have been shown to genetically interact in the development of
the fourth pharyngeal arch artery (PAA) and Fgf10 was identified to be a direct
downstream target of Tbx1. To dissect the epistatic relationships of these genes 
during embryonic development and the molecular pathogenesis of the Tbx1 mutant
phenotype, we generated Fgf10+/-;Tbx1+/- and Fgf3-/-;Tbx1+/- mice. Despite strong
hypotheses that Fgf10 is the key gene downstream of Tbx1 in the development of
the anterior heart field, we do not find evidence for genetic interaction between
Tbx1 and Fgf10. Also, the Fgf3-/-;Tbx1+/- mutant mice do not show an additive
phenotype. Furthermore, more severe defects do not occur in Fgf8+/-;Tbx1+/-
mutants by crossing in the Fgf3 null allele. There is a possible additive effect 
only in PAA remodeling in the Fgf10+/-;Tbx1+/-;Fgf8+/- embryos. Our findings
underscore the importance of potential functional redundancy with additional Fgfs
in the development of the pharyngeal apparatus and cardiovascular system via
Tbx1. This redundancy should be considered when looking at individual FGF genes
as modifiers of 22q11DS.

PMID: 17000704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Hum Genet. 2006;51(12):1037-45. Epub 2006 Sep 13.

Analyses of the associations between the genes of 22q11 deletion syndrome and
schizophrenia.

Arinami T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8577, Japan.
tarinami@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

Schizophrenia is a severe, debilitating mental disorder characterized by profound
disturbances of cognition, emotion and social functioning. The lifetime morbid
risk is surprisingly uniform at slightly less than 1% across different
populations and different cultures. The evidence of genetic risk factors is our
strongest clue to the cause of schizophrenia. Linkage and association analyses
have identified genes associated with the development of schizophrenia. However, 
most of the alleles or haplotypes identified thus far have only a weak
association or are reported to be population specific. A deletion of 22q11.2 that
causes the most common microdeletion syndrome (22q11DS) with an estimated
prevalence of 1:2,500-1:4,000 live births may represent one of the greatest known
genetic risk factors for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia is a late manifestation in 
approximately 30% of patients with 22q11.2 deletion, comparable to the risk to
offspring of two parents with schizophrenia. Clinical and neuroimaging
assessments indicate that 22q11DS-schizophrenia is a neurodevelopmental model of 
schizophrenia. Recent studies have provided evidence that haploinsufficiency of
TBX1 is likely to be responsible for many of the physical features associated
with the deletion. Most of the genes in the 22q11 deletion region are conserved
together on mouse chromosome 16, enabling the generation of mouse models.
Similarities in the cardiovascular and other phenotypes between 22q11DS patients 
and mouse models can provide important insights into roles of genes in
neurobehavioral phenotypes. Because more than one gene in the 22q11DS region is
likely to contribute to the marked risk for schizophrenia, further extensive
studies are necessary. Analyses of 22q11DS will help clarify the molecular
pathogenesis of schizophrenia.

PMID: 16969581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Methods Mol Med. 2006;126:43-55.

Molecular and genetic aspects of DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome.

Driscoll DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Cytogenetic, molecular, and clinical genetic studies have contributed to our
understanding of the etiology, pathogenesis, and natural history of DiGeorge
syndrome (DGS) and velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS). Submicroscopic deletions of 
chromosome 22ql 1.2 are the leading cause of both of these disorders. The 22q
11.2 deletion syndrome is recognized as one of the most common microdeletion
syndromes. The clini'cal features are highly variable and include a variety of
congenital anomalies, medical problems, and cognitive and neuropsychological
difficulties. Infrequently, other chromosomal rearrangements are found in
patients with DGS/VCFS, and, rarely, point mutations in the gene TBX1, a
transcription factor, that maps to the deleted region. The most sensitive and
widely used diagnostic test for detecting the 22ql 1.2 deletion is fluorescence
in situ hybridization using probes from the commonly deleted region.
Alternatively, polymerase chain reaction can be performed to confirm failure to
inherit a parental allele in the region or to determine copy number. Prenatal
diagnosis is also available, particularly when a conotruncal cardiac defect is
identified during a pregnancy or when a parent carries a deletion. Genetic
counseling is recommended before testing to review the natural history of the
disorder, testing options, and test sensitivity and limitations.

PMID: 16930005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Development. 2006 Sep;133(18):3587-95. Epub 2006 Aug 16.

Mesodermal expression of Tbx1 is necessary and sufficient for pharyngeal arch and
cardiac outflow tract development.

Zhang Z(1), Huynh T, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cardiovascular Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

The development of the segmented pharyngeal apparatus involves complex
interaction of tissues derived from all three germ layers. The role of mesoderm
is the least studied, perhaps because of its apparent lack of anatomical
boundaries and positionally restricted gene expression. Here, we report that the 
mesoderm-specific deletion of Tbx1, a T-box transcription factor, caused severe
pharyngeal patterning and cardiovascular defects, while mesoderm-specific
restoration of Tbx1 expression in a mutant background corrected most of those
defects in the mouse. We show that some organs, e.g. the thymus, require Tbx1
expression in the mesoderm and in the epithelia. In addition, these experiments
revealed that different pharyngeal arches require Tbx1 in different tissues.
Finally, we show that Tbx1 in the mesoderm is required to sustain cell
proliferation. Thus, the mesodermal transcription program is not only crucial for
cardiovascular development, but is also key in the development and patterning of 
pharyngeal endoderm.

PMCID: PMC1850622
PMID: 16914493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Neurogenetics. 2006 Nov;7(4):247-57. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Behavior of mice with mutations in the conserved region deleted in
velocardiofacial/DiGeorge syndrome.

Long JM(1), LaPorte P, Merscher S, Funke B, Saint-Jore B, Puech A, Kucherlapati
R, Morrow BE, Skoultchi AI, Wynshaw-Boris A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego School of
Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093-0627, USA.

Velocardiofacial/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS) is a developmental disorder caused 
by a 1.5 to 3-Mb hemizygous 22q11.2 deletion. VCFS/DGS patients display
malformations in multiple systems, as well as an increased frequency of
neuropsychiatric defects including schizophrenia. Haploinsufficiency of TBX1
appears to be responsible for these physical malformations in humans and mice,
but the genes responsible for the neuropsychiatric defects are unknown. In this
study, two mouse models of VCFS/DGS, a deletion mouse model (Lgdel/+) and a
single gene model (Tbx1 +/-), as well as a third mouse mutant (Gscl -/-) for a
gene within the Lgdel deletion, were tested in a large behavioral battery
designed to assess gross physical features, sensorimotor reflexes, motor activity
nociception, acoustic startle, sensorimotor gating, and learning and memory.
Lgdel/+ mice contain a 1.5-Mb hemizygous deletion of 27 genes in the orthologous 
region on MMU 16 and present with impairment in sensorimotor gating, grip
strength, and nociception. Tbx1 +/- mice were impaired in grip strength similar
to Lgdel/+ mice and movement initiation. Gscl -/- mice were not impaired in any
of the administered tests, suggesting that redundant function of other Gsc family
members may compensate for the loss of Gscl. Thus, although deletion of the genes
in the Lgdel region in mice may recapitulate some of the behavioral phenotypes
seen in humans with VCFS/DGS, these phenotypes are not found in mice with
complete loss of Gscl or in mice with heterozygous loss of Tbx1, suggesting that 
the neuropsychiatric and physical malformations of VCFS/DGS may act by different 
genetic mechanisms.

PMID: 16900388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Pediatr Res. 2006 Sep;60(3):353-8. Epub 2006 Jul 20.

Array-based comparative genome hybridization in clinical genetics.

Bar-Shira A(1), Rosner G, Rosner S, Goldstein M, Orr-Urtreger A.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv 64239, Israel.

Comment in
    Pediatr Res. 2006 Sep;60(3):243-4.

Abnormalities in DNA copy number are frequently found in patients with multiple
anomaly syndromes and mental retardation. Array-based comparative genomic
hybridization (array-CGH) is a high-resolution, whole-genome technology that
improves detection of submicroscopic aberrations underlying these syndromes.
Eight patients with mental disability, multiple congenital anomalies, and
dysmorphic features were screened for submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances using
the GenoSensor Array 300 Chip. Subtelomeric aberrations previously detected by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis were confirmed in two
patients, and accurate diagnosis was provided in two previously undiagnosed
complex cases. Microdeletions at 15q11.2-q13 in a newborn with hypotonia,
cryptorchidism, and hypopigmentation were detected with few discrepancies between
the array results and FISH analysis. Contiguous microdeletion of GSCL, HIRA and
TBX1 genes at 22q11.2 was identified in a previously undiagnosed boy with an
unusual presentation of the VCF/DiGeorge spectrum. In a newborn with aniridia, a 
borderline false-negative WT1 deletion was observed, most probably because of
differences between the size of the genomic deletion and the microarray probe. A 
false-positive rate of 0.2% was calculated for clone-by-clone analysis, whereas
the per patient false-positive rate was 20%. Array-CGH is a powerful tool for the
rapid and accurate detection of genetic disorders associated with copy number
abnormalities and can significantly improve clinical genetic diagnosis and care.

PMID: 16857771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Jun 13;86(22):1553-7.

[Single nucleotide polymorphism and haplotype in TBX1 gene of patients with
conotruncal defects: analysis of 130 cases].

[Article in Chinese]

Han XM(1), Lou Y, Zhu XY, Hu XF, Pang WY, Sun ZJ, Zhang H, Zhang DQ, Sun YX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Second Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang 110004, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the distribution of the single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) sites in TBX1 gene and the distribution of related haplotypes in the
patients with conotruncal defects (CTD) and normal people.
METHODS: The genotypes of the 3 selected SNPs: G2857C (rs737868), G2963A
(rs28649236), and A6571T (rs28939675) in TBX1 gene were analyzed by PCR-RFLP
among 130 patients with CTD and 200 normal people. Contingency table was applied 
to analyze the frequencies of these SNP genotypes and related alleles. PHASE
software was used to construct the haplotypes and analyze the haplotype
frequencies in these 2 groups.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in the allele frequency and
genotype rates of the SNPs G2587C and A6571T between the CTD patients and normal 
controls (all P > 0.05). However, the allele frequency and genotype rates of the 
SNP G2963A were significant different between he CTD patients and normal
controls: the G allele frequency in the CTD patients was 53.8%, significantly
higher than that in the normal controls (42.5%, chi(2) = 8.14, P < 0.005); and
the AA genotype rate of the CTD patients was 21.6%, significantly lower than that
of the controls (38.0%), and the GA genotype rate in the CTD patients was 49.2%, 
significantly higher than that in the controls (39.0%) (both chi(2) = 9.9, P <
0.05). The haplotype frequencies of G2587/G2963/A6571 and G2587/A2963/T6571 of
the CTD patients were 49.2% and 14.6% respectively, both significantly higher
than those of the normal controls (36.3% and 9.5% respectively), and the
haplotype frequencies of G2587/G2963/T6571 and G2587/A2963/A6571 in the CTD
patients were 34.6% and 3% respectively, both significantly lower than those in
the normal controls (48.3% and 18% respectively) (chi(2) = 22.39, P < 0.005).
CONCLUSION: The SNP site G2963A located in the coding-region of TBX1 gene is
associated with CTD. The persons with G2963 have higher risk of CTD than those
with A2963. The haplotypes constructed with these 3 SNP sites may be linked with 
the susceptibility gene of CTD.

PMID: 16854283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Dev Biol. 2006 Aug 15;296(2):421-36. Epub 2006 Jun 8.

Forkhead transcription factors, Foxc1 and Foxc2, are required for the
morphogenesis of the cardiac outflow tract.

Seo S(1), Kume T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, 332 PRB, 2220 Pierce Ave, Nashville, TN 37232-6300,
USA.

Previous studies have shown that Foxc1 and Foxc2, closely related Fox
transcription factors, have interactive roles in cardiovascular development.
However, little is known about their functional overlap during early heart
morphogenesis. Here, we show that Foxc genes are coexpressed in a novel heart
field, the second heart field, as well as the cardiac neural crest cells (NCCs), 
endocardium, and proepicardium. Notably, compound Foxc1; Foxc2 mutants have a
wide spectrum of cardiac abnormalities, including hypoplasia or lack of the
outflow tract (OFT) and right ventricle as well as the inflow tract, dysplasia of
the OFT and atrioventricular cushions, and abnormal formation of the epicardium, 
in a dose-dependent manner. Most importantly, in the second heart field, compound
mutants exhibit significant downregulation of Tbx1 and Fgf8/10 and a reduction in
cell proliferation. Moreover, NCCs in compound mutants show extensive apoptosis
during migration, leading to a failure of the OFT septation. Taken together, our 
results demonstrate that Foxc1 and Foxc2 play pivotal roles in the early
processes of heart development, especially acting upstream of the Tbx1-FGF
cascade during the morphogenesis of the OFT.

PMID: 16839542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Jun 28;Suppl 2:70-3.

[22q11.2 deletion syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Ishikawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine,
Ichihara Hospital.

PMID: 16817353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2006;73:1-27.

Chromosome 22 deletion syndrome and schizophrenia.

Williams NM(1), O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, Henry Wellcome Building for Biomedical
Research, College of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.

PMID: 16737900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Development. 2006 Jun;133(12):2419-33.

Required, tissue-specific roles for Fgf8 in outflow tract formation and
remodeling.

Park EJ(1), Ogden LA, Talbot A, Evans S, Cai CL, Black BL, Frank DU, Moon AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor 8 (Fgf8) is a secreted signaling protein expressed in
numerous temporospatial domains that are potentially relevant to cardiovascular
development. However, the pathogenesis of complex cardiac and outflow tract
defects observed in Fgf8-deficient mice, and the specific source(s) of Fgf8
required for outflow tract formation and subsequent remodeling are unknown. A
detailed examination of the timing and location of Fgf8 production revealed
previously unappreciated expression in a subset of primary heart field cells;
Fgf8 is also expressed throughout the anterior heart field (AHF) mesoderm and in 
pharyngeal endoderm at the crescent and early somite stages. We used conditional 
mutagenesis to examine the requirements for Fgf8 function in these different
expression domains during heart and outflow tract morphogenesis. Formation of the
primary heart tube and the addition of right ventricular and outflow tract
myocardium depend on autocrine Fgf8 signaling in cardiac crescent mesoderm. Loss 
of Fgf8 in this domain resulted in decreased expression of the Fgf8 target gene
Erm, and aberrant production of Isl1 and its target Mef2c in the anterior heart
field, thus linking Fgf8 signaling with transcription factor networks that
regulate survival and proliferation of the anterior heart field. We further found
that mesodermal- and endodermal-derived Fgf8 perform specific functions during
outflow tract remodeling: mesodermal Fgf8 is required for correct alignment of
the outflow tract and ventricles, whereas activity of Fgf8 emanating from
pharyngeal endoderm regulates outflow tract septation. These findings provide a
novel insight into how the formation and remodeling of primary and anterior heart
field-derived structures rely on Fgf8 signals from discrete temporospatial
domains.

PMCID: PMC1780034
PMID: 16720879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 15;295(2):559-70. Epub 2006 Apr 4.

Fgf8 expression in the Tbx1 domain causes skeletal abnormalities and modifies the
aortic arch but not the outflow tract phenotype of Tbx1 mutants.

Vitelli F(1), Zhang Z, Huynh T, Sobotka A, Mupo A, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cardiology, Baylor College of Medicine, 1102 Bates
St, RM FC450.03, Houston, TX 77030, USA. fvitelli@ibt.tamhsc.edu

Fgf8 and Tbx1 have been shown to interact in patterning the aortic arch, and both
genes are required in formation and growth of the outflow tract of the heart.
However, the nature of the interaction of the two genes is unclear. We have
utilized a novel Tbx1(Fgf8) allele which drives Fgf8 expression in Tbx1-positive 
cells and an inducible Cre-LoxP recombination system to address the role of Fgf8 
in Tbx1 positive cells in modulating cardiovascular development. Results support 
a requirement of Fgf8 in Tbx1 expressing cells to finely control patterning of
the aortic arch and great arteries specifically during the pharyngeal arch artery
remodeling process and indicate that the endoderm is the most likely site of this
interaction. Furthermore, our data suggest that Fgf8 and Tbx1 play independent
roles in regulating outflow tract development. This finding is clinically
relevant since TBX1 is the candidate for DGS/VCFS, characterized clinically by
variable expressivity and reduced penetrance of cardiovascular defects; Fgf8 gene
variants may provide molecular clues to this variability.

PMCID: PMC1850621
PMID: 16696966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 May 16;103(20):7729-34. Epub 2006 May 9.

Tbx1 haploinsufficiency is linked to behavioral disorders in mice and humans:
implications for 22q11 deletion syndrome.

Paylor R(1), Glaser B, Mupo A, Ataliotis P, Spencer C, Sobotka A, Sparks C, Choi 
CH, Oghalai J, Curran S, Murphy KC, Monks S, Williams N, O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ,
Scambler PJ, Lindsay E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

About 35% of patients with 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS), which includes
DiGeorge and velocardiofacial syndromes, develops psychiatric disorders, mainly
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. We previously reported that mice carrying a
multigene deletion (Df1) that models 22q11DS have reduced prepulse inhibition
(PPI), a behavioral abnormality and schizophrenia endophenotype. Impaired PPI is 
associated with several psychiatric disorders, including those that occur in
22q11DS, and recently, reduced PPI was reported in children with 22q11DS. Here,
we have mapped PPI deficits in a panel of mouse mutants that carry deletions that
partially overlap with Df1 and have defined a PPI critical region encompassing
four genes. We then used single-gene mutants to identify the causative genes. We 
show that PPI deficits in Df1/+ mice are caused by haploinsufficiency of two
genes, Tbx1 and Gnb1l. Mutation of either gene is sufficient to cause reduced
PPI. Tbx1 is a transcription factor, the mutation of which is sufficient to cause
most of the physical features of 22q11DS, but the gene had not been previously
associated with the behavioral/psychiatric phenotype. A likely role for Tbx1
haploinsufficiency in psychiatric disease is further suggested by the
identification of a family in which the phenotypic features of 22q11DS, including
psychiatric disorders, segregate with an inactivating mutation of TBX1. One
family member has Asperger syndrome, an autistic spectrum disorder that is
associated with reduced PPI. Thus, Tbx1 and Gnb1l are strong candidates for
psychiatric disease in 22q11DS patients and candidate susceptibility genes for
psychiatric disease in the wider population.

PMCID: PMC1472513
PMID: 16684884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2006 Feb;7(2):77-85.

22q11 deletion syndrome: a review of some developmental biology aspects of the
cardiovascular system.

Restivo A(1), Sarkozy A, Digilio MC, Dallapiccola B, Marino B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Rome La Sapienza, Italy.

The morphology and molecular genetics of the 22q11 deletion syndrome
cardiovascular anomalies are reviewed. Special emphasis is given to TBX1,
recently identified and considered to be the potential key gene for this clinical
syndrome. The TBX1 downstream molecular pathways modulating the normal
development of the pharyngeal apparatus are also discussed, and emphasis is given
to the possible, equally fundamental role of downstream molecular pathway
disruption in causing the clinical 22q11 deletion phenotype features.

PMID: 16645366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Biol Psychiatry. 2006 Jun 15;59(12):1172-9. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

Mouse models of 22q11 deletion syndrome.

Paylor R(1), Lindsay E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) is caused by an interstitial chromosomal
microdeletion that encompasses about 40 genes. It is the most common of the
microdeletion syndromes. The clinical phenotype, which is complex and variable,
includes specific congenital defects of the cardiovascular system, craniofacies, 
and immune system. In early childhood, patients manifest cognitive impairment,
behavioral disorders, and delays in motor development and language acquisition.
Adult patients have a high risk for developing serious psychiatric disorders,
especially schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, and bipolar disorder. The
great majority of patients have an identical or near identical chromosomal
deletion, and genotype-phenotype correlations have not been established. Indeed, 
little progress was made toward resolving the complex clinical phenotype until
the deletion was successfully modeled in the mouse. In recent years, through a
variety of mouse mutants that carry multigene and single gene mutations, we have 
learned that mutation in a single gene, Tbx1, is responsible for most of the
congenital defects seen in the mouse models and in patients. We now face a
greater challenge as we attempt to use the mouse to address the pathogenesis of
the behavioral and psychiatric disorders associated with 22q11DS. Significant
progress has already been made, and recent studies in the mouse suggest that
several genes from the deleted region affect behavior and might contribute to
disease burden in patients.

PMID: 16616724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 May 15;15(10):1629-39. Epub 2006 Apr 6.

Tissue-specific roles of Tbx1 in the development of the outer, middle and inner
ear, defective in 22q11DS patients.

Arnold JS(1), Braunstein EM, Ohyama T, Groves AK, Adams JC, Brown MC, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Most 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) patients have middle and outer ear
anomalies, whereas some have inner ear malformations. Tbx1, a gene hemizygously
deleted in 22q11DS patients and required for ear development, is expressed in
multiple tissues during embryogenesis. To determine the role of Tbx1 in the first
pharyngeal pouch (PPI) in forming outer and middle ears, we tissue-specifically
inactivated the gene using Foxg1-Cre. In the conditional mutants, PPI failed to
outgrow, preventing the middle ear bone condensations from forming. Tbx1 was also
inactivated in the otic vesicle (OV), resulting in the failure of inner ear
sensory organ formation, and in duplication of the cochleovestibular ganglion
(CVG). Consistent with the anatomical defects, the sensory genes, Otx1 and Bmp4
were downregulated, whereas the CVG genes, Fgf3 and NeuroD, were upregulated. To 
delineate Tbx1 cell-autonomous roles, a more selective ablation, exclusively in
the OV, was performed using Pax2-Cre. In contrast to the Foxg1-Cre mutants,
Pax2-Cre conditional mutant mice survived to adulthood and had normal outer and
middle ears but had the same inner ear defects as the Tbx1 null mice, with the
same gene expression changes. These results demonstrate that Tbx1 has non-cell
autonomous roles in PPI in the formation of outer and middle ears and
cell-autonomous roles in the OV. Periotic mesenchymal markers, Prx2 and Brn4 were
normal in both conditional mutants, whereas they were diminished in Tbx1-/-
embryos. Thus, Tbx1 in the surrounding mesenchyme in both sets of conditional
mutants cannot suppress the defects in the OV that occur in the null mutants.

PMCID: PMC2563157
PMID: 16600992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Int J Dev Biol. 2006;50(5):504-10.

Tbx1 is expressed at multiple sites of epithelial-mesenchymal interaction during 
early development of the facial complex.

Zoupa M(1), Seppala M, Mitsiadis T, Cobourne MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, GKT Dental
Institute, Guy's Hospital, London, UK.

TBX1 encodes a T-box-containing transcription factor, which is thought to be a
key player in the aetiology of the DiGeorge and Velocardiofacial syndromes
(DGS/VCFS). In addition to defects affecting structures derived from the
pharyngeal pouches, these patients exhibit varying degrees of facial
dysmorphology and cleft palate. We have analysed the expression of murine Tbx1
during early facial development and found transcripts at sites of known
epithelial-mesenchymal interaction. In particular, Tbx1 was expressed in
epithelium of the early facial processes, including the fronto-nasal, medial and 
lateral nasal and palatine. Transcripts were also localised to the epithelium of 
developing tooth germs and hair follicles at several stages during their early
development. Together, these expression domains suggest a role for Tbx1 in
mediating epithelial-mesenchymal signalling in regions of the developing face, a 
finding which is consistent with the spectrum of facial deformity encountered
amongst subjects affected by DGS/VCFS.

PMID: 16586352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Development. 2006 Apr;133(8):1565-73.

Tbx1 affects asymmetric cardiac morphogenesis by regulating Pitx2 in the
secondary heart field.

Nowotschin S(1), Liao J, Gage PJ, Epstein JA, Campione M, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Individuals with 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS; DiGeorge/velo-cardio-facial
syndrome) have multiple congenital malformations, including cardiovascular
defects. Most individuals with this syndrome possess 1.5-3.0 Mb hemizygous
22q11.2 deletions. The T-box transcription factor TBX1, lies within the nested
1.5 Mb interval and is a strong candidate for its etiology. Inactivation of Tbx1 
in the mouse results in neonatal lethality owing to the presence of a single
cardiac outflow tract. One important goal is to understand the molecular
pathogenesis of cardiovascular defects in this syndrome. However, the molecular
pathways of Tbx1 are still largely unexplored. Here, we show that Tbx1 is
co-expressed with the bicoid-like homeodomain transcription factor Pitx2 in
secondary heart field cells in the pharyngeal mesenchyme. In situ hybridization
studies in Tbx1(-/-) mouse embryos revealed downregulation of Pitx2 in these
cells. To test for a possible genetic interaction, we intercrossed Tbx1(+/-) and 
Pitx2(+/-) mice. Tbx1(+/-); Pitx2(+/-) mice died perinatally with cardiac
defects, including double outlet right ventricle, and atrial and ventricular
septal defects, all occurring with variable penetrance. An enhancer located
between exons 4 and 5 in which a putative T-half site was identified near an
Nkx2.5-binding site regulates asymmetric expression of Pitx2. We show using in
vitro studies that Tbx1 binds to this site and activates the Pitx2 enhancer with 
the synergistic action of Nkx2.5. The results presented in this study unravel a
novel Tbx1-Pitx2 pathway linking Tbx1 to asymmetric cardiac morphogenesis.

PMID: 16556915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Dev Biol. 2006 May 15;293(2):499-512. Epub 2006 Mar 10.

Patterning of the third pharyngeal pouch into thymus/parathyroid by Six and Eya1.

Zou D(1), Silvius D, Davenport J, Grifone R, Maire P, Xu PX.

Author information: 
(1)McLaughlin Research Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Great Falls, MT 59405, 
USA.

Previous studies have suggested a role of the homeodomain Six family proteins in 
patterning the developing vertebrate head that involves appropriate segmentation 
of three tissue layers, the endoderm, the paraxial mesoderm and the neural crest 
cells; however, the developmental programs and mechanisms by which the Six genes 
act in the pharyngeal endoderm remain largely unknown. Here, we examined their
roles in pharyngeal pouch development. Six1-/- mice lack thymus and parathyroid
and analysis of Six1-/- third pouch endoderm demonstrated that the patterning of 
the third pouch into thymus/parathyroid primordia is initiated. However, the
endodermal cells of the thymus/parathyroid rudiments fail to maintain the
expression of the parathyroid-specific gene Gcm2 and the thymus-specific gene
Foxn1 and subsequently undergo abnormal apoptosis, leading to a complete
disappearance of organ primordia by E12.5. This thus defines the
thymus/parathyroid defects present in the Six1 mutant. Analyses of the
thymus/parathyroid development in Six1-/-;Six4-/- double mutant show that both
Six1 and Six4 act synergistically to control morphogenetic movements of early
thymus/parathyroid tissues, and the threshold of Six1/Six4 appears to be crucial 
for the regulation of the organ primordia-specific gene expression. Previous
studies in flies and mice suggested that Eya and Six genes may function
downstream of Pax genes. Our data clearly show that Eya1 and Six1 expression in
the pouches does not require Pax1/Pax9 function, suggesting that they may
function independently from Pax1/Pax9. In contrast, Pax1 expression in all
pharyngeal pouches requires both Eya1 and Six1 function. Moreover, we show that
the expression of Tbx1, Fgf8 and Wnt5b in the pouch endoderm was normal in
Six1-/- embryos and slightly reduced in Six1-/-;Six4-/- double mutant, but was
largely reduced in Eya1-/- embryos. These results indicate that Eya1 appears to
be upstream of very early events in the initiation of thymus/parathyroid
organogenesis, while Six genes appear to act in an early differentiation step
during thymus/parathyroid morphogenesis. Together, these analyses establish an
essential role for Eya1 and Six genes in patterning the third pouch into
organ-specific primordia.

PMCID: PMC3882147
PMID: 16530750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Dev Dyn. 2006 Jun;235(6):1623-30.

Developmental expression patterns of Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx5, and Tbx20 in Xenopus
tropicalis.

Showell C(1), Christine KS, Mandel EM, Conlon FL.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center and Department of Genetics, University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-3280, USA.

T-box genes have diverse functions during embryogenesis and are implicated in
several human congenital disorders. Here, we report the identification, sequence 
analysis, and developmental expression patterns of four members of the T-box gene
family in the diploid frog Xenopus tropicalis. These four genes-Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx5,
and Tbx20-have been shown to influence cardiac development in a variety of
organisms, in addition to their individual roles in regulating other aspects of
embryonic development. Our results highlight the high degree of evolutionary
conservation between orthologs of these genes in X. tropicalis and other
vertebrates, both at the molecular level and in their developmental expression
patterns, and also identify novel features of their expression. Thus, X.
tropicalis represents a potentially valuable vertebrate model in which to further
investigate the functions of these genes through genetic approaches.

Developmental Dynamics 235:1623-1630, 2006. (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC1635807
PMID: 16477648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Development. 2006 Mar;133(5):977-87. Epub 2006 Feb 1.

Inactivation of Tbx1 in the pharyngeal endoderm results in 22q11DS malformations.

Arnold JS(1), Werling U, Braunstein EM, Liao J, Nowotschin S, Edelmann W, Hebert 
JM, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The 22q11 deletion (22q11DS; velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome) is
characterized by defects in the derivatives of the pharyngeal apparatus. Mouse
genetic studies have identified Tbx1, a member of the T-box family of
transcription factors, as being responsible for the physical malformations of the
syndrome. Mice heterozygous for a null mutation in Tbx1 have mild anomalies,
whereas homozygous Tbx1 mutants die at birth with severe defects in the
derivatives of the pharyngeal apparatus, including cleft palate, thymus gland
aplasia and cardiac outflow tract malformations. Tbx1 is expressed in the
splanchnic mesenchyme, the pharyngeal endoderm (PE) and in the core mesoderm of
the pharyngeal apparatus. Tissue interactions between the epithelia and
mesenchyme of the arches are required for development of the pharyngeal
apparatus; the precise role of Tbx1 in each tissue is not known. To assess the
role of Tbx1 in the PE, a conditional allele of Tbx1 was generated using the
Cre/loxP system. Foxg1-Cre was used to drive PE-specific ablation of Tbx1.
Conditional null mutants survived embryogenesis, but died in the neonatal period 
with malformations identical to the defects observed in Tbx1 homozygous null
mutants. The abnormalities appear to be secondary to failed outgrowth of the
pharyngeal pouches. These results show that Tbx1 in the PE is required for the
patterning and development of the pharyngeal apparatus, thereby disrupting the
formation of its derivative structures.

PMID: 16452092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Immunol Rev. 2006 Feb;209:28-46.

Cellular and molecular events during early thymus development.

Holländer G(1), Gill J, Zuklys S, Iwanami N, Liu C, Takahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Immunology, The Center for Biomedicine, Department of
Clinical-Biological Sciences, University of Basel, and The University Children's 
Hospital of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. georg-a.hollaender@unibas.ch

The thymic stromal compartment consists of several cell types that collectively
enable the attraction, survival, expansion, migration, and differentiation of
T-cell precursors. The thymic epithelial cells constitute the most abundant cell 
type of the thymic microenvironment and can be differentiated into
morphologically, phenotypically, and functionally separate subpopulations of the 
postnatal thymus. All thymic epithelial cells are derived from the endodermal
lining of the third pharyngeal pouch. Very soon after the formation of a thymus
primordium and prior to its vascularization, thymic epithelial cells orchestrate 
the first steps of intrathymic T-cell development, including the attraction of
lymphoid precursor cells to the thymic microenvironment. The correct segmentation
of pharyngeal epithelial cells and their subsequent crosstalk with cells in the
pharyngeal arches are critical prerequisites for the formation of a thymus
anlage. Mutations in several transcription factors and their target genes have
been informative to detail some of the complex mechanisms that control the
development of the thymus anlage. This review highlights recent findings related 
to the genetic control of early thymus organogenesis and provides insight into
the molecular basis by which lymphocyte precursors are attracted to the thymus.

PMID: 16448532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Dev Dyn. 2006 Mar;235(3):701-10.

Tbx1 is regulated by forkhead proteins in the secondary heart field.

Maeda J(1), Yamagishi H, McAnally J, Yamagishi C, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Keio University
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Transcriptional regulation in a tissue-specific and quantitative manner is
essential for developmental events, including those involved in cardiovascular
morphogenesis. Tbx1 is a T-box-containing transcription factor that is
responsible for many of the defects observed in 22q11 deletion syndrome in
humans. Tbx1 is expressed in the secondary heart field (SHF) and is essential for
cardiac outflow tract (OFT) development. We previously reported that Tbx1 is
regulated by sonic hedgehog by means of forkhead (Fox) transcription factors in
the head mesenchyme and pharyngeal endoderm, but how it is regulated in the SHF
is unknown. Here, we show that Tbx1 expression in the SHF is regulated by Fox
proteins through a combination of two evolutionarily conserved Fox binding sites 
in a dose-dependent manner. Cell fate analysis using the Tbx1 enhancer suggests
that SHF-derived Tbx1-expressing cells contribute extensively to the right
ventricular myocardium as well as the OFT during early development and ultimately
give rise to the right ventricular infundibulum, pulmonary trunk, and pulmonary
valves. These results suggest that Fox proteins are involved in most, if not all,
Tbx1 expression domains and that Tbx1 marks a subset of SHF-derived cells,
particularly those that uniquely contribute to the right-sided outflow tract and 
proximal pulmonary artery.

PMCID: PMC3316489
PMID: 16444712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Dev Cell. 2006 Jan;10(1):81-92.

Dose-dependent interaction of Tbx1 and Crkl and locally aberrant RA signaling in 
a model of del22q11 syndrome.

Guris DL(1), Duester G, Papaioannou VE, Imamoto A.

Author information: 
(1)The Ben May Institute for Cancer Research and Center for Molecular Oncology,
The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

22q11 deletion (del22q11) syndrome is characterized genetically by heterozygous
deletions within chromosome 22q11 and clinically by a constellation of congenital
malformations of the aortic arch, heart, thymus, and parathyroid glands described
as DiGeorge syndrome (DGS). Here, we report that compound heterozygosity of mouse
homologs of two 22q11 genes, CRKL and TBX1, results in a striking increase in the
penetrance and expressivity of a DGS-like phenotype compared to heterozygosity at
either locus. Furthermore, we show that these two genes have critical
dose-dependent functions in pharyngeal segmentation, patterning of the pharyngeal
apparatus along the anteroposterior axis, and local regulation of retinoic acid
(RA) metabolism and signaling. We can partially rescue one salient feature of DGS
in Crkl+/-;Tbx1+/- embryos by genetically reducing the amount of RA produced in
the embryo. Thus, we suggest that del22q11 is a contiguous gene syndrome
involving dose-sensitive interaction of CRKL and TBX1 and locally aberrant RA
signaling.

PMID: 16399080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Dec 27;102(52):19132-7. Epub 2005 Dec 19.

A 200-kb region of human chromosome 22q11.2 confers antipsychotic-responsive
behavioral abnormalities in mice.

Hiroi N(1), Zhu H, Lee M, Funke B, Arai M, Itokawa M, Kucherlapati R, Morrow B,
Sawamura T, Agatsuma S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Psychobiology, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY
10461, USA. hiroi@aecom.yu.edu

Human chromosome 22q11.2 has been implicated in various behavioral abnormalities,
including schizophrenia and other neuropsychiatric/behavioral disorders. However,
the specific genes within 22q11.2 that contribute to these disorders are still
poorly understood. Here, we show that an approximately 200-kb segment of human
22q11.2 causes specific behavioral abnormalities in mice. Mice that overexpress
an approximately 200-kb region of human 22q11.2, containing CDCrel, GP1Bbeta,
TBX1, and WDR14, exhibited spontaneous sensitization of hyperactivity and a lack 
of habituation. These effects were ameliorated by antipsychotic drugs. The
transgenic mice were also impaired in nesting behavior. Although Tbx1 has been
shown to be responsible for many physical defects associated with 22q11.2
haploinsufficiency, Tbx1 heterozygous mice did not display these behavioral
abnormalities. Our results show that the approximately 200-kb region of 22q11.2
contains a gene(s) responsible for behavioral abnormalities and suggest that
distinct genetic components within 22q11.2 mediate physical and behavioral
abnormalities.

PMCID: PMC1323212
PMID: 16365290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Clin Perinatol. 2005 Dec;32(4):845-55, vii.

Cardiac development: new concepts.

Gruber PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiac Center, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Suite 8527, 34th Street and Civic Center
Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. pgruber@mail.med.upenn.edu

Understanding normal development is a prerequisite to unraveling the mechanisms
that underlie congenital heart disease, a critical step if one is to design
rational new therapies. Over the past 20 years, human molecular genetics and
developmental biology have provided a group of powerful tools to uncover a number
of now well-defined pathways. There is now a confluence of new technologies and
experimental systems that may allow for a more profound understanding in the near
future.

PMID: 16325665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Int J Dev Biol. 2006;50(1):55-61.

TBX1, a DiGeorge syndrome candidate gene, is inhibited by retinoic acid.

Zhang L(1), Zhong T, Wang Y, Jiang Q, Song H, Gui Y.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China.

Both retinoic acid (RA) and Tbx1 are definitively indispensable for the
development of the pharyngeal arches. The defects produced by a loss of Tbx1
highly resemble those induced by hyper- and hypo-RA. Based on these similarities,
the effects of RA on Tbx1 expression pattern were explored during pharyngeal arch
development in zebrafish. Whole-mount in situ hybridization and real-time
quantitative PCR were used. Zebrafish embryos were treated with 5 x 10(-8)mol/L
and 10(-7)mol/L RA at 12.5 hours post fertilization for 1.5 hours, respectively. 
Whole-mount in situ hybridization showed that Tbx1 was expressed in the cardiac
region, pharyngeal arch and otic vesicle between 24 hpf and 72 hpf in zebrafish. 
Tbx1 expression was obviously reduced, even lost, in the pharyngeal arch and
outflow tract in RA treated groups. Real-time quantitative PCR analysis showed
that Tbx1 expression rose to a peak level at 36 hpf in wild type group.
Repression of Tbx1 expression was most evident at 36 hpf, 24 hours after RA
treatment. 10(-7 )mol/L RA caused a more severe effect on the Tbx1 expression
level than 5 x 10(-8)mol/L RA. The results suggested that RA could produce an
altered Tbx1 expression pattern in zebrafish. In addition, RA could repress Tbx1 
expression in a dose-dependent manner.

PMID: 16323078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Development. 2005 Dec;132(23):5307-15.

Tbx1 expression in pharyngeal epithelia is necessary for pharyngeal arch artery
development.

Zhang Z(1), Cerrato F, Xu H, Vitelli F, Morishima M, Vincentz J, Furuta Y, Ma L, 
Martin JF, Baldini A, Lindsay E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Cardiology), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

Erratum in
    Development. 2005;132(24):5614.

During embryonic life, the initially paired pharyngeal arch arteries (PAAs)
follow a precisely orchestrated program of persistence and regression that leads 
to the formation of the mature aortic arch and great vessels. When this program
fails, specific cardiovascular defects arise that may be life threatening or
mild, according to the identity of the affected artery. Fourth PAA-derived
cardiovascular defects occur commonly in DiGeorge syndrome and velocardiofacial
syndrome (22q11DS), and in Tbx1(+/-) mice that model the 22q11DS cardiovascular
phenotype. Tbx1 is expressed in pharyngeal mesoderm, endoderm and ectoderm, and, 
in addition, we show that it is expressed in precursors of the endothelial cells 
that line the PAAs, thus expanding the number of tissues in which Tbx1 is
potentially required for fourth PAA development. In this study, we have used cell
fate mapping and tissue-specific gene deletion, driven by six different Cre
lines, to explore Tbx1 gene-dosage requirements in the embryonic pharynx for
fourth PAA development. Through this approach, we have resolved the spatial
requirements for Tbx1 in this process, and we show pharyngeal epithelia to be a
critical tissue. We also thereby demonstrate conclusively that the role of Tbx1
in fourth PAA development is cell non-autonomous.

PMID: 16284121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2005 Dec;17(6):725-30.

Velo-cardio-facial syndrome.

Shprintzen RJ(1), Higgins AM, Antshel K, Fremont W, Roizen N, Kates W.

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Diagnosis, Treatment and Study of Velo-Cardio-Facial Syndrome, 
Department of Otolaryngology and Communication Sciences, State University of New 
York Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.
shprintr@upstate.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Velo-cardio-facial syndrome has emerged from obscurity to
become one of the most researched disorders this past decade. It is one of the
most common genetic syndromes in humans, the most common contiguous gene syndrome
in humans, the most common syndrome of cleft palate, and the most common syndrome
of conotruncal heart malformations. Velo-cardio-facial syndrome has an expansive 
phenotype, a factor reflected in the wide range of studies that cover both
clinical features and molecular genetics. In this review, we cover multiple areas
of research during the past year, including psychiatric disorders, neuroimaging, 
and the delineation of clinical features.
RECENT FINDINGS: The identification of candidate genes for heart anomalies,
mental illness, and other clinical phenotypes has been reported in the past year 
with a focus on TBX1 for cardiac and craniofacial phenotypes and COMT and PRODH
for psychiatric disorders. The expansive phenotype of velo-cardio-facial syndrome
continues to grow with new behavioral and structural anomalies reported.
Treatment issues are beginning to draw attention, although most authors continue 
to focus on diagnostic issues.
SUMMARY: Its high population prevalence, estimated to be as common as 1:2000 has 
sparked a large amount of research, as has the model the syndrome serves for
identifying the causes of mental illness and learning disabilities, but it is
obvious that more information is needed. Intensive scrutiny of velo-cardio-facial
syndrome will undoubtedly continue for many years to come with the hope that
researchers will turn more of their attention to treatment and treatment
outcomes.

PMID: 16282778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2005 Dec;13(6):371-5.

Velo-cardio-facial syndrome: the pediatric otolaryngologist's perspective.

Butts SC(1), Tatum SA 3rd, Mortelliti AJ, Shprintzen RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Communication Sciences, Upstate Medical
University, 750 East Adams Street, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA. sydbutts@yahoo.com

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The understanding of velo-cardio-facial syndrome has grown
markedly since the initial descriptions of this common genetic disorder nearly 30
years ago. Our knowledge of the syndrome has advanced in part from opportunities 
to monitor many patients into adulthood because of advances in the fields of
cardiothoracic surgery and immunology. Longitudinal study has brought to light
psychiatric and behavioral features of the syndrome that are often not apparent
until late adolescence or the early adult years. Certain endocrine and
immunologic features of the syndrome thought to be resolved in childhood are now 
witnessed in older patients. Variable expression and lack of disease awareness
are two major factors that contribute to the delays in diagnosis in many cases.
To address this, there has been a call to delineate screening parameters for
patients at risk of carrying the deletion.
RECENT FINDINGS: Several areas are highlighted in this review, reflecting the
focus of scholarly work on velo-cardio-facial syndrome in the past year.
Molecular genetics has shown smaller deletions in many families with the
syndrome. The gene TBX1 has been found to be important to the phenotype. Surgical
outcomes data reveal the greater challenges involved in correcting velopharyngeal
insufficiency.
SUMMARY: Defining the genetic basis of velo-cardio-facial syndrome will allow
clinicians and basic scientists to make further inroads into understanding the
variable expressivity of this syndrome. It is also important to be aware of the
continued diagnostic challenges encountered by clinicians in attempts to improve 
the detection of patients with this syndrome.

PMID: 16282767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Oct;63 Suppl 10:357-61.

[Hypoparathyroidism].

[Article in Japanese]

Ishikawa T(1), Okazaki R.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine,
Ichihara Hospital.

PMID: 16279662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Development. 2005 Nov;132(22):4897-910.

T-box transcription factors and their roles in regulatory hierarchies in the
developing heart.

Stennard FA(1), Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, St Vincent's Hospital, 384 Victoria
Street, Darlinghurst, New South Wales 2010, Australia.

T-box transcription factors are important players in the molecular circuitry that
generates lineage diversity and form in the developing embryo. At least seven
family members are expressed in the developing mammalian heart, and the human
T-box genes TBX1 and TBX5 are mutated in cardiac congenital anomaly syndromes.
Here, we review T-box gene function during mammalian heart development in the
light of new insights into heart morphogenesis. We see for the first time how
hierarchies of transcriptional activation and repression involving multiple T-box
factors play out in three-dimensional space to establish the cardiac progenitors 
fields, to define their subservient lineages, and to generate heart form and
function.

PMID: 16258075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Nihon Shinkei Seishin Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2005 Apr;25(2):79-84.

[Chromosome 22q11 and schizophrenia].

[Article in Japanese]

Agatsuma S(1), Hiroi N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Psychobiology, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx,
New York 10461, USA.

Several human chromosomal regions have been identified as candidate regions that 
play a role in schizophrenia. Deletion or duplication of chromosome 22q11 is
associated with velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS), a
disorder associated with high rates of schizophrenia as well as physical
abnormalities (i.e., cardiovascular, parathyroid, thymic and craniofacial
abnormalities). Recent mouse studies have identified several candidate genes for 
VCFS/DGS within the mouse homologue chromosome 16. Deletion of Tbx1, Prodh and
Comt within mouse chromosome 16 causes several physical and behavioral features
of VCFS/DGS. As VCFS/DGS is likely to represent a genetic subtype of
schizophrenia, pinpointing the genetic basis for this specific subtype will
contribute to a better understanding of this neuropsychiatric disorder.

PMID: 16220657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Development. 2005 Oct;132(19):4387-95. Epub 2005 Sep 1.

Timed mutation and cell-fate mapping reveal reiterated roles of Tbx1 during
embryogenesis, and a crucial function during segmentation of the pharyngeal
system via regulation of endoderm expansion.

Xu H(1), Cerrato F, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cardiovascular Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

The definition of time-specific requirements for a developmental gene can
pinpoint the processes within which the gene is involved and can reveal potential
late functions in structures and organs that fail to develop in germline mutants.
Here, we show the first systematic time-course deletion, in parallel with timed
cell fate mapping, of a developmentally crucial gene, Tbx1, during mouse
embryogenesis. Tbx1 mouse mutants model DiGeorge syndrome, a disorder of
pharyngeal and cardiovascular development. Results revealed different time
requirements for the development of individual structures, as well as multiple
and time-distinct roles during the development of the same organ or system. We
also show that Tbx1 is required throughout pharyngeal segmentation for the
regulation of endoderm expansion, thus this is the first gene implicated directly
in this process. A genetic-based blueprint of crucial developmental times for
organs and systems should be a valuable asset for our understanding of birth
defect pathogenesis.

PMID: 16141220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Dev Biol. 2005 Sep 15;285(2):554-69.

Microarray analysis detects differentially expressed genes in the pharyngeal
region of mice lacking Tbx1.

Ivins S(1), Lammerts van Beuren K, Roberts C, James C, Lindsay E, Baldini A,
Ataliotis P, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

22q11-deletion (DiGeorge/velocardiofacial) syndrome (22q11DS) is modeled by
mutation of murine transcription factor Tbx1. As part of efforts to identify
transcriptional targets of Tbx1, we analyzed the transcriptome of the pharyngeal 
region of Df1/+;Tbx1+/- embryos at 9.5 days of embryonic development using two
independent microarray platforms. In this model, embryos are null for Tbx1, with 
hemizygosity of genes in cis with Tbx1 on one chromosome providing a positive
control for array sensitivity. Reduced mRNA levels of genes deleted from Df1 were
detected on both platforms. Expression level filtering and statistical analysis
identified several genes that were consistently differentially expressed between 
mutant and wild type embryos. Real-time quantitative PCR and in situ
hybridization validated diminished expression of Pax9 and Gcm2, genes known to be
required for normal thymus and parathyroid gland morphogenesis, whereas Pax1,
Hoxa3, Eya1, and Foxn1, which are similarly required, were not down-regulated.
Gbx2, a gene required for normal arch artery development, was down-regulated
specifically in the pharyngeal endoderm and the posterior part of pharyngeal arch
1, and is a potential point of cross talk between the Tbx1 and Fgf8 controlled
pathways. These experiments highlight which genes and pathways potentially
affected by lack of Tbx1, and whose role may be explored further by testing for
epistasis using mouse mutants.

PMID: 16109395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2005 Jun;15(3):279-84.

Dissecting contiguous gene defects: TBX1.

Baldini A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Development, Department of Pediatrics (Cardiology), 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. baldini@bcm.tmc.edu

DiGeorge syndrome is mainly caused by a multigene, heterozygous, interstitial
chromosomal deletion. Of the approximately 30 deleted genes, Tbx1 is the only
gene that, after an extensive functional analysis in the mouse, has been found to
be haploinsufficient. The mutant phenotype is convincingly similar to the human
syndrome, and its human homolog, TBX1, is the only gene for which mutations have 
been found in some patients without the chromosomal deletion. The research
interest in this syndrome is driven not only by the obvious clinical significance
of the disease but also by a broader biological importance. In particular, this
syndrome is the most typical developmental defect of the embryonic pharyngeal
system: a transient, vertebrate-specific structure that contributes to diverse
tissues of the head, neck and thorax. Many birth defects, including a large
fraction of congenital heart disease cases, derive from developmental problems of
the pharyngeal system. Tbx1 is an excellent tool to probe the genetic network
governing embryonic pharyngeal development.

PMID: 15917203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2005 Jun;26(6):666-72.

Gene expression profile of amyloid beta protein-injected mouse model for
Alzheimer disease.

Kong LN(1), Zuo PP, Mu L, Liu YY, Yang N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical
College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, China.

AIM: To investigate the gene expression profile changes in the cerebral cortex of
mice injected icv with amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) fragment 25-35 using cDNA
microarray.
METHODS: Balb/c mice were randomly divided into a control group and Abeta-treated
group. The Morris water maze test was performed to detect the effect of
Abeta-injection on the learning and memory of mice. Atlas Mouse 1.2 Expression
Arrays containing 1176 genes were used to investigate the gene expression pattern
of each group.
RESULTS: The gene expression profiles showed that 19 genes including TBX1, NF-kB,
AP-1/c-Jun, cadherin, integrin, erb-B2, and FGFR1 were up-regulated after 2 weeks
of icv administration of Abeta; while 12 genes were down-regulated, including
NGF, glucose phosphate isomerase 1, AT motif binding factor 1, Na+/K+-ATPase, and
Akt.
CONCLUSIONS: The results provide important leads for pursuing a more complete
understanding of the molecular events of Abeta-injection into mice with Alzheimer
disease.

PMID: 15916731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mech Dev. 2005 May;122(5):625-34. Epub 2005 Jan 8.

Eya1 acts upstream of Tbx1, Neurogenin 1, NeuroD and the neurotrophins BDNF and
NT-3 during inner ear development.

Friedman RA(1), Makmura L, Biesiada E, Wang X, Keithley EM.

Author information: 
(1)Gonda Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, House Ear Institute, 2100 W.
Third Street, Los Angeles, CA 90057, USA. rfriedman@hei.org

Cell fate specification during inner ear development is dependent upon regional
gene expression within the otic vesicle. One of the earliest cell fate
determination steps in this system is the specification of neural precursors, and
regulators of this process include the Atonal-related basic helix-loop-helix
genes, Ngn1 and NeuroD and the T-box gene, Tbx1. In this study we demonstrate
that Eya1 signaling is critical to the normal expression patterns of Tbx1, Ngn1, 
and NeuroD in the developing mouse otocyst. We discuss a potential mechanism for 
the absence of neural precursors in the Eya1-/- inner ears and the primary and
secondary mechanisms for the loss of cochleovestibular ganglion cells in the
Eya1bor/bor hypomorphic mutant.

PMID: 15817220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Genesis. 2005 Apr;41(4):192-201.

Fgf15 is required for proper morphogenesis of the mouse cardiac outflow tract.

Vincentz JW(1), McWhirter JR, Murre C, Baldini A, Furuta Y.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genes and Development, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Texas-Houston, Health Sciences Center and M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Evidence in animal models indicates that signaling networks functioning in the
developing pharyngeal arches regulate stereotyped processes critical for proper
development of the aortic arch and cardiac outflow tract. Here, we describe the
phenotype of mice lacking fibroblast growth factor 15 (Fgf15), which encodes a
secreted signaling molecule expressed within the developing pharyngeal arches.
Homozygous Fgf15 mutants present heart defects consistent with malalignment of
the aorta and pulmonary trunk. These defects correlate with early morphological
defects of the outflow tract due to aberrant behavior of the cardiac neural
crest. We demonstrate that Fgf15 expression within the pharyngeal arches is
unaltered by a loss of Tbx1, a key regulator of pharyngeal arch development
implicated in DiGeorge syndrome. In addition, Fgf15 and Tbx1 do not interact
genetically, suggesting that Fgf15 operates through a pathway independent of
Tbx1. These studies reveal a novel role of Fgf15 during development of the
cardiac outflow tract.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15789410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Hum Genet. 2005 May;116(6):486-96. Epub 2005 Mar 19.

Microarray analysis of the Df1 mouse model of the 22q11 deletion syndrome.

Prescott K(1), Ivins S, Hubank M, Lindsay E, Baldini A, Scambler P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford St., London,
WC1N 1EH, UK.

The 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS; DiGeorge/velo-cardio-facial syndrome)
primarily affects the structures comprising the pharyngeal arches and pouches
resulting in arch artery, cardiac, parathyroid, thymus, palatal and craniofacial 
defects. Tbx1 haploinsufficiency is thought to account for the main structural
anomalies observed in the 22q11DS. The Df1 deleted mouse provides a model for
22q11DS, the deletion reflecting Tbx1 haploinsufficiency in the context of the
deletion of 21 adjacent genes. We examined the expression of genes in Df1 embryos
at embryonic day (E) 10.5, a stage when the arch-artery phenotype is fully
penetrant. Our aims were threefold, with our primary aim to identify
differentially regulated genes. Second, we asked whether any of the genes
hemizygous in Df1 were dosage compensated to wild type levels, and third we
investigated whether genes immediately adjacent to the deletion were dysregulated
secondary to a position effect. Utilisation of oligonulceotide arrays allowed us 
to achieve our aims with 9 out of 12 Df1 deleted genes passing the stringent
statistical filtering applied. Several genes involved in vasculogenesis and
cardiogenesis were validated by real time quantitative PCR (RTQPCR), including
Connexin 45, a gene required for normal vascular development, and Dnajb9 a gene
implicated in microvascular differentiation. There was no evidence of any dosage 
compensation of deleted genes, suggesting this phenomenon is rare, and no
dysregulation of genes mapping immediately adjacent to the deletion was detected.
However Crkl, another gene implicated in the 22q11DS phenotype, was found to be
downregulated by microarray and RTQPCR.

PMID: 15778864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Dev Dyn. 2005 Apr;232(4):979-91.

XTbx1 is a transcriptional activator involved in head and pharyngeal arch
development in Xenopus laevis.

Ataliotis P(1), Ivins S, Mohun TJ, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, United
Kingdom. p.ataliotis@ich.ucl.ac.uk

The development of pharyngeal arch derivatives in mouse and zebrafish embryos
depends on the activity of the transcription factor Tbx1. We cloned the Xenopus
laevis orthologue of Tbx1 (XTbx1) and show that the pattern of expression is
similar to that in other vertebrate species. Zygotic transcripts are first
detected shortly after the mid-blastula transition and are localized to the
presumptive mesoderm at mid-gastrula stages. XTbx1 expression persists in the
lateral plate mesoderm at neurula stages and is found in the pharyngeal arches
and otic vesicles from early tail bud stages onward. We demonstrate that XTbx1 is
a transcriptional activator and that this trans-activation requires the
C-terminal region of the protein. A dominant interfering mutant of XTbx1 disrupts
the development of Xenopus head structures and pharyngeal arch derivatives.
Lineage labeling reveals a requirement for XTbx1 function in cells that
contribute to the pharyngeal mesoderm and for fgf8 expression.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15736267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Dev Dyn. 2005 Apr;232(4):1003-12.

The MLC1v gene provides a transgenic marker of myocardium formation within
developing chambers of the Xenopus heart.

Smith SJ(1), Ataliotis P, Kotecha S, Towers N, Sparrow DB, Mohun TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

Many details of cardiac chamber morphogenesis could be revealed if muscle fiber
development could be visualized directly within the hearts of living vertebrate
embryos. To achieve this end, we have used the active promoter of the MLC1v gene 
to drive expression of green fluorescent protein (GFP) in the developing tadpole 
heart. By using a line of Xenopus laevis frogs transgenic for the MLC1v-EGFP
reporter, we have observed regionalized patterns of muscle formation within the
ventricular chamber and maturation of the atrial chambers, from the onset of
chamber formation through to the adult frog. In f1 generation MLC1v-EGFP animals,
promoter activity is first detected within the looping heart tube and delineates 
the forming ventricular chamber and proximal outflow tract throughout their
development. The 8-kb MLC1v promoter faithfully reproduces the embryonic
expression of the endogenous MLC1v mRNA. At later larval stages, weak patches of 
EGFP fluorescence are found on the atrial side of the atrioventricular boundary. 
Subsequently, an extensive lattice of MLC1v-expressing fibers extend across the
mature atrial chambers of adult frog hearts and the transgene reveals the
differing arrangement of muscle fibers in chamber versus outflow myocardium. The 
complete activity of the promoter resides within the proximal 4.5 kb of the MLC1v
DNA fragment, whereas key elements regulating chamber-specific expression are
present in the proximal-most 1.5 kb. Finally, we demonstrate how cardiac and
craniofacial muscle expression of the MLC1v promoter can be used to diagnose
mutant phenotypes in living embryos, using the injection of RNA encoding a
Tbx1-engrailed repressor-fusion protein as an example.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15736168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Dev Dyn. 2005 Apr;232(4):928-38.

Retinoic acid down-regulates Tbx1 expression in vivo and in vitro.

Roberts C(1), Ivins SM, James CT, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, United
Kingdom. c.roberts@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Both Tbx1 and retinoic acid (RA) are key players in embryonic pharyngeal
development; loss of Tbx1 produces DiGeorge syndrome-like phenotypes in mouse
models as does disruption of retinoic acid homeostasis. We have demonstrated that
perturbation of retinoic acid levels in the avian embryo produces altered Tbx1
expression. In vitamin A-deficient quails, which lack endogenous retinoic acid,
Tbx1 expression patterns were disrupted early in development and expression was
subsequently lost in all tissues. "Gain-of-function" experiments where RA-soaked 
beads were grafted into the pharyngeal region produced localized down-regulation 
of Tbx1 expression. In these embryos, analysis of Shh and Foxa2, upstream control
factors for Tbx1, suggested that the effect of RA was independent of this
regulatory pathway. Real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis of retinoic
acid-treated P19 cells showed a dose-dependent repression of Tbx1 by retinoic
acid. Repression of Tbx1 transcript levels was first evident after 8-12 hr in
culture in the presence of retinoic acid, and to achieve the highest levels of
repression, de novo protein synthesis was required.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15736167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Apr 1;14(7):885-92. Epub 2005 Feb 9.

Identification of a novel nuclear localization signal in Tbx1 that is deleted in 
DiGeorge syndrome patients harboring the 1223delC mutation.

Stoller JZ(1), Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) is the most common human chromosomal deletion syndrome
and is frequently associated with deletions on chromosome 22q11. Approximately
17% of patients with the phenotypic features of this syndrome have no detectable 
genomic deletion. Animal studies using mouse models have implicated Tbx1 as a
critical gene within the commonly deleted region, and several mutations in TBX1
have been identified recently in non-deleted patients, including missense and
frameshift mutations. The mechanisms by which these mutations cause disease have 
remained unclear. We have identified a previously unrecognized and novel nuclear 
localization signal (NLS) at the C-terminus of Tbx1 that is deleted by the
1223delC mutation, thus explaining the mechanism of disease in these patients.
This NLS is conserved across species, among a subfamily of T-box proteins
including Brachyury and Tbx10, and among additional nuclear proteins. By
providing functional data to indicate loss-of-function produced by the 1223delC
TBX1 mutation, our results provide strong support for the conclusion that TBX1
mutations can cause DGS in humans.

PMID: 15703190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mech Dev. 2005 Feb;122(2):199-212.

Tbx1 is required for proper neural crest migration and to stabilize spatial
patterns during middle and inner ear development.

Moraes F(1), Nóvoa A, Jerome-Majewska LA, Papaioannou VE, Mallo M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, UT, Rua da Quinta Grande 6, 2780-156 Oeiras, 
Portugal.

Tbx1 belongs to the family of T-box containing transcription factors. In humans, 
TBX1 is implicated in the etiology of the DiGeorge syndrome. Inactivation of the 
Tbx1 gene in mice produces a variety of malformations including abnormal
branching of the heart outflow tract, deficiencies in the branchial arch
derivatives, agenesis of pharyngeal glands and abnormal development of the
auditory system. We analyze here the middle and inner ear phenotypes of the Tbx1 
null mice. The middle ear is strongly affected. Its skeletal components are
malformed to varying degrees, some being slightly hypoplastic and others
completely absent. However, a seemingly normal-looking tympanic membrane can
still be recognized. Middle ear anomalies are associated with other skeletal
deficiencies in the branchial arch-derived skeleton. These phenotypes derive from
a combination of the failure of the posterior branchial arches to develop and the
misrouting of neural crest cells. The inner ears of Tbx1(-/-) animals are
hypoplastic. No vestibular or cochlear structures are detectable, but the
endolymphatic duct, the cochleovestibular ganglia and residual sensory patches
are still identifiable. Molecular analyses revealed a seemingly normal spatial
distribution of a variety of patterning markers in the otic vesicles of Tbx1 null
mutants at E9.0. However, 1 day later, several of these markers presented altered
domains of expression in the otocysts of these mutant embryos, suggesting that
Tbx1 is not required for the establishment of spatial patterns in the otocyst,
but rather for their maintenance. The inability of the Tbx1(-/-) embryos to keep 
properly segregated functional domains in the otocyst is likely the cause of the 
strong inner ear phenotypes observed in these mutants.

PMID: 15652707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jan;232(1):11-20.

T-box genes and heart development: putting the "T" in heart.

Plageman TF Jr(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, ML7020, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Members of the T-box gene family (Tbx) are essential for normal heart
development, and mutations in human TBX genes cause congenital cardiovascular
malformations. T-box genes have been implicated in early cardiac lineage
determination, chamber specification, valvuloseptal development, and
diversification of the specialized conduction system in vertebrate embryos. These
genes include Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx5, Tbx18, and Tbx20, all of which exhibit
complex temporal spatial regulation in developing cardiac structures. Less is
known about T-box genes in invertebrate heart development, but multiple T-box
genes are expressed in Drosophila cardiac lineages. The molecular hierarchies and
developmental processes controlled by T-box genes in the heart are the focus of
this review.

PMID: 15580613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Development. 2004 Dec;131(24):6211-23. Epub 2004 Nov 17.

ENU induced mutations causing congenital cardiovascular anomalies.

Yu Q(1), Shen Y, Chatterjee B, Siegfried BH, Leatherbury L, Rosenthal J, Lucas
JF, Wessels A, Spurney CF, Wu YJ, Kirby ML, Svenson K, Lo CW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, National Heart Lung and Blood Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-8019, USA.

We used non-invasive high frequency ultrasound to screen N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea
mutagenized mouse fetuses for congenital cardiovascular anomalies. We ultrasound 
scanned 7546 mouse fetuses from 262 mutagenized families, and identified 124
families with cardiovascular defects. Represented were most of the major
congenital cardiovascular anomalies seen clinically. The ENU-induced mutations in
several families were mapped using polymorphic microsatellite DNA markers. One
family with forelimb anomalies and ventricular septal defects, phenotypes similar
to Holt-Oram syndrome, and one family with transposition of the great arteries
and heart situs anomalies were mapped to different regions of mouse chromosome 4.
A third mutation causing persistent truncus arteriosus and craniofacial defects, 
phenotypes reminiscent of DiGeorge syndrome, was mapped to mouse chromosome 2. We
note that mouse chromosomes 4 and 2 do not contain Tbx5 or Tbx1, genes previously
linked to Holt-Oram and DiGeorge syndromes, respectively. In two other families, 
the ENU-induced mutation was identified--Sema3CL605P was associated with
persistent truncus arteriosus with interrupted aortic arch, and the Gja1W45X
connexin43 mutation caused conotruncal malformation and coronary aneurysms.
Although our screen was designed as a recessive screen, a number of the mutations
showed cardiovascular phenotypes in both heterozygote and homozygote animals.
These studies show the efficacy of ENU mutagenesis and high-throughput ultrasound
phenotyping in recovering mutations causing a wide spectrum of congenital heart
defects. These ENU-induced mutations hold promise in yielding new insights into
the genetic basis for human congenital heart disease.

PMID: 15548583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Development. 2004 Nov;131(21):5491-502. Epub 2004 Oct 6.

Tbx1 regulates fibroblast growth factors in the anterior heart field through a
reinforcing autoregulatory loop involving forkhead transcription factors.

Hu T(1), Yamagishi H, Maeda J, McAnally J, Yamagishi C, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Birth defects, which occur in one out of 20 live births, often affect multiple
organs that have common developmental origins. Human and mouse studies indicate
that haploinsufficiency of the transcription factor TBX1 disrupts pharyngeal arch
development, resulting in the cardiac and craniofacial features associated with
microdeletion of 22q11 (del22q11), the most frequent human deletion syndrome.
Here, we have generated an allelic series of Tbx1 deficiency that reveals a lower
critical threshold for Tbx1 activity in the cardiac outflow tract compared with
other pharyngeal arch derivatives, including the palatal bones. Mice hypomorphic 
for Tbx1 failed to activate expression of the forkhead transcription factor Foxa2
in the pharyngeal mesoderm, which contains cardiac outflow precursors derived
from the anterior heart field. We identified a Fox-binding site upstream of Tbx1 
that interacted with Foxa2 and was necessary for pharyngeal mesoderm expression
of Tbx1, revealing an autoregulatory loop that may explain the increased cardiac 
sensitivity to Tbx1 dose. Downstream of Tbx1, we found a fibroblast growth factor
8 (Fgf8) enhancer that was dependent on Tbx1 in vivo for regulating expression in
the cardiac outflow tract, but not in pharyngeal arches. Consistent with its role
in regulating cardiac outflow tract cells Tbx1 gain of function resulted in
expansion of the cardiac outflow tract segment derived from the anterior heart
field as marked by Fgf10. These findings reveal a Tbx1-dependent transcriptional 
and signaling network in the cardiac outflow tract that renders mouse
cardiovascular development more susceptible than craniofacial development to a
reduction in Tbx1 dose, similar to humans with del22q11.

PMID: 15469978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Nov 15;13(22):2829-40. Epub 2004 Sep 22.

The del22q11.2 candidate gene Tbx1 regulates branchiomeric myogenesis.

Kelly RG(1), Jerome-Majewska LA, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA. rk2149@columbia.edu

Formation and remodeling of the pharyngeal arches play central roles in
craniofacial development. TBX1, encoding a T-box-containing transcription factor,
is the major candidate gene for del22q11.2 (DiGeorge or velo-cardio-facial)
syndrome, characterized by craniofacial defects, thymic hypoplasia,
cardiovascular anomalies, velopharyngeal insufficiency and skeletal muscle
hypotonia. Tbx1 is expressed in pharyngeal mesoderm, which gives rise to
branchiomeric skeletal muscles of the head and neck. Although the genetic control
of craniofacial muscle development is known to involve pathways distinct from
those operational in the trunk, the regulation of branchiomeric myogenesis has
remained enigmatic. Here we show that branchiomeric muscle development is
severely perturbed in Tbx1 mutant mice. In the absence of Tbx1, the myogenic
determination genes Myf5 and MyoD fail to be normally activated in pharyngeal
mesoderm. Unspecified precursor cells expressing genes encoding the
transcriptional repressors Capsulin and MyoR are present in the mandibular arch
of Tbx1 mutant embryos. Sporadic activation of Myf5 and MyoD in these precursor
cells results in the random presence or absence of hypoplastic mandibular
arch-derived muscles at later developmental stages. Tbx1 is also required for
normal expression of Tlx1 and Fgf10 in pharyngeal mesoderm, in addition to
correct neural crest cell patterning in the mandibular arch. Tbx1 therefore
regulates the onset of branchiomeric myogenesis and controls normal mandibular
arch development, including robust transcriptional activation of myogenic
determination genes. While no abnormalities in branchiomeric myogenesis were
detected in Tbx1(+/-) mice, reduced TBX1 levels may contribute to pharyngeal
hypotonia in del22q11.2 patients.

PMID: 15385444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Dev Genes Evol. 2004 Nov;214(11):559-66. Epub 2004 Sep 11.

Developmental expression of the amphioxus Tbx1/ 10 gene illuminates the evolution
of vertebrate branchial arches and sclerotome.

Mahadevan NR(1), Horton AC, Gibson-Brown JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Washington University, 1 Brookings Drive, St. Louis, MO
63130-4899, USA.

We have isolated an amphioxus T-box gene that is orthologous to the two
vertebrate genes, Tbx1 and Tbx10, and examined its expression pattern during
embryonic and early larval development. AmphiTbx1/ 10 is first expressed in
branchial arch endoderm and mesoderm of developing neurulae, and in a bilateral, 
segmented pattern in the ventral half of newly formed somites. Branchial
expression is restricted to the first three branchial arches, and disappears
completely by 4 days post fertilization. Ventral somitic expression is restricted
to the first 10-12 somites, and is not observed in early larvae except in the
most ventral mesoderm of the first three branchial arches. No expression can be
detected by 4 days post fertilization. Integrating functional, phylogenetic and
expression data from amphioxus and a variety of vertebrate model organisms, we
have reconstructed the early evolutionary history of the Tbx1/ 10 subfamily of
genes within the chordate lineage. We conclude that Tbx1/ 10-mediated branchial
arch endoderm and mesoderm patterning functions predated the origin of neural
crest, and that ventral somite specification functions predated the origin of
vertebrate sclerotome, but that Tbx1 was later co-opted during the evolution of
developmental programs regulating branchial neural crest and sclerotome
migration.

PMID: 15372236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Ann Genet. 2004 Jul-Sep;47(3):235-40.

Allelic variations at the haploid TBX1 locus do not influence the cardiac
phenotype in cases of 22q11 microdeletion.

Voelckel MA(1), Girardot L, Giusiano B, Levy N, Philip N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire, Departement de Genetique Medicale,
Hôpital d'Enfants de la Timone, 264, rue Saint-Pierre, 13385 Marseille cedex 5,
France. marie-antoinette.voelckel@ap-hm.fr

Microdeletion at the 22q11 locus is characterised by a high clinical variability.
Congenital heart defects (CHD) are the most life-threatening manifestations of
the syndrome and affect approximately 50% of patients carrying the deleted
chromosome 22. The causes of this phenotype variability remain unknown although
several hypotheses have been raised. It has been suggested that allelic
variations at the haploid locus could modify the phenotypic expression. Regarding
this hypothesis, TBX1 was thought to be a major candidate to the cardiac
phenotype or its severity in patients carrying the 22q11 microdeletion. A
mutational screening was performed in this gene, in a series of 39 deleted
patients, with and without CHD. The results indicate that mutations in TBX1 are
not likely to be involved in the cardiac phenotype observed in del22q11 patients.

PMID: 15337468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Dev Dyn. 2004 Aug;230(4):743-53.

T-box genes in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis: characterization of cDNAs and
spatial expression.

Takatori N(1), Hotta K, Mochizuki Y, Satoh G, Mitani Y, Satoh N, Satou Y,
Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto, Japan.

Members of the T-box family of transcription factors share an evolutionarily
conserved DNA-binding domain and play significant roles in various processes of
embryonic development. Vertebrate T-box genes are categorized into the following 
five major subfamilies (eight groups), depending on sequence similarities:
Brachyury, Tbx1 (Tbx1/10, Tbx15/18/22, Tbx20), Tbx2/3/4/5 (Tbx2/3 and Tbx4/5),
Tbx6, and Tbr/Eomes/TBX21. Ascidians are primitive chordates, and their tadpole
larva are considered to represent the simplified and basic body plan of
vertebrates. In addition, it has been revealed that the ascidian genome contains 
the basic ancestral complement of genes involved in development. The present
characterization of cDNAs and survey of the Ciona intestinalis draft genome
demonstrated that the Ciona genome contains a single copy gene for each of the
Brachyury, Tbx1/10, Tbx15/18/22, Tbx20, Tbx2/3, and Tbr/Eomes/TBX21 groups, and
at least three copies of the Tbx6 subfamily. Each of the Ciona T-box genes shows 
a characteristic expression pattern, although that of Tbx20 was not determined in
the present study. These results provide basic information that will be useful
for future studies of the function of each gene, genetic cascades of different
T-box genes, and genome-wide surveys of evolutionary changes in the T-box gene
structure and organization in this primitive chordate.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15254908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic. 2003 Oct;2(3):224-33.

The comparative genomics of T-box genes.

Minguillon C(1), Logan M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, NIMR, London, UK.

T-box genes are defined by the presence of a conserved sequence, the so-called
T-box; this codes for the T-domain, which is involved in DNA-binding and protein 
dimerisation. Members of this gene family have been found in all metazoans, from 
diploblasts to humans, and mutations in T-box gene family members in humans have 
been linked to several congenital disorders. Sequencing of the complete genomes
of a range of invertebrate and vertebrate species has allowed the classification 
of individual T-box genes into five subfamilies: Brachyury, T-brain1, Tbx1, Tbx2 
and Tbx6. This review will largely focus on T-box genes identified in organisms
whose genomes have been fully sequenced, emphasising how comparative studies of
the T-box gene family will help to reveal the roles of these genes during
development and in the adult.

PMID: 15239925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Aug 1;13(15):1577-85. Epub 2004 Jun 9.

Full spectrum of malformations in velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome
mouse models by altering Tbx1 dosage.

Liao J(1), Kochilas L, Nowotschin S, Arnold JS, Aggarwal VS, Epstein JA, Brown
MC, Adams J, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
NY 10461, USA.

Velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS) is associated with de
novo hemizygous 22q11.2 deletions and is characterized by malformations
attributed to abnormal development of the pharyngeal arches and pouches. The main
physical findings include aortic arch and outflow tract heart defects, thymus
gland hypoplasia or aplasia and craniofacial anomalies. The disorder varies
greatly in expressivity; while some patients are mildly affected with learning
disabilities and subtle craniofacial malformations, others die soon after birth
with major cardiovascular defects and thymus gland aplasia. In addition to the
main clinical features, many other findings are associated with the disorder such
as chronic otitis media and hypocalcemia. Tbx1, a gene encoding a T-box
transcription factor, which is hemizygously deleted on chromosome 22q11.2, was
found to be a strong candidate for the equivalent of human VCFS/DGS in mice. Mice
hemizygous for a null allele of Tbx1 had mild malformations, while homozygotes
had severe malformations in the affected structures; neither precisely modeling
the syndrome. Interestingly, bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) transgenic
mice overexpressing human TBX1 and three other transgenes, had similar
malformations as VCFS/DGS patients. By employing genetic complementation studies,
we demonstrate that altered TBX1 dosage and not overexpression of the other
transgenes is responsible for most of the defects in the BAC transgenic mice.
Furthermore, the full spectrum of VCFS/DGS malformations was elicited in a Tbx1
dose dependent manner, thus providing a molecular basis for the pathogenesis and 
varied expressivity of the syndrome.

PMID: 15190012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Development. 2004 Jul;131(13):3217-27. Epub 2004 Jun 2.

Tbx1 has a dual role in the morphogenesis of the cardiac outflow tract.

Xu H(1), Morishima M, Wylie JN, Schwartz RJ, Bruneau BG, Lindsay EA, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cardiovascular Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

Dysmorphogenesis of the cardiac outflow tract (OFT) causes many congenital heart 
defects, including those associated with DiGeorge syndrome. Genetic manipulation 
in the mouse and mutational analysis in patients have shown that Tbx1, a T-box
transcription factor, has a key role in the pathogenesis of this syndrome. Here, 
we have dissected Tbx1 function during OFT development using genetically modified
mice and tissue-specific deletion, and have defined a dual role for this protein 
in OFT morphogenesis. We show that Tbx1 regulates cell contribution to the OFT by
supporting cell proliferation in the secondary heart field, a source of cells
fated to the OFT. This process might be regulated in part by Fgf10, which we show
for the first time to be a direct target of Tbx1 in vitro. We also show that Tbx1
expression is required in cells expressing Nkx2.5 for the formation of the
aorto-pulmonary septum, which divides the aorta from the main pulmonary artery.
These results explain why aortic arch patterning defects and OFT defects can
occur independently in individuals with DiGeorge syndrome. Furthermore, our data 
link, for the first time, the function of the secondary heart field to congenital
heart disease.

PMID: 15175244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2004 Jun;6(3):176-82.

Genetic abnormalities of chromosome 22 and the development of psychosis.

Williams NM(1), Owen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychological Medicine, Henry Wellcome Building for Biomedical
Research, University of Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff CF14 4XN, Wales, UK.
williamsnm@cf.ac.uk

A microdeletion at chromosome 22q11 is the most frequently known interstitial
deletion found in humans, occurring in approximately one of every 4000 live
births. Its occurrence is associated with a characteristic facial dysmorphology, 
a range of congenital abnormalities, and psychiatric problems, especially
schizophrenia. The prevalence of psychosis in those with 22q11 deletion syndrome 
is high (30%), suggesting that haploinsufficiency of a gene or genes in this
region may confer a substantially increased risk. In addition, several studies
provide evidence for linkage to schizophrenia on 22q, suggesting that a gene in
this region could confer susceptibility to schizophrenia in nondeleted cases.
Recent studies have provided compelling evidence that haploinsufficiency of TBX1 
is likely to be responsible for many of the physical features associated with the
deletion. However, although a number of genes have been implicated as possible
schizophrenia susceptibility loci, further confirmatory studies are required.

PMID: 15142470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2004 May;19(3):201-4.

DiGeorge syndrome: an update.

Baldini A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, and Center for
Cardiovascular Development, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA. baldini@bcm.tmc.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article is an update on DiGeorge syndrome research
focusing on the synergy of human and model systems genetics toward the
understanding of conotruncal and aortic arch defects.
RECENT FINDINGS: The identification of mutations of the human T-Box1 (TBX1) gene 
and progress on research of Tbx1 function in mouse development demonstrate the
pathogenetic role of this gene in DiGeorge syndrome and generate new hypotheses
about its function in cardiovascular development.
SUMMARY: The Tbx1 genetic pathway and the cell biology of tissues contributing to
pharyngeal arch arteries and cardiac outflow tract are the foundation for
understanding congenital heart disease in DiGeorge syndrome.

PMID: 15096950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Development. 2004 Apr;131(8):1801-12. Epub 2004 Mar 17.

Suppression of neural fate and control of inner ear morphogenesis by Tbx1.

Raft S(1), Nowotschin S, Liao J, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris
Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Inner ear sensory organs and VIIIth cranial ganglion neurons of the
auditory/vestibular pathway derive from an ectodermal placode that invaginates to
form an otocyst. We show that in the mouse otocyst epithelium, Tbx1 suppresses
neurogenin 1-mediated neural fate determination and is required for induction or 
proper patterning of gene expression related to sensory organ morphogenesis (Otx1
and Bmp4, respectively). Tbx1 loss-of-function causes dysregulation of neural
competence in otocyst regions linked to the formation of either mechanosensory or
structural sensory organ epithelia. Subsequently, VIIIth ganglion rudiment form
is duplicated posteriorly, while the inner ear is hypoplastic and shows neither a
vestibular apparatus nor a coiled cochlear duct. We propose that Tbx1 acts in the
manner of a selector gene to control neural and sensory organ fate specification 
in the otocyst.

PMID: 15084464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Med Genet. 2004 Apr;41(4):e40.

Assessment of association between variants and haplotypes of the remaining TBX1
gene and manifestations of congenital heart defects in 22q11.2 deletion patients.

Rauch A, Devriendt K, Koch A, Rauch R, Gewillig M, Kraus C, Weyand M, Singer H,
Reis A, Hofbeck M.

PMCID: PMC1735727
PMID: 15060116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 30;279(18):19026-34. Epub 2004 Feb 20.

Differential expression and function of Tbx5 and Tbx20 in cardiac development.

Plageman TF Jr(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

The T-box transcription factors play critical roles in embryonic development
including cell type specification, tissue patterning, and morphogenesis. Several 
T-box genes are expressed in the heart and are regulators of cardiac development.
At the earliest stages of heart development, two of these genes, Tbx5 and Tbx20, 
are co-expressed in the heart-forming region but then become differentially
expressed as heart morphogenesis progresses. Although Tbx5 and Tbx20 belong to
the same gene family and share a highly conserved DNA-binding domain, their
transcriptional activities are distinct. The C-terminal region of the Tbx5
protein is a transcriptional activator, while the C terminus of Tbx20 can repress
transcription. Tbx5, but not Tbx20, activates a cardiac-specific promoter (atrial
natriuretic factor (ANF)) alone and synergistically with other transcription
factors. In contrast, Tbx20 represses ANF promoter activity and also inhibits the
activation mediated by Tbx5. Of the two T-box binding consensus sequences in the 
promoter of ANF, only T-box binding element 1 (TBE1) is required for the
synergistic activation of ANF by Tbx5 and GATA4, but TBE2 is required for
repression by Tbx20. To elucidate upstream signaling pathways that regulate Tbx5 
and Tbx20 expression, recombinant bone morphogenetic protein-2 was added to
cardiogenic explants from chick embryos. Using real time reverse
transcription-PCR, it was demonstrated that Tbx20, but not Tbx5, is induced by
bone morphogenetic protein-2. Collectively these data demonstrate clear
differences in both the expression and function of two related transcription
factors and suggest that the modulation of cardiac gene expression can occur as a
result of combinatorial regulatory interactions of T-box proteins.

PMID: 14978031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Dev Biol. 2004 Mar 1;267(1):190-202.

Cre-mediated excision of Fgf8 in the Tbx1 expression domain reveals a critical
role for Fgf8 in cardiovascular development in the mouse.

Brown CB(1), Wenning JM, Lu MM, Epstein DJ, Meyers EN, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Erratum in
    Dev Biol. 2004 Jul 1;271(1):223.

Tbx1 has been implicated as a candidate gene responsible for defective pharyngeal
arch remodeling in DiGeorge/Velocardiofacial syndrome. Tbx1(+/-) mice mimic
aspects of the DiGeorge phenotype with variable penetrance, and null mice display
severe pharyngeal hypoplasia. Here, we identify enhancer elements in the Tbx1
gene that are conserved through evolution and mediate tissue-specific expression.
We describe the generation of transgenic mice that utilize these enhancer
elements to direct Cre recombinase expression in endogenous Tbx1 expression
domains. We use these Tbx1-Cre mice to fate map Tbx1-expressing precursors and
identify broad regions of mesoderm, including early cardiac mesoderm, which are
derived from Tbx1-expressing cells. We test the hypothesis that fibroblast growth
factor 8 (Fgf8) functions downstream of Tbx1 by performing tissue-specific
inactivation of Fgf8 using Tbx1-Cre mice. Resulting newborn mice display
DiGeorge-like congenital cardiovascular defects that involve the outflow tract of
the heart. Vascular smooth muscle differentiation in the great vessels is
disrupted. This data is consistent with a model in which Tbx1 induces Fgf8
expression in the pharyngeal endoderm, which is subsequently required for normal 
cardiovascular morphogenesis and smooth muscle differentiation in the aorta and
pulmonary artery.

PMID: 14975726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol. 2004 Jan;276(1):22-33.

Smooth muscle stem cells.

Hirschi KK(1), Majesky MW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, 
USA.

Vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs) originate from multiple types of progenitor
cells. In the embryo, the most well studied SMC progenitor is the cardiac neural 
crest stem cell. Smooth muscle differentiation in the neural crest lineage is
controlled by a combination of cell intrinsic factors, including Pax3, Tbx1,
FoxC1, and serum response factor, interacting with various extrinsic factors in
the local environment such as bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), Wnts,
endothelin (ET)-1, and FGF8. Additional sources of multipotential cells that give
rise to vascular SMCs in the embryo include proepicardial cells and possibly
endothelial progenitor cells. In the adult, vascular SMCs must continually repair
arterial injuries and maintain functional mass in response to changing demands
upon the vessel wall. Recent evidence suggests that this is accomplished, in
part, by recruiting multipotential vascular progenitors from bone marrow-derived 
stem cells as well as from less well defined sources within adult tissues
themselves. This article will review our current understanding of the origins of 
vascular SMCs from multipotential stem and progenitor cells in developing as well
as adult vasculature.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14699631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Nov 25;100(24):14433-8. Epub 2003 Nov 12.

A comprehensive analysis of 22q11 gene expression in the developing and adult
brain.

Maynard TM(1), Haskell GT, Peters AZ, Sikich L, Lieberman JA, LaMantia AS.

Author information: 
(1)Neurodevelopmental Disorders Research Center, Silvio O. Conte Center for the
Neuroscience of Mental Disorders, Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology,
School of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Deletions at 22q11.2 are linked to DiGeorge or velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS), 
whose hallmarks include heart, limb, and craniofacial anomalies, as well as
learning disabilities and increased incidence of schizophrenia. To assess the
potential contribution of 22q11 genes to cognitive and psychiatric phenotypes, we
determined the CNS expression of 32 mouse orthologs of 22q11 genes, primarily in 
the 1.5-Mb minimal critical region consistently deleted in VCFS. None are
uniquely expressed in the developing or adult mouse brain. Instead, 27 are
localized in the embryonic forebrain as well as aortic arches, branchial arches, 
and limb buds. Each continues to be expressed at apparently constant levels in
the fetal, postnatal, and adult brain, except for Tbx1, ProDH2, and T10, which
increase in adolescence and decline in maturity. At least six 22q11 proteins are 
seen primarily in subsets of neurons, including some in forebrain regions thought
to be altered in schizophrenia. Thus, 22q11 deletion may disrupt expression of
multiple genes during development and maturation of neurons and circuits
compromised by cognitive and psychiatric disorders associated with VCFS.

PMCID: PMC283609
PMID: 14614146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Lancet. 2003 Oct 25;362(9393):1366-73.

Role of TBX1 in human del22q11.2 syndrome.

Yagi H(1), Furutani Y, Hamada H, Sasaki T, Asakawa S, Minoshima S, Ichida F, Joo 
K, Kimura M, Imamura S, Kamatani N, Momma K, Takao A, Nakazawa M, Shimizu N,
Matsuoka R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genomic Medicine, Institute of Advanced Biomedical Engineering and
Science, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo,
Japan.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2003 Oct 25;362(9393):1342-3.

BACKGROUND: Del22q11.2 syndrome is the most frequent known chromosomal
microdeletion syndrome, with an incidence of 1 in 4000-5000 livebirths. It is
characterised by a 3-Mb deletion on chromosome 22q11.2, cardiac abnormalities,
T-cell deficits, cleft palate facial anomalies, and hypocalcaemia. At least 30
genes have been mapped to the deleted region. However, the association of these
genes with the cause of this syndrome is not clearly understood.
METHODS: To test for the chromosomal deletion at 22q11.2, we did fluorescence
in-situ hybridisation analysis with ten probes on 22q11.2 in 235 unrelated
patients with clinically diagnosed del22q11.2 syndrome. To investigate mutations 
in the coding sequence of TBX1, we also did genetic analysis in 13 patients from 
ten families who have the 22q11.2 syndrome phenotype but no detectable deletion
of 22q11.2.
FINDINGS: 96% (225 of 235) of patients had a defined 1.5-3-Mb deletion at
22q11.2. We identified three mutations of TBX1 in two unrelated patients without 
the 22q11.2 deletion-one with sporadic conotruncal anomaly face
syndrome/velocardiofacial syndrome and one with sporadic DiGeorge's syndrome-and 
in three patients from a family with conotruncal anomaly face
syndrome/velocardiofacial syndrome. We did not record these three mutations in
555 healthy controls (1110 chromosomes; p<0.0001).
INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that the TBX1 mutation is responsible for
five major phenotypes in del22q11.2 syndrome. Therefore, we conclude that TBX1 is
a major genetic determinant of the del22q11.2 syndrome.

PMID: 14585638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Lancet. 2003 Oct 25;362(9393):1342-3.

DiGeorge's syndrome: a gene at last.

Baldini A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric (Cardiology), and Center for Cardiovascular
Development, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
baldini@bmc.tmc.edu

Comment on
    Lancet. 2003 Oct 25;362(9393):1366-73.

PMID: 14585631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Nature. 2003 Oct 2;425(6957):507-12.

Jelly belly protein activates the receptor tyrosine kinase Alk to specify
visceral muscle pioneers.

Lee HH(1), Norris A, Weiss JB, Frasch M.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1020, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2003 Oct 2;425(6957):468-9.

The secreted protein Jelly belly (Jeb) is required for an essential signalling
event in Drosophila muscle development. In the absence of functional Jeb,
visceral muscle precursors are normally specified but fail to migrate and
differentiate. The structure and distribution of Jeb protein implies that Jeb
functions as a signal to organize the development of visceral muscles. Here we
show that the Jeb receptor is the Drosophila homologue of anaplastic lymphoma
kinase (Alk), a receptor tyrosine kinase of the insulin receptor superfamily.
Human ALK was originally identified as a proto-oncogene, but its normal function 
in mammals is not known. In Drosophila, localized Jeb activates Alk and the
downstream Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade to specify a select group
of visceral muscle precursors as muscle-patterning pioneers. Jeb/Alk signalling
induces the myoblast fusion gene dumbfounded (duf; also known as kirre) as well
as org-1, a Drosophila homologue of mammalian TBX1, in these cells.

PMID: 14523446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Trends Mol Med. 2003 Sep;9(9):383-9.

Unraveling the genetic and developmental mysteries of 22q11 deletion syndrome.

Yamagishi H(1), Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjyuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. hyamag@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp

Birth defects occur in nearly 5% of all live births and are the major cause of
infant mortality and morbidity. Despite the recent progress in molecular and
developmental biology, the underlying genetic etiology of most congenital
anomalies remains unknown. Heterozygous deletion of the 22q11.2 locus results in 
the most common human genetic deletion syndrome, known as DiGeorge syndrome, and 
has served as an entry to understanding the basis for numerous congenital heart
and craniofacial anomalies, among many other defects. Extensive human genetic
analyses, mouse modeling and studies of developmental molecular cascades involved
in 22q11 deletion syndrome are revealing complex networks of signaling and
transcriptional events that are essential for normal embryonic development. Armed
with this knowledge, we can now begin to consider the multiple genetic "hits"
that might contribute to developmental anomalies, some of which could provide
targets for in utero prevention of birth defects.

PMID: 13129704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Oct;3(5):645-51.

Cloning and characterization of zebrafish tbx1.

Kochilas LK(1), Potluri V, Gitler A, Balasubramanian K, Chin AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Brown University
Medical School, Providence, RI, USA.

Tbx1 is one of the genes within the DiGeorge Critical Region (DGCR) and has been 
recently identified as the critical gene for the cardiovascular anomalies in the 
DiGeorge mouse models. We have cloned, sequenced and analyzed the zebrafish
(Danio rerio) tbx1 cDNA. It encodes a protein of 460 amino acids that shares 64% 
identity and 67% similarity with the human TBX1 orthologue at the amino acid
level. Although maternal expression was detected by RT-PCR, only zygotic
expression could be detected by whole-mount in situ hybridization. Expression of 
zebrafish tbx1 by whole-mount in situ hybridization was first detected at 40%
epiboly, 5.0 hours post fertilization (hpf) in the dorsal blastoderm margin.
Through the stage of embryonic shield formation, tbx1 expression is restricted to
the hypoblast, in the region of cells fated to become head and lateral plate
mesoderm and pharyngeal endoderm. At 18 hpf, when the heart tube is beginning to 
assemble, three domains of tbx1 expression can be seen: cardiac precursors,
pharyngeal arch precursors and otic vesicle. These three domains will remain the 
sites of tbx1 expression to varying degrees through at least 72 hpf. By 51 hpf,
tbx1 expression can be seen in the cardiac outflow tract, the ventricle and the
atrium, although by 72 hpf cardiac expression is strongest in the cardiac outflow
tract. This newly identified tbx1 expression pattern in cardiac regions other
than the cardiac outflow tract offers a new insight into the role of the tbx1
transcription factor in cardiac development.

PMID: 12972000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Development. 2003 Oct;130(20):5043-52.

The zebrafish van gogh mutation disrupts tbx1, which is involved in the DiGeorge 
deletion syndrome in humans.

Piotrowski T(1), Ahn DG, Schilling TF, Nair S, Ruvinsky I, Geisler R, Rauch GJ,
Haffter P, Zon LI, Zhou Y, Foott H, Dawid IB, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health, NICHD, LMG, Bldg. 6B, 9000 Rockville Pike,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. piotrowski@neuro.utah.edu

The van gogh (vgo) mutant in zebrafish is characterized by defects in the ear,
pharyngeal arches and associated structures such as the thymus. We show that vgo 
is caused by a mutation in tbx1, a member of the large family of T-box genes.
tbx1 has been recently suggested to be a major contributor to the cardiovascular 
defects in DiGeorge deletion syndrome (DGS) in humans, a syndrome in which
several neural crest derivatives are affected in the pharyngeal arches. Using
cell transplantation studies, we demonstrate that vgo/tbx1 acts cell autonomously
in the pharyngeal mesendoderm and influences the development of neural
crest-derived cartilages secondarily. Furthermore, we provide evidence for
regulatory interactions between vgo/tbx1 and edn1 and hand2, genes that are
implicated in the control of pharyngeal arch development and in the etiology of
DGS.

PMID: 12952905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Dev Dyn. 2003 Sep;228(1):95-104.

Ece1 and Tbx1 define distinct pathways to aortic arch morphogenesis.

Morishima M(1), Yanagisawa H, Yanagisawa M, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Cardiology), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA.

Pharyngeal arch artery (PAA) remodeling defects account for several cases of
congenital heart disease. Mutations in the Endothelin-1 genetic pathway or Tbx1, 
a candidate gene for DiGeorge syndrome, cause similar aortic arch defects.
Previous research suggests that Tbx1 may trigger diffusible signals from the
pharyngeal arches to support the growth of the PAAs that contribute to the mature
aortic arch. The demonstration of genetic interaction between Tbx1 and Fgf8
pointed to FGF signaling as a possible candidate. Because Fgf8 interacts with
Endothelin-1 signaling and because Endothelin-1 signaling interacts with neural
crest-derived cells in the pharyngeal apparatus, we hypothesized that Tbx1 and
Endothelin-1 signaling may contribute to the same pathway required for aortic
arch morphogenesis. Therefore, we have analyzed mice mutated for the endothelin
converting enzyme (Ece1) or Tbx1 genes and compound mutants. Results show that
the two genes have different roles in the remodeling of the PAAs and do not
interact. We propose that Tbx1 is required for the formation and early growth and
remodeling of the PAAs, whereas Ece1 is necessary for regression of the cranial
arch arteries and growth of the most caudal arch arteries. The latter function is
likely related to the known role of the Endothelin-1 pathway in neural crest
function.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12950083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Aug 15;12(16):2041-8.

TBX1 is required for inner ear morphogenesis.

Vitelli F(1), Viola A, Morishima M, Pramparo T, Baldini A, Lindsay E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Cardiology), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

TBX1 is thought to be a critical gene in the pathogenesis of del22q11/DiGeorge
syndrome (DGS). Morphological abnormalities of the external ear and hearing
impairment (conductive or sensorineural) affect the majority of patients. Here we
show that homozygous mutation of the mouse homolog Tbx1 is associated with severe
inner ear defects that prevent the formation of the cochlea and of the
vestibulum. Consistent with phenotypic abnormalities, Tbx1 is expressed early in 
otocyst development in the otic epithelium and in the periotic mesenchyme. Tbx1
loss-of-function blocks inner ear development at early otocyst stage and after
neurogenesis. Analysis of chimeras suggests that Tbx1 function is required in the
otic epithelium cell autonomously, but abnormalities of the periotic mesenchyme
indicate that the pathogenesis of the inner ear phenotype is complex. We propose 
a model where Tbx1 is required for expansion of a subpopulation of otic
epithelial cells, which is required to form the vestibular and auditory organs.
Our data suggest that Tbx1 deletion in del22q11 patients may cause not only
external and middle ear defects but also sensorineural and vestibular phenotypes 
observed in these patients.

PMID: 12913075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Pediatr Surg. 2003 Aug;38(8):E21-3.

Esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal fistula in a patient with Digeorge
syndrome.

Kilic SS(1), Gurpinar A, Yakut T, Egeli U, Dogruyol H.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Uludag University School of
Medicine, Bursa, Turkey.

Comment in
    J Pediatr Surg. 2004 Aug;39(8):1301; author reply 1301-2.

DiGeorge Syndrome (DGS) is a congenital disorder that affects the thymus,
parathyroid glands, and heart and brain. Thymus involvement in DGS may vary
between absence/hypoplasia of thymus to various forms of reduced T cell function.
TBX1 deficiency causes a number of distinct vascular and heart defects,
suggesting multiple roles in cardiovascular development, specifically, formation 
and growth of the pharyngeal arch arteries, growth and septation of the outflow
tract of the heart, interventricular septation, and conal alignment. Here the
authors describe a case of DGS presenting with severe combined immunodeficiency, 
esophageal atresia, and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). DGS is an important
differential diagnosis in TEF.

PMID: 12891520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2002;67:327-32.

Genetic dissection of the DiGeorge syndrome phenotype.

Vitelli F(1), Lindsay EA, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Cardiology), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA.

PMID: 12858556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2002;67:57-62.

Neural crest migration and mouse models of congenital heart disease.

Gitler AD(1), Brown CB, Kochilas L, Li J, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Health System,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

PMID: 12858524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Development. 2003 Aug;130(15):3567-78.

The role of chordin/Bmp signals in mammalian pharyngeal development and DiGeorge 
syndrome.

Bachiller D(1), Klingensmith J, Shneyder N, Tran U, Anderson R, Rossant J, De
Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1662, USA.
bachiller@hnsurg.medsch.ucla.edu

The chordin/Bmp system provides one of the best examples of extracellular
signaling regulation in animal development. We present the phenotype produced by 
the targeted inactivation of the chordin gene in mouse. Chordin homozygous mutant
mice show, at low penetrance, early lethality and a ventralized gastrulation
phenotype. The mutant embryos that survive die perinatally, displaying an
extensive array of malformations that encompass most features of DiGeorge and
Velo-Cardio-Facial syndromes in humans. Chordin secreted by the mesendoderm is
required for the correct expression of Tbx1 and other transcription factors
involved in the development of the pharyngeal region. The chordin mutation
provides a mouse model for head and neck congenital malformations that frequently
occur in humans and suggests that chordin/Bmp signaling may participate in their 
pathogenesis.

PMID: 12810603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2003 Feb;69(1):25-37.

T-box genes and cardiac development.

Ryan K(1), Chin AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Joseph Stokes Jr. Research Institute, Division of Cardiology, Abramson 
Research Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND: T-box genes play roles in vertebrate gastrulation and in later
organogenesis. Their existence in all metazoans examined so far indicates that
this is an evolutionarily ancient gene family. Drosophila melanogaster has eight 
T-box genes, whereas Caenorhabditis elegans has 22. Mammals appear to have at
least 18 T-box genes, comprising five subfamilies.
METHODS: A full range of cytological, developmental, molecular and genetic
methodologies have recently been applied to the study of T-box genes.
RESULTS: Over the last 5 years, mutations in TBX1 and TBX5 have been implicated
in two human disorders with haplo-insufficient cardiovascular phenotypes,
DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome and Holt-Oram ("heart-hand") syndrome.
Interestingly, the number of T-box gene family members discovered to have cardiac
or pharyngeal arch expression domains during vertebrate embryonic development has
steadily grown. In addition, various Tbx5 loss-of-function models in organisms as
distant as the mouse and zebrafish do indeed phenocopy Holt-Oram syndrome.
Finally, the intriguing discovery earlier this year that a T-box gene is
expressed in a subset of cardioblasts in D. melanogaster suggests that members of
this gene family may have fundamental, conserved roles in cardiovascular pattern 
formation.
CONCLUSIONS: These developments prompted us to review the current understanding
of the contribution of T-box genes to cardiovascular morphogenesis.

PMID: 12768655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Eur J Hum Genet. 2003 Apr;11(4):349-51.

DiGeorge subtypes of nonsyndromic conotruncal defects: evidence against a major
role of TBX1 gene.

Conti E(1), Grifone N, Sarkozy A, Tandoi C, Marino B, Digilio MC, Mingarelli R,
Pizzuti A, Dallapiccola B.

Author information: 
(1)CSS Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. e.conti@css-mendel.it

The role of the 22q11 region genes, and among them TBX1, in nonsyndromic
conotruncal defects (CTDs) is still unclear. Mice hemizygous at the Tbx1 locus
show a remarkable incidence of heart outflow tract anomalies, of the same type
commonly found in DiGeorge/Velo-cardio-facial syndrome (DGS/VCFS). Mutation
analysis of the TBX1 gene in isolated, nonsyndromic CTDs has not demonstrated any
functional pathogenetic variation so far. We screened the TBX1 gene in 41
patients affected by nonsyndromic CTDs of the DGS/VCFS subtype, principally
"atypical" tetralogy of Fallot. Besides a few polymorphisms, we did not find any 
pathogenetic variation. These results do not support a major role of the TBX1
gene as responsible for human nonsyndromic CTDs.

PMID: 12700609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Apr 1;12 Spec No 1:R37-44.

T-box genes in human disorders.

Packham EA(1), Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham, NG7 2UH, UK.

The T-box gene family encodes a large family of transcription factors with more
than 20 members identified in humans so far, and homologues in many other
organisms. A number of human disorders have been linked to mutations in T-box
genes, confirming their medical importance. They include Holt- Oram
syndrome/TBX5, Ulnar-Mammary syndrome/TBX3, and more recently DiGeorge
syndrome/TBX1, ACTH deficiency/TBX19 and cleft palate with ankyloglossia/TBX22.
This review describes the key features of these disorders and the involvement of 
T-box genes in their phenotype.

PMID: 12668595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Gene Expr Patterns. 2002 Nov;2(1-2):99-103.

Embryonic expression of Tbx1, a DiGeorge syndrome candidate gene, in the lamprey 
Lampetra fluviatilis.

Sauka-Spengler T(1), Le Mentec C, Lepage M, Mazan S.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Développement et Evolution des Vertébrés, UPRES-A 8080, Université
Paris- Sud, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France.

We report the embryonic expression in the lamprey Lampetra fluviatilis of Tbx1,
the main candidate gene involved in DiGeorge/velo-cardio-facial syndrome
(DGS/VCFS). From the end of neurulation to stage 26, Tbx1 becomes progressively
expressed in all developing pharyngeal arches, as they form. Transcripts are
mainly restricted to the mesodermal core and to the posterior pharyngeal
endoderm, excluding ingressing neural crest cells. They are also present in the
otic vesicle, in a ventral and posterior location. From a later stage (stage 27) 
onwards, additional expression domains in the head mesenchyme, later contributing
to labial muscle precursors, and in the cloacal region, become visible. The
comparison of these data with those reported in the chick and the mouse indicates
a high conservation of Tbx1 expression in the pharyngeal arches among
vertebrates.

PMID: 12617845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Nat Med. 2003 Feb;9(2):173-82. Epub 2003 Jan 21.

VEGF: a modifier of the del22q11 (DiGeorge) syndrome?

Stalmans I(1), Lambrechts D, De Smet F, Jansen S, Wang J, Maity S, Kneer P, von
der Ohe M, Swillen A, Maes C, Gewillig M, Molin DG, Hellings P, Boetel T, Haardt 
M, Compernolle V, Dewerchin M, Plaisance S, Vlietinck R, Emanuel B,
Gittenberger-de Groot AC, Scambler P, Morrow B, Driscol DA, Moons L, Esguerra CV,
Carmeliet G, Behn-Krappa A, Devriendt K, Collen D, Conway SJ, Carmeliet P.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Transgene Technology and Gene Therapy, Flanders Interuniversity
Institute for Biotechnology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Hemizygous deletion of chromosome 22q11 (del22q11) causes thymic, parathyroid,
craniofacial and life-threatening cardiovascular birth defects in 1 in 4,000
infants. The del22q11 syndrome is likely caused by haploinsufficiency of TBX1,
but its variable expressivity indicates the involvement of additional modifiers. 
Here, we report that absence of the Vegf164 isoform caused birth defects in mice,
reminiscent of those found in del22q11 patients. The close correlation of birth
and vascular defects indicated that vascular dysgenesis may pathogenetically
contribute to the birth defects. Vegf interacted with Tbx1, as Tbx1 expression
was reduced in Vegf164-deficient embryos and knocked-down vegf levels enhanced
the pharyngeal arch artery defects induced by tbx1 knockdown in zebrafish.
Moreover, initial evidence suggested that a VEGF promoter haplotype was
associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular birth defects in del22q11
individuals. These genetic data in mouse, fish and human indicate that VEGF is a 
modifier of cardiovascular birth defects in the del22q11 syndrome.

PMID: 12539040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Genes Dev. 2003 Jan 15;17(2):269-81.

Tbx1 is regulated by tissue-specific forkhead proteins through a common Sonic
hedgehog-responsive enhancer.

Yamagishi H(1), Maeda J, Hu T, McAnally J, Conway SJ, Kume T, Meyers EN,
Yamagishi C, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA. Hiroyuki.Yamagishi@UTSouthwestern.edu

Haploinsufficiency of Tbx1 is likely a major determinant of cardiac and
craniofacial birth defects associated with DiGeorge syndrome. Although mice
deficient in Tbx1 exhibit pharyngeal and aortic arch defects, the developmental
program and mechanisms through which Tbx1 functions are relatively unknown. We
identified a single cis-element upstream of Tbx1 that recognized winged
helix/forkhead box (Fox)-containing transcription factors and was essential for
regulation of Tbx1 transcription in the pharyngeal endoderm and head mesenchyme. 
The Tbx1 regulatory region was responsive to signaling by Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in
vivo. We show that Shh is necessary for aortic arch development, similar to Tbx1,
and is also required for expression of Foxa2 and Foxc2 in the pharyngeal endoderm
and head mesenchyme, respectively. Foxa2, Foxc1, or Foxc2 could bind and activate
transcription through the critical cis-element upstream of Tbx1, and Foxc
proteins were required, within their expression domains, for Tbx1 transcription
in vivo. We propose that Tbx1 is a direct transcriptional target of Fox proteins 
and that Fox proteins may serve an intermediary role in Shh regulation of Tbx1.

PMCID: PMC195981
PMID: 12533514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Dev Biol. 2002 Nov 1;251(1):157-66.

The role of neural crest during cardiac development in a mouse model of DiGeorge 
syndrome.

Kochilas L(1), Merscher-Gomez S, Lu MM, Potluri V, Liao J, Kucherlapati R, Morrow
B, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, USA. 
lkochila@mail.med.upenn.edu

The velo-cardio-facial syndrome (VCFS)/DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) is a genetic
disorder characterized by phenotypic abnormalities of the derivatives of the
pharyngeal arches, including cardiac outflow tract defects. Neural crest cells
play a major role in the development of the pharyngeal arches, and defects in
these cells are likely responsible for the syndrome. Most patients are hemizygous
for a 1.5- to 3.0-Mb region of 22q11, that is suspected to be critical for normal
pharyngeal arch development. Mice hemizygous for a 1.5-Mb homologous region of
chromosome 16 (Lgdel/+) exhibit conotruncal cardiac defects similar to those seen
in affected VCFS/DGS patients. To investigate the role of Lgdel genes in neural
crest development, we fate mapped neural crest cells in Lgdel/+ mice and we
performed hemizygous neural crest-specific inactivation of Lgdel. Hemizygosity of
the Lgdel region does not eliminate cardiac neural crest migration to the forming
aortic arches. However, neural crest cells do not differentiate appropriately
into smooth muscle in both fourth and sixth aortic arches and the affected aortic
arch segments develop abnormally. Tissue-specific hemizygous inactivation of
Lgdel genes in neural crest results in normal cardiovascular development. Based
on our studies, we propose that Lgdel genes are required for the expression of
soluble signals that regulate neural crest cell differentiation.

PMID: 12413905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Oct 1;11(20):2363-9.

DiGeorge syndrome: the use of model organisms to dissect complex genetics.

Baldini A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Cardiology), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA. baldini@bcm.tmc.edu

The research interest in DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) is partly due to its clinical
importance. However, fundamental questions of genetics and developmental biology 
related to DGS are inspiring investigators to experiment with model systems. Most
DGS cases are caused by a heterozygous chromosomal deletion del22q11, and the
search for haploinsufficient genes has been successful in mice and led to the
discovery of Tbx1 as a major player in the development of the pharyngeal arches
and pouches. Whether TBX1 is haploinsufficient in humans, as several other T-box 
genes are, is yet to be proven. The puzzling clinical variability in patients
with del22q11 is also being addressed in model organisms. Consistent with
clinical data, experiments in mice indicate that genetics can only explain part
of the phenotypic variability. The recent identification of phenotypic modifiers 
further underscores the complex genetics of this syndrome.

PMID: 12351571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Genes Dev. 2002 Sep 15;16(18):2365-78.

Specification of the mammalian cochlea is dependent on Sonic hedgehog.

Riccomagno MM(1), Martinu L, Mulheisen M, Wu DK, Epstein DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Organization of the inner ear into auditory and vestibular components is
dependent on localized patterns of gene expression within the otic vesicle.
Surrounding tissues are known to influence compartmentalization of the otic
vesicle, yet the participating signals remain unclear. This study identifies
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) secreted by the notochord and/or floor plate as a primary
regulator of auditory cell fates within the mouse inner ear. Whereas otic
induction proceeds normally in Shh(-/-) embryos, morphogenesis of the inner ear
is greatly perturbed by midgestation. Ventral otic derivatives including the
cochlear duct and cochleovestibular ganglia failed to develop in the absence of
Shh. The origin of the inner ear defects in Shh(-/-) embryos could be traced back
to alterations in the expression of a number of genes involved in cell fate
specification including Pax2, Otx1, Otx2, Tbx1, and Ngn1. We further show that
several of these genes are targets of Shh signaling given their ectopic
activation in transgenic mice that misexpress Shh in the inner ear. Taken
together, our data support a model whereby auditory cell fates in the otic
vesicle are established by the direct action of Shh.

PMCID: PMC187441
PMID: 12231626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Development. 2002 Oct;129(19):4613-25.

Fgf8 is required for pharyngeal arch and cardiovascular development in the mouse.

Abu-Issa R(1), Smyth G, Smoak I, Yamamura K, Meyers EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Neonatal Perinatal Research Institute, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

We present here an analysis of cardiovascular and pharyngeal arch development in 
mouse embryos hypomorphic for Fgf8. Previously, we have described the generation 
of Fgf8 compound heterozygous (Fgf8(neo/-)) embryos. Although early analysis
demonstrated that some of these embryos have abnormal left-right (LR) axis
specification and cardiac looping reversals, the number and type of cardiac
defects present at term suggested an additional role for Fgf8 in cardiovascular
development. Most Fgf8(neo/-) mutant embryos survive to term with abnormal
cardiovascular patterning, including outflow tract, arch artery and intracardiac 
defects. In addition, these mutants have hypoplastic pharyngeal arches, small or 
absent thymus and abnormal craniofacial development. Neural crest cells (NCCs)
populate the pharyngeal arches and contribute to many structures of the face,
neck and cardiovascular system, suggesting that Fgf8 may be required for NCC
development. Fgf8 is expressed within the developing pharyngeal arch ectoderm and
endoderm during NCC migration through the arches. Analysis of NCC development in 
Fgf8(neo/-) mutant embryos demonstrates that NCCs are specified and migrate, but 
undergo cell death in areas both adjacent and distal to where Fgf8 is normally
expressed. This study defines the cardiovascular defects present in Fgf8 mutants 
and supports a role for Fgf8 in development of all the pharyngeal arches and in
NCC survival.

PMID: 12223417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Development. 2002 Oct;129(19):4605-11.

A genetic link between Tbx1 and fibroblast growth factor signaling.

Vitelli F(1), Taddei I, Morishima M, Meyers EN, Lindsay EA, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Cardiology), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston TX 
77030, USA.

Tbx1 haploinsufficiency causes aortic arch abnormalities in mice because of early
growth and remodeling defects of the fourth pharyngeal arch arteries. The
function of Tbx1 in the development of these arteries is probably cell
non-autonomous, as the gene is not expressed in structural components of the
artery but in the surrounding pharyngeal endoderm. We hypothesized that Tbx1 may 
trigger signals from the pharyngeal endoderm directed to the underlying
mesenchyme. We show that the expression patterns of Fgf8 and Fgf10, which
partially overlap with Tbx1 expression pattern, are altered in Tbx1(-/-) mutants.
In particular, Fgf8 expression is abolished in the pharyngeal endoderm. To
understand the significance of this finding for the pathogenesis of the mutant
Tbx1 phenotype, we crossed Tbx1 and Fgf8 mutants. Double heterozygous
Tbx1(+/-);Fgf8(+/-) mutants present with a significantly higher penetrance of
aortic arch artery defects than do Tbx1(+/-);Fgf8(+/+) mutants, while
Tbx1(+/+);Fgf8(+/-) animals are normal. We found that Fgf8 mutation increases the
severity of the primary defect caused by Tbx1 haploinsufficiency, i.e. early
hypoplasia of the fourth pharyngeal arch arteries, consistent with the time and
location of the shared expression domain of the two genes. Hence, Tbx1 and Fgf8
interact genetically in the development of the aortic arch. Our data provide the 
first evidence of a genetic link between Tbx1 and FGF signaling, and the first
example of a modifier of the Tbx1 haploinsufficiency phenotype. We speculate that
the FGF8 locus might affect the penetrance of cardiovascular defects in
individuals with chromosome 22q11 deletions involving TBX1.

PMID: 12223416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Structure. 2002 Mar;10(3):343-56.

Structure of the DNA-bound T-box domain of human TBX3, a transcription factor
responsible for ulnar-mammary syndrome.

Coll M(1), Seidman JG, Müller CW.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Grenoble Outstation, France.

T-box genes encode transcription factors involved in morphogenesis and
organogenesis of vertebrates and invertebrates. Mutations in human T-box genes
TBX3, TBX5, and TBX1 cause severe genetic disorders known as Ulnar-Mammary
syndrome (UMS), Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), and DiGeorge syndrome, respectively.
The crystal structure of the T-box domain of the first human T-box transcription 
factor, TBX3, in complex with DNA at 1.7 A resolution explains structural
consequences of T-box domain point mutations observed in UMS and HOS patients.
Comparison with the structure of the T-box domain from Xenopus laevis (Xbra)
bound to DNA shows differences in several secondary structure elements and in the
quaternary structure of the two complexes. TBX3 independently recognizes the two 
binding sites present in the palindromic DNA duplex, whereas in Xbra, binding to 
the palindrome is stabilized through interactions between the two monomers. The
different quaternary structures suggest different DNA binding modes for T-box
transcription factors.

PMID: 12005433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Apr 15;11(8):915-22.

Tbx1 mutation causes multiple cardiovascular defects and disrupts neural crest
and cranial nerve migratory pathways.

Vitelli F(1), Morishima M, Taddei I, Lindsay EA, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Cardiology), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

TBX1 is the major candidate gene for DiGeorge syndrome (DGS). Mouse studies have 
shown that the Tbx1 gene is haploinsufficient, as expected for a DGS candidate
gene, and that it is required for the development of pharyngeal arches and
pouches, as predicted by the DGS clinical phenotype. However, a detailed analysis
of the cardiovascular phenotype associated with Tbx1 mutations has not been
reported. Here we show that Tbx1 deficiency causes a number of distinct vascular 
and heart defects, suggesting multiple roles in cardiovascular development -
specifically formation and growth of the pharyngeal arch arteries, growth and
septation of the outflow tract of the heart, interventricular septation, and
conal alignment. Comparison of phenotype and gene expression using a Tbx1-lacZ
reporter allele supports a cell-autonomous function in the growth of the
pharyngeal apparatus, and a cell non-autonomous function in the growth and early 
remodeling of the pharyngeal arch arteries. Our data do not support a direct role
of neural crest cells in the pathogenesis of the Tbx1 mutant phenotype; however, 
these cells, and the cranial nerves, are misdirected. We hypothesize that this is
due to the lack of a guidance role from the pouch endoderm, which is missing in
these mutants.

PMID: 11971873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Am J Hum Genet. 2002 May;70(5):1077-88. Epub 2002 Mar 29.

Genomic disorders on 22q11.

McDermid HE(1), Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

The 22q11 region is involved in chromosomal rearrangements that lead to altered
gene dosage, resulting in genomic disorders that are characterized by mental
retardation and/or congenital malformations. Three such disorders-cat-eye
syndrome (CES), der(22) syndrome, and velocardiofacial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome
(VCFS/DGS)-are associated with four, three, and one dose, respectively, of parts 
of 22q11. The critical region for CES lies centromeric to the deletion region of 
VCFS/DGS, although, in some cases, the extra material in CES extends across the
VCFS/DGS region. The der(22) syndrome region overlaps both the CES region and the
VCFS/DGS region. Molecular approaches have revealed a set of common chromosome
breakpoints that are shared between the three disorders, implicating specific
mechanisms that cause these rearrangements. Most VCFS/DGS and CES rearrangements 
are likely to occur by homologous recombination events between blocks of low-copy
repeats (e.g., LCR22), whereas nonhomologous recombination mechanisms lead to the
constitutional t(11;22) translocation. Meiotic nondisjunction events in carriers 
of the t(11;22) translocation can then lead to offspring with der(22) syndrome.
The molecular basis of the clinical phenotype of these genomic disorders has also
begun to be addressed. Analysis of both the genomic sequence for the 22q11
interval and the orthologous regions in the mouse has identified >24 genes that
are shared between VCFS/DGS and der(22) syndrome and has identified 14 putative
genes that are shared between CES and der(22) syndrome. The ability to manipulate
the mouse genome aids in the identification of candidate genes in these three
syndromes. Research on genomic disorders on 22q11 will continue to expand our
knowledge of the mechanisms of chromosomal rearrangements and the molecular basis
of their phenotypic consequences.

PMCID: PMC447586
PMID: 11925570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Med Genet. 2001 Dec;38(12):E45.

Mutation analysis of TBX1 in non-deleted patients with features of DGS/VCFS or
isolated cardiovascular defects.

Gong W, Gottlieb S, Collins J, Blescia A, Dietz H, Goldmuntz E, McDonald-McGinn
DM, Zackai EH, Emanuel BS, Driscoll DA, Budarf ML.

PMCID: PMC1734783
PMID: 11748311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Oct 15;10(22):2549-56.

Mice overexpressing genes from the 22q11 region deleted in velo-cardio-facial
syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome have middle and inner ear defects.

Funke B(1), Epstein JA, Kochilas LK, Lu MM, Pandita RK, Liao J, Bauerndistel R,
Schüler T, Schorle H, Brown MC, Adams J, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS) is a congenital anomaly 
disorder associated with hemizygous 22q11 deletions. We previously showed that
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) transgenic mice overexpressing four
transgenes, PNUTL1, (CDCrel-1), GP1B beta, TBX1 and WDR14, had reduced viability,
cardiovascular malformations and thymus gland hypoplasia. Since these are
hallmark features of VCFS/DGS, we analyzed the mice for additional anomalies. We 
found that the mice have important defects in the middle and inner ear that are
directly relevant to the disorder. The most striking defect was the presence of
chronic otitis media, a common finding in VCFS/DGS patients. In addition, the
mice had a hyperactive circling behavior and sensorineural hearing loss. This was
associated with middle and inner ear malformations, analogous to Mondini
dysplasia in humans reported to occur in VCFS/DGS patients. We propose that
overexpression of one or more of the transgenes is responsible for the etiology
of the ear defects in the mice. Based upon its pattern of expression in the ear
and functional studies of the gene, TbX1 likely plays a central role.
Haploinsufficiency of TBX1 may be responsible for ear disorders in VCFS/DGS
patients.

PMID: 11709542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Trends Genet. 2001 Oct;17(10):S13-7.

Developing models of DiGeorge syndrome.

Epstein JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)BRB II, Room 954, Cardiovascular Division, Dept of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania Health System, 421 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
epsteinj@mail.med.upenn.edu

DiGeorge syndrome is a common congenital disorder characterized by
neural-crest-related developmental defects. Mouse models of DiGeorge syndrome
have been created that recapitulate defects seen in human patients. Here, the
genetic pathways regulating cardiac neural crest development are reviewed and the
evidence implicating TBX1 and other genes on chromosome 22q11 in the pathogenesis
of DiGeorge syndrome is summarized.

PMID: 11585671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Pediatr Res. 2001 Sep;50(3):307-8.

Wrapping up DiGeorge syndrome in a T-box?

Kim MS, Basson CT.

PMID: 11518813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Dev Biol. 2001 Jul 1;235(1):62-73.

Tbx1, a DiGeorge syndrome candidate gene, is regulated by sonic hedgehog during
pharyngeal arch development.

Garg V(1), Yamagishi C, Hu T, Kathiriya IS, Yamagishi H, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Rm. NA8.124, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

Appropriate interactions between the epithelium and adjacent neural crest-derived
mesenchyme are necessary for normal pharyngeal arch development. Disruption of
pharyngeal arch development in humans underlies many of the craniofacial defects 
observed in the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (del22q11), but the genes responsible
remain unknown. Tbx1 is a T-box transcription factor that lies in the 22q11.2
locus. Tbx1 transcripts were found to be localized to the pharyngeal endoderm and
the mesodermal core of the pharyngeal arches, but were not present in the neural 
crest-derived mesenchyme of the pharyngeal arches. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is also
expressed in the pharyngeal arches and is necessary for normal craniofacial
development. We found that Tbx1 expression was dependent upon Shh signaling in
mouse embryos, consistent with their overlapping expression in the pharyngeal
arches. Furthermore, Shh was sufficient to induce Tbx1 expression when
misexpressed in selected regions of chick embryos. These studies reveal a
Shh-mediated pathway that regulates Tbx1 during pharyngeal arch development.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11412027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Trends Biotechnol. 2001 May;19(5):162.

The heart of the matter.

McKay D.

PMID: 11301117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Circulation. 2001 Mar 13;103(10):E9019-21.

Three groups identify gene for DiGeorge syndrome.

SoRelle R.

PMID: 11270392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Nat Genet. 2001 Mar;27(3):286-91.

DiGeorge syndrome phenotype in mice mutant for the T-box gene, Tbx1.

Jerome LA(1), Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.

The DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome (DGS/VCFS) is a relatively common human
disorder, usually associated with deletions of chromosome 22q11. The genetic
basis for the wide range of developmental anomalies in the heart, glands and
facial structures has been elusive. We have investigated the potential role of
one candidate gene, Tbx1, which encodes a transcription factor of the T-box
family, by producing a null mutation in mice. We found that mice heterozygous for
the mutation had a high incidence of cardiac outflow tract anomalies, thus
modeling one of the major abnormalities of the human syndrome. Moreover, Tbx1-/- 
mice displayed a wide range of developmental anomalies encompassing almost all of
the common DGS/VCFS features, including hypoplasia of the thymus and parathyroid 
glands, cardiac outflow tract abnormalities, abnormal facial structures, abnormal
vertebrae and cleft palate. On the basis of this phenotype in mice, we propose
that TBX1 in humans is a key gene in the etiology of DGS/VCFS.

PMID: 11242110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Nat Genet. 2001 Mar;27(3):238-40.

Deconstructing DiGeorge syndrome.

Schinke M, Izumo S.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2001 Mar;27(3):293-8.

PMID: 11242098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Nature. 2001 Mar 1;410(6824):97-101.

Tbx1 haploinsufficieny in the DiGeorge syndrome region causes aortic arch defects
in mice.

Lindsay EA(1), Vitelli F, Su H, Morishima M, Huynh T, Pramparo T, Jurecic V,
Ogunrinu G, Sutherland HF, Scambler PJ, Bradley A, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA.

DiGeorge syndrome is characterized by cardiovascular, thymus and parathyroid
defects and craniofacial anomalies, and is usually caused by a heterozygous
deletion of chromosomal region 22q11.2 (del22q11) (ref. 1). A targeted,
heterozygous deletion, named Df(16)1, encompassing around 1 megabase of the
homologous region in mouse causes cardiovascular abnormalities characteristic of 
the human disease. Here we have used a combination of chromosome engineering and 
P1 artificial chromosome transgenesis to localize the haploinsufficient gene in
the region, Tbx1. We show that Tbx1, a member of the T-box transcription factor
family, is required for normal development of the pharyngeal arch arteries in a
gene dosage-dependent manner. Deletion of one copy of Tbx1 affects the
development of the fourth pharyngeal arch arteries, whereas homozygous mutation
severely disrupts the pharyngeal arch artery system. Our data show that
haploinsufficiency of Tbx1 is sufficient to generate at least one important
component of the DiGeorge syndrome phenotype in mice, and demonstrate the
suitability of the mouse for the genetic dissection of microdeletion syndromes.

PMID: 11242049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Cell. 2001 Feb 23;104(4):619-29.

TBX1 is responsible for cardiovascular defects in velo-cardio-facial/DiGeorge
syndrome.

Merscher S(1), Funke B, Epstein JA, Heyer J, Puech A, Lu MM, Xavier RJ, Demay MB,
Russell RG, Factor S, Tokooya K, Jore BS, Lopez M, Pandita RK, Lia M, Carrion D, 
Xu H, Schorle H, Kobler JB, Scambler P, Wynshaw-Boris A, Skoultchi AI, Morrow BE,
Kucherlapati R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Avenue, 10461, Bronx, NY, USA

Velo-cardio-facial syndrome (VCFS)/DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) is a human disorder
characterized by a number of phenotypic features including cardiovascular
defects. Most VCFS/DGS patients are hemizygous for a 1.5-3.0 Mb region of 22q11. 
To investigate the etiology of this disorder, we used a cre-loxP strategy to
generate mice that are hemizygous for a 1.5 Mb deletion corresponding to that on 
22q11. These mice exhibit significant perinatal lethality and have conotruncal
and parathyroid defects. The conotruncal defects can be partially rescued by a
human BAC containing the TBX1 gene. Mice heterozygous for a null mutation in Tbx1
develop conotruncal defects. These results together with the expression patterns 
of Tbx1 suggest a major role for this gene in the molecular etiology of VCFS/DGS.

PMID: 11239417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Gene. 2000 Nov 27;258(1-2):15-29.

Differential DNA binding and transcription modulation by three T-box proteins, T,
TBX1 and TBX2.

Sinha S(1), Abraham S, Gronostajski RM, Campbell CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, NB40, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

T-box genes encode a family of phylogenetically conserved DNA-binding proteins
that regulate gene expression during embryogenesis. While the developmental
importance of many T-box genes has been well documented, little is known about
how family members differ in their DNA binding properties and ability to modulate
transcription. Here we show that although TBX1, TBX2 and the Xenopus T protein
(Xbra) share only 50-60% identity within their DNA-binding domains they can bind 
the same DNA sequence in vitro. However, the proteins differ in three important
respects. While TBX1 protein binds a palindromic T oligonucleotide as a dimer, as
had been previously reported for Xbra, TBX2 appears to bind the same DNA sequence
as a monomer. Also, T protein/DNA complexes are stabilized in vitro by the
addition of specific antibodies, whereas TBX2/DNA complexes are not stabilized by
antibodies. Most importantly, TBX2 represses while Xbra activates transcription
of the same chimeric reporter plasmid. TBX1, although capable of binding to the
chimeric promoter, has no effect on transcription. Thus, while the DNA binding
domains of T-box proteins share substantial homology, these proteins differ in
both their DNA binding and transcriptional modulation properties. These results
suggest that the various T-box proteins, while highly conserved, likely use
different mechanisms to modulate transcription and may have different targets in 
vivo.

PMID: 11111039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Nat Genet. 1999 Oct;23(2):213-6.

Early specification of limb muscle precursor cells by the homeobox gene Lbx1h.

Schäfer K(1), Braun T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, Martin-Luther-University Halle, 06097
Halle, Hollystr. 1, Germany.

During vertebrate embryogenesis, myogenic precursor cells of limb muscles
delaminate from the ventro-lateral edge of the somitic dermomyotome and migrate
to the limb buds, where they congregate into dorsal and ventral muscle masses. It
has been proposed that the surrounding connective tissue controls muscle pattern 
formation in limbs. Regulatory molecules such as receptor tyrosine kinases like
c-Met ( ref. 6) and those encoded by homeobox-containing genes, including c-Met
(ref. 6), Tbx1 (ref. 7), Mox2 (ref. 8), Six1 and Six2 (ref. 9), Pitx2, Pax3 (refs
10,11) and Lbx1h (refs 12,13), are expressed in migrating limb precursor cells.
The role of these genes in the patterning of limb muscles is unknown, although
mutation of Pax3 or Met causes disruption of limb muscle development at an
initial step, disturbing the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of the somitic 
epithelium. No limb muscle cells form in these mutants, and the early loss of
myogenic precursor cells prevented an analysis of later functions of these genes 
during limb muscle development. Based on quail-chick chimaera studies, it was
assumed that a cell-autonomous contribution of myogenic cells to the formation of
individual limb muscles is negligible, and that an instructive role of limb
mesenchyme is critical in this process. Here we show that Lbx1h determines
migratory routes of muscle precursor cells in a cell-autonomous manner, thereby
leading to the formation of distinct limb muscle patterns. Inactivation of Lbx1h,
which is specifically expressed in migrating muscle precursor cells, led to a
lack of extensor muscles in forelimbs and an absence of muscles in hindlimbs. The
defect was caused by the failure of all muscle precursor cells of hindlimbs and
of precursor cells of extensor muscles of forelimbs to migrate to their
corresponding muscle anlagen. Our results demonstrate that Lbx1h is a key
regulator of muscle precursor cell migration and is required for the acquisition 
of dorsal identities of forelimb muscles.

PMID: 10508520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Am J Med Genet. 1999 Sep 3;86(1):27-33.

Patient with a 22q11.2 deletion with no overlap of the minimal DiGeorge syndrome 
critical region (MDGCR).

McQuade L(1), Christodoulou J, Budarf M, Sachdev R, Wilson M, Emanuel B, Colley
A.

Author information: 
(1)VCFS Research Group, Clinical Sciences, Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children,
Parramatta, New South Wales, Australia.

The apparent lack of genotype/phenotype correlation in patients with the DiGeorge
anomaly and velocardiofacial syndrome (DGA/VCFS; the "22q11 deletion syndrome")
indicates a complex genetic condition. Most cases, whatever the phenotype, have a
1.5-3 Mb chromosomal deletion that includes the minimal DiGeorge critical region 
(MDGCR). Another potential critical region on 22q11 has been suggested based on
two patients with distal deletions outside the MDGCR. We report on a patient with
a VCFS phenotype who has a deletion, mapped by short tandem repeat polymorphic
loci and fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, distal to and not
overlapping the MDGCR. This patient is deleted for several genes, including the
T-box 1 gene (TBX1; a transcription regulator expressed early in embryogenesis)
and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT; involved in neurotransmitter metabolism).
We discuss the role these two genes may play in the clinical phenotype of the
patient.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10440825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Genomics. 1999 Jan 1;55(1):10-20.

Identification, mapping, and phylogenomic analysis of four new human members of
the T-box gene family: EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19.

Yi CH(1), Terrett JA, Li QY, Ellington K, Packham EA, Armstrong-Buisseret L,
McClure P, Slingsby T, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Nottingham, Queen's
Medical Centre, Nottingham, NG7 2UH.

Brachyury(T) is a mouse mutation, first described over 70 years ago, that causes 
defects in mesoderm formation. Recently several related genes, the T-box gene
family, that encode a similar N-terminal DNA binding domain, the T-box, and that 
play critical roles in human embryonic development have been identified. It has
been shown that human TBX5 and TBX3, if mutated, cause developmental disorders,
Holt-Oram syndrome (OMIM 142900) and ulnar-mammary syndrome (OMIM 181450),
respectively. We have identified four new human members of the T-box gene family,
EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19, and these genes have been mapped to different
chromosomal regions by radiation hybrid mapping. The four T-box genes were
classified into four different subfamilies and have also been subjected to
phylogenomic analysis. Human EOMES maps at 3p21.3-p21.2. This Tbr1-subfamily gene
is likely to play a significant role in early embryogenesis similar to that
described for Xenopus eomesodermin. Human TBX6 maps at 16p12-q12. This
Tbx6-subfamily gene is likely to participate in paraxial mesoderm formation and
somitogenesis in human embryo. TBX18 is a novel member of the Tbx1 subfamily that
maps at 6q14-q15. Two subgroups, TBX1/10 and TBX15/18 subgroups, could be
distinguished within the Tbx1 subfamily. TBX19 is an orthologue of chick TbxT and
maps at 1q23-q24. The genomic organization of TBX19 is highly similar to that of 
human T(Brachyury), another human member of the same subfamily.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9888994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Genomics. 1998 Jul 1;51(1):68-75.

Cloning, mapping, and expression analysis of TBX15, a new member of the T-Box
gene family.

Agulnik SI(1), Papaioannou VE, Silver LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, 
08544, USA.

The T-box gene family has been conserved throughout metazoan evolution and codes 
for putative transcription factors that share a uniquely defining DNA-binding
domain. We have previously uncovered six mouse T-box genes with discrete spatial 
and temporal patterns of expression during embryogenesis. Here, we report a novel
mouse T-box gene, Tbx15. The Tbx15 gene produces a 3.7-kb transcript with an open
reading frame coding for a polypeptide with 602 amino acid residues. Phylogenetic
analysis places the Tbx15 gene into a T-box subfamily that also includes mouse
Tbx1, Drosophila H15, and nematode Ce-tbx-12 genes. We have mapped mouse Tbx15 to
chromosome 3, at a position 49 cM from the centromere. During development, Tbx15 
transcripts are first detected at embryonic day 9.5. The gene is expressed
primarily in the cranio-facial region and in the developing limbs. An isolated
human homolog, TBX15, has been mapped by in situ hybridization to chromosomal
band 1p13. TBX15 appears to be an excellent candidate for the dominantly
expressed acromegaloid facial appearance syndrome, which also maps to the short
arm of human chromosome 1 and, like TBX15, is expressed prominently in the
eyebrow regions.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9693034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Gene. 1998 Jun 8;212(2):237-48.

Isolation of a Drosophila T-box gene closely related to human TBX1.

Porsch M(1), Hofmeyer K, Bausenwein BS, Grimm S, Weber BH, Miassod R, Pflugfelder
GO.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Genetik, Theodor-Boveri-Institut, Biozentrum, Am Hubland, D
97074, Würzburg, Germany.

T-box genes, in all metazoans studied from nematode to man, exist in small gene
families. They encode transcription factors with a novel, large, and highly
conserved DNA binding domain termed the T-domain. In all cases studied, T-box
genes have important developmental roles. Two familial diseases, Holt-Oram
syndrome and ulnar-mammary syndrome, were recently shown to be caused by
mutations in the human T-box genes TBX5 and TBX3, respectively. T-box genes were 
first identified in Drosophila and mouse. Two of the three known Drosophila T-box
genes show a close sequence homology to mammalian genes. Similarities in the
phenotypes of fly and mammalian mutants can be taken as evidence of functional
conservation. We report here the isolation of a fourth Drosophila T-box gene,
optomotor-blind-related gene-1 (org-1), closely related to mouse and human TBX1. 
We localized TBX1 to chromosomal band 22q11, confirming a recent report, and
discuss TBX1 as a candidate gene for DiGeorge and related syndromes.

PMID: 9611267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mamm Genome. 1998 May;9(5):397-9.

TBX10, a member of the Tbx1-subfamily of conserved developmental genes, is
located at human chromosome 11q13 and proximal mouse chromosome 19.

Law DJ(1), Garvey N, Agulnik SI, Perlroth V, Hahn OM, Rhinehart RE, Gebuhr TC,
Silver LM.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Center and Department of Human Genetics, 1150 West Medical Center
Drive, 3514 MSRB I, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0650, USA.

PMID: 9545502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Genomics. 1997 Aug 1;43(3):267-77.

Isolation and characterization of a gene from the DiGeorge chromosomal region
homologous to the mouse Tbx1 gene.

Chieffo C(1), Garvey N, Gong W, Roe B, Zhang G, Silver L, Emanuel BS, Budarf ML.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

DiGeorge syndrome, velocardiofacial syndrome, conotruncal anomaly face syndrome, 
and isolated and familial forms of conotruncal cardiac defects have been
associated with deletions of chromosomal region 22q11.2. This report describes
the identification, cloning, and characterization of the human TBX1 gene, which
maps to the center of the DiGeorge chromosomal region. Further, we have extended 
the mouse cDNA sequence to permit comparisons between human and mouse Tbx1. TBX1 
is a member of a phylogenetically conserved family of genes that share a common
DNA-binding domain, the T-box. T-box genes are transcription factors involved in 
the regulation of developmental processes. There is 98% amino acid identity
between human and mouse TBX1 proteins overall, and within the T-box domain, the
proteins are identical except for two amino acids. Expression of human TBX1 in
adult and fetal tissues, as determined by Northern blot analysis, is similar to
that found in the mouse. Additionally, using 3 'RACE, we obtained a
differentially spliced message in adult skeletal muscle. Mouse Tbx1 has been
previously shown to be expressed during early embryogenesis in the pharyngeal
arches, pouches, and otic vesicle. Later in development, expression is seen in
the vertebral column and tooth bud. Thus, human TBX1 is a candidate for some of
the features seen in the 22q11 deletion syndrome.

PMID: 9268629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Dev Biol. 1996 Dec 15;180(2):534-42.

Tbx6, a mouse T-Box gene implicated in paraxial mesoderm formation at
gastrulation.

Chapman DL(1), Agulnik I, Hancock S, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, 701 West 168th Street, New York, New York, 10032, USA.

The T-box genes constitute an evolutionarily conserved family of putative
transcription factors which are expressed in discrete domains during
embryogenesis, suggesting that they may play roles in inductive interactions.
Members have been identified by virtue of their homology to the prototypical
T-box gene, T or Brachyury, which is required for mesoderm formation and axial
elongation during embryogenesis. We have previously reported the discovery of six
new mouse T-box genes, Tbx1-Tbx6, and described the expression patterns of
Tbx1-Tbx5 (Bollag et al., 1994; Agulnik et al., 1996; Chapman et al., 1996;
Gibson-Brown et al., 1996). We have obtained cDNA clones encoding the full-length
Tbx6 protein from screens of gastrulation-stage mouse cDNA libraries and
determined the spatial and temporal distribution of Tbx6 transcripts during
embryogenesis. The gene codes for a 1.9-kb transcript with an open reading frame 
coding for a 540-amino acid protein, with a predicted molecular weight of 59 kDa.
Tbx6 maps to chromosome 7 and does not appear to be linked to any known mutation.
Unlike other members of the mouse T-box gene family which are expressed in a wide
variety of tissues derived from all germ layers, Tbx6 expression is quite
restricted. Tbx6 transcripts are first detected in the gastrulation stage embryo 
in the primitive streak and newly recruited paraxial mesoderm. Later in
development, Tbx6 expression is restricted to presomitic, paraxial mesoderm and
to the tail bud, which replaces the streak as the source of mesoderm. Expression 
in the tail bud persists until 12. 5 days postcoitus. Tbx6 expression thus
overlaps that of Brachyury in the primitive streak and tail bud, although
Brachyury is expressed earlier in the primitive streak. Brachyury is also
expressed in a second domain, the node and notochord, that is not shared with
Tbx6. The onset of Tbx6 expression is not affected in homozygous null Brachyury
mutant embryos at 7.5 days postcoitus. However, Tbx6 expression is extinguished
in mutant embryos as soon as the Brachyury phenotype becomes evident at 8.5 days 
postcoitus, indicating that the continued expression of Tbx6 is directly or
indirectly dependent upon Brachyury expression.

PMID: 8954725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Genetics. 1996 Sep;144(1):249-54.

Evolution of mouse T-box genes by tandem duplication and cluster dispersion.

Agulnik SI(1), Garvey N, Hancock S, Ruvinsky I, Chapman DL, Agulnik I, Bollag R, 
Papaioannou V, Silver LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, New Jersey 08544-1014, 
USA.

The T-box genes comprise an ancient family of putative transcription factors
conserved across species as divergent as Mus musculus and Caenorhabditis elegans.
All T-box gene products are characterized by a novel 174-186-amino acid DNA
binding domain called the T-box that was first discovered in the polypeptide
products of the mouse T locus and the Drosophila melanogaster optomotor-blind
gene. Earlier studies allowed the identification of five mouse T-box genes, T,
Tbx1-3, and Tbr1, that all map to different chromosomal locations and are
expressed in unique temporal and spatial patterns during embryogenesis. Here, we 
report the discovery of three new members of the mouse T-box gene family, named
Tbx4, Tbx5, and Tbx6. Two of these newly discovered genes, Tbx4 and Tbx5, were
found to be tightly linked to previously identified T-box genes. Combined results
from phylogenetic, linkage, and physical mapping studies provide a picture for
the evolution of a T-box subfamily by unequal crossing over to form a two-gene
cluster that was duplicated and dispersed to two chromosomal locations. This
analysis suggests that Tbx4 and Tbx5 are cognate genes that diverged apart from a
common ancestral gene during early vertebrate evolution.

PMCID: PMC1207498
PMID: 8878690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Dev Dyn. 1996 Aug;206(4):379-90.

Expression of the T-box family genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, during early mouse development.

Chapman DL(1), Garvey N, Hancock S, Alexiou M, Agulnik SI, Gibson-Brown JJ,
Cebra-Thomas J, Bollag RJ, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicans and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

A novel family of genes, characterized by the presence of a region of homology to
the DNA-binding domain of the Brachyury (T) locus product, has recently been
identified. The region of homology has been named the T-box, and the new mouse
genes that contain the T-box domain have been named T-box 1-6 (Tbx1 through
Tbx6). As the basis for further study of the function and evolution of these
genes, we have examined the expression of 5 of these genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, across a
wide range of embryonic stages from blastocyst through gastrulation and early
organogenesis by in situ hybridization of wholemounts and tissue sections. Tbx3
is expressed earliest, in the inner cell mass of the blastocyst. Four of the
genes are expressed in different components of the mesoderm or mesoderm/endoderm 
during gastrulation (Tbx1 and Tbx3-5). All of these genes have highly specific
patterns of expression during later embryogenesis, notably in areas undergoing
inductive tissue interactions. In several cases there is complementary expression
of different genes in 2 interacting tissues, as in the lung epithelium (Tbx1) and
lung mesenchyme (Tbx2-5), and in mammary buds (Tbx3) and mammary stroma (Tbx2).
Tbx1 shows very little overlap in the sites of expression with the other 4 genes,
in contrast to a striking similarity in expression between members of the 2
cognate gene sets, Tbx2/Tbx3 and Tbx4/Tbx5. This is a clear reflection of the
evolutionary relationship between the 5 genes since the divergence of Tbx1
occurred long before the relatively recent divergence of Tbx2 and 3 and Tbx4 and 
5 from common ancestral genes. These studies are a good indication that the T-box
family of genes has important roles in inductive interactions in many stages of
mammalian embryogenesis.

PMID: 8853987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


