
1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2016 Mar 3;3(2):e210. doi:
10.1212/NXI.0000000000000210. eCollection 2016.

Disrupted balance of T cells under natalizumab treatment in multiple sclerosis.

Kimura K(1), Nakamura M(1), Sato W(1), Okamoto T(1), Araki M(1), Lin Y(1), Murata
M(1), Takahashi R(1), Yamamura T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, National Institute of Neuroscience (K.K., M.N.,
W.S., Y.L., T.Y.), and Multiple Sclerosis Center (W.S., T.O., M.A., Y.L., T.Y.)
and Department of Neurology (Y.L., M.M.), National Center Hospital, National
Center of Neurology and Psychiatry (NCNP), Tokyo; and Department of Neurology
(K.K., R.T.), Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To compare effects of natalizumab on inflammatory and regulatory T
cells with regard to expression of a4-integrin (CD49d).
METHODS: Twenty-seven natalizumab-naive and 8 natalizumab-treated patients with
multiple sclerosis (MS), 7 patients with neuromyelitis optica (NMO) or NMO
spectrum disorder, and 8 healthy controls were included. The positive rate of
CD49d was analyzed and compared among T helper 1 (Th1), T helper 17 (Th17), and
regulatory T (Treg) cells (CD49d+Th1, CD49d+Th17, and CD49d+Treg, respectively).
RESULTS: Natalizumab treatment increased CD49d ratios, CD49d+Th1/CD49d+Treg, and 
CD49d+Th17/CD49d+Treg. This indicates larger reduction of the CD49d+ population
in Treg cells than in Th1 or Th17 cells. The CD49d ratios of 2 patients who
experienced exacerbation during natalizumab treatment were remarkably higher than
those of the other natalizumab-treated patients. Natalizumab treatment increased 
the expression of TBX21, RORC, interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>, and interleukin (IL)-17A, and 
decreased the expression of FOXP3 in CD49d+ memory CD4 T cells. Natalizumab
treatment also increased the amount of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17A secreted by CD49d+ memory
CD4 T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The reduction rate of the CD49d+ population in Treg cells was larger
than that in Th1 or Th17 cells. Although the large reduction in CD49d+ population
is beneficial for MS, the proinflammatory state of residual CD49d+ cells might,
in part, explain the presence of disease activity under natalizumab treatment.

PMCID: PMC4784802
PMID: 27006971  [PubMed]


2. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2016 Mar 22. doi: 10.1111/pai.12566. [Epub ahead of
print]

Genetic associations of the response to inhaled corticosteroids in children
during an asthma exacerbation.

Keskin Ö(1), Uluca Ü(2), Birben E(3), Coskun Y(2), Ozkars MY(1), Keskin M(2),
Küçükosmanoglu E(1), Kalayci Ö(3).

Author information: 
(1)Gaziantep University School of Medicine, Pediatric Allergy and Immunology
Department, Gaziantep, Turkey. (2)Gaziantep University School of Medicine,
Department of Pediatrics. (3)Hacettepe University School of Medicine, Pediatric
Allergy and Asthma Unit, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Genetic associations of the response to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
during an asthma exacerbation are unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of genetic variants in the therapeutic response
to high dose ICS in children with moderate to severe asthma exacerbations.
METHODS: 82 children (56 boys/26 girls, mean age 9.6±3.2 years) with
moderate-severe asthma exacerbation were genotyped for eight single nucleotide
polymorphisms that were a priori associated with ICS response in chronic asthma
treatment: glucocorticosteroid receptor (NR3C1) rs41423247; corticotrophin
releasing hormone receptor1 (CRHR1) rs242939, rs242941, rs1876828; T-box 21
(TBX21) rs2240017; glucocorticoid-induced transcript 1 (GLCCl1); T gene
rs3099266, rs2305089. Children were treated with a single-high dose (4000 µg)
fluticasone propionate given by a nebulizer followed by 1000 µg/day of inhaled
fluticasone propionate for six days. Primary outcome measure was the improvement 
in FEV1 at 4 hours.
RESULTS: Mean FEV1 was 71.7±14.2% at presentation. Overall, fluticasone treatment
resulted in a significant improvement in asthma score and FEV1 (p<0.0001 for
both). Children with the GG genotype at NR3C1 rs41423247 (n=26) had a higher
improvement inFEV1 [24.2% (interquartile range11.5-36.3)] compared to those with 
CG+CC (n=19), [7.9% (interquartile range 6.1-24.6) (p=0.006)].
CONCLUSION: Homozygosity for the G allele at rs41423247 of the
glucocorticosteroid receptor (NR3C1) gene is associated with a higher improvement
in FEV1 at 4 hours in children with moderate to severe asthma exacerbation
treated with high dose ICS. This observation may have important clinical
implications especially for children who use systemic steroids frequently for
recurrent asthma exacerbations. This article is protected by copyright. All
rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27003716  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Front Microbiol. 2016 Feb 25;7:206. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00206. eCollection
2016.

Differential Expression of miRNA Regulates T Cell Differentiation and Plasticity 
During Visceral Leishmaniasis Infection.

Pandey RK(1), Sundar S(2), Prajapati VK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Central University of
Rajasthan Kishangarh, India. (2)Department of Medicine, Institute of Medical
Sciences, Banaras Hindu University Varanasi, India.

Visceral leishmaniasis (VL) is a tropical neglected disease caused by Leishmania 
donovani, results in significant mortality in the Indian subcontinent. The
plasticity of T cell proliferation and differentiation depends on microRNA
mediated gene regulation which leads Th1/Th2 or Th17/Treg type of immune response
during human VL. This study depicts the identification of target immune signaling
molecule and transcription factors, which play a role in T-cell proliferation and
differentiation followed by the identification of miRNA controlling their gene
expression using three web servers' viz., TargetScan, miRPath and miRDB. This
study provides the bioinformatics evidences that seed region present in the
miRNAs miR-29-b, miR-29a, have the putative binding site in the 3'-untranslated
region (UTR) of TBX21 transcription factor of CD4(+) T helper (Th1), which may
suppress the Th1 specific protective immune response. Development of Th2 type
specific immune response can be suppressed by binding of miR-135 and miR-126
miRNAs over the 3'-UTR region of GATA-3 transcription factor of Th2 specific
CD4(+) T helper cells. MiRNA identified against Th2/Treg immune cells are
important and their over expression or administration can be used for developing 
the Th1/Th17 type of protective immune response during VL infection. This study
indicates that miRNAs have the capacity to regulate immune signaling, cytokine
production and immune cell migration to control the VL infection in human. This
observation warrants further investigation for the development of miRNA based
therapy controlling T cell differentiation in human VL.

PMCID: PMC4766295
PMID: 26941729  [PubMed]


4. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb 19. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.4912. [Epub ahead of print]

In human alloreactive CD4+ T-cells, dichloroacetate inhibits aerobic glycolysis, 
induces apoptosis and favors differentiation towards the regulatory T-cell subset
instead of effector T-cell subsets.

Eleftheriadis T(1), Sounidaki M(1), Pissas G(1), Antoniadi G(1), Liakopoulos
V(1), Stefanidis I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Medical School, University of Thessaly, 41110
Larissa, Greece.

Although kidney transplantation is the best therapy for end-stage renal disease, 
rejection remains a concern, and currently available immunosuppressive agents
contribute to morbidity and mortality. Thus, novel immunosuppressive drugs are
required. Dichloroacetate (DCA) is already used in the treatment of congenital
lactic acidosis and characterized by limited toxicity. As DCA inhibits aerobic
glycolysis, which is a prerequisite for CD4+ T-cell proliferation and
differentiation into effector T-cells, its possible immunosuppressive role in
mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR), a model of alloreactivity, was investigated.
Glucose and lactate concentrations were measured in the supernatants, and cell
proliferation was assessed immunoenzymatically. CD4+ T-cells were then isolated
from the MLRs and the expression of cleaved caspase-3, various enzymes involved
in glycolysis, and the signature transcription factors of CD4+ T-cell subsets
were evaluated by western blotting. In MLRs, DCA decreased glucose consumption
and aerobic glycolysis, while it exerted a negligible effect on cell
proliferation. In CD4+ T-cells, DCA induced apoptosis, and decreased the
expression of glucose trasporter-1, hexokinase II, lactate dehydrogenase-A and
phosphorylated pyruvate dehydrogenase, while it increased total pyruvate
dehydrogenase. In addition, DCA increased the expression of transcription factor 
forkhead box P3, whereas it decreased the expression of T-box transcription
factor TBX21, trans-acting T-cell-specific transcription factor GATA-3 and
retinoic acid receptor related orphan receptor-<U+03B3>t. In conclusion, in alloreactive
CD4+ T-cells, DCA inhibits aerobic glycolysis, induces apoptosis and favors
differentiation towards the regulatory T-cell subset. These characteristics
render it a promising immunosuppressive agent in the field of transplantation.

PMID: 26935268  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 26;6:22081. doi: 10.1038/srep22081.

Evidence for genetic association of TBX21 and IFNG with systemic lupus
erythematosus in a Chinese Han population.

Leng RX(1,)(2), Pan HF(1,)(2), Liu J(1,)(2), Yang XK(1,)(2), Zhang C(1,)(2), Tao 
SS(1,)(2), Wang DG(3), Li XM(4), Li XP(4), Yang W(5), Ye DQ(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China. (2)Anhui Provincial Laboratory of
Population Health and Major Disease Screening and Diagnosis, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui, China. (3)Department of Nephrology, The Second
Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China.
(4)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Anhui Provincial Hospital,
Affiliated to Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China. (5)Department of
Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

TBX21 recode T-bet which is an important transcription factor that drives the Th1
immune response primarily by promoting expression of the interferon-gamma (IFNG) 
gene. Recent studies have shown that genetic variants in TBX21 and IFNG are
connected with risk of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The aim of the present
study was to replicate these genetic associations with SLE in Anhui Chinese
population. Genotyping of 3 variants (rs4794067 in TBX21, rs2069705 and rs2069718
in IFNG) was performed. A total of 3732 subjects were included in the final
analysis. The study only identified the association of rs2069705 with SLE
susceptibility (T vs. C: odds ratio [OR]<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.12, 95% confidence interval
[CI]<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.00-1.26, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.046). Combined analysis with Hong Kong GWAS showed that
the OR for rs2069705 was 1.10 (95% CI: 1.01-1.21, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.027). Further pooled
analysis with Korean populations involving 10498 subjects showed a more
significant association between rs2069705 and SLE (T vs. C: OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.11,
95%CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.04-1.19, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002; TT<U+2009>+<U+2009>TC vs. CC: OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.11, 95%CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.02-1.21,
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.012; TT vs. TC<U+2009>+<U+2009>CC: OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.28, 95%CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.07-1.54, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008; TT vs. CC:
OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.33, 95%CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.10-1.60, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003). In addition, we also identified a
significant genetic interaction between rs2069705 and rs4794067 in Anhui Chinese 
population. Our study suggests that IFNG and IFNG-TBX21 interaction are involved 
in SLE susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4768161
PMID: 26916970  [PubMed - in process]


6. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 18;11(2):e0149644. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149644.
eCollection 2016.

Variations in T Cell Transcription Factor Sequence and Expression Associated with
Resistance to the Sheep Nematode Teladorsagia circumcincta.

Wilkie H(1), Gossner A(1), Bishop S(1), Hopkins J(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Roslin Institute & R(D)SVS, University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush,
Midlothian, EH25 9RG, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(3):e0152396.

This study used selected lambs that varied in their resistance to the
gastrointestinal parasite Teladorsagia circumcincta. Infection over 12 weeks
identified susceptible (high adult worm count, AWC; high fecal egg count, FEC;
low body weight, BW; low IgA) and resistant sheep (no/low AWC and FEC, high BW
and high IgA). Resistance is mediated largely by a Th2 response and IgA and IgE
antibodies, and is a heritable characteristic. The polarization of T cells and
the development of appropriate immune responses is controlled by the master
regulators, T-bet (TBX21), GATA-3 (GATA3), ROR<U+03B3>t (RORC2) and RORa (RORA); and
several inflammatory diseases of humans and mice are associated with allelic or
transcript variants of these transcription factors. This study tested the
hypothesis that resistance of sheep to T. circumcincta is associated with
variations in the structure, sequence or expression levels of individual master
regulator transcripts. We have identified and sequenced one variant of sheep
TBX21, two variants of GATA3 and RORC2 and five variants of RORA from lymph node 
mRNA. Relative RT-qPCR analysis showed that TBX21, GATA3 and RORC2 were not
significantly differentially-expressed between the nine most resistant (AWC, 0;
FEC, 0) and the nine most susceptible sheep (AWC, mean 6078; FEC, mean 350).
Absolute RT-qPCR on all 45 animals identified RORVv5 as being significantly
differentially-expressed (p = 0.038) between resistant, intermediate and
susceptible groups; RORCv2 was not differentially-expressed (p = 0.77).
Spearman's rank analysis showed that RORAv5 transcript copy number was
significantly negatively correlated with parameters of susceptibility, AWC and
FEC; and was positively correlated with BW. RORCv2 was not correlated with AWC,
FEC or BW but was significantly negatively correlated with IgA antibody levels.
This study identifies the full length RORA variant (RORAv5) as important in
controlling the protective immune response to T. circumcincta infection in sheep.

PMCID: PMC4759366
PMID: 26890074  [PubMed - in process]


7. FASEB J. 2016 Feb 17. pii: fj.201500135. [Epub ahead of print]

Corticosteroid modulation of immunoglobulin expression and B-cell function in
COPD.

Lee J(1), Machin M(1), Russell KE(1), Pavlidis S(2), Zhu J(1), Barnes PJ(1),
Chung KF(1), Adcock IM(1), Durham AL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London, United Kingdom; and. (2)Janssen Research and Development, High
Wycombe, United Kingdom. (3)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung
Institute, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom; and
a.durham@imperial.ac.uk.

We investigated changes in gene expression that occur in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) after corticosteroid treatment and sought to identify
the mechanisms that regulate these changes. Biopsy samples were taken from
patients with COPD (Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease stage 
I to II) before and after treatment with fluticasone propionate (FP)/salmeterol
(SM) (Seretide 50/500, 4 wk; GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, United Kingdom). Gene
expression was measured by microarray and was confirmed by real-time reverse
transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR). The effect of FP on IgG expression and 
B-cell proliferation in the presence of oxidative stress was also studied. FP/SM 
significantly increased the expression of 180 genes while repressing 343 genes.
The top 5 down-regulated genes were associated with immunoglobulin production,
whereas the immunomodulatory FK506 binding protein (FK506BP) was up-regulated.
Genes including IL6, IL8, and TBET-encoding TBX21 were unaffected. FP reduced IgG
protein and mRNA expression and proliferation of human B cells through the
dephosphorylation of ERK-1/2 via increased DUSP1 (dual-specificity protein
phosphatase 1) expression. Consistent with in vivo data, oxidative stress did not
prevent FP-induced suppression of IgG expression in human B cells in vitro.
Changes in expression were validated by RT-qPCR and by gene set enrichment
analysis in distinct COPD cohorts. FP may reduce the adaptive immune response in 
COPD and may be more effective in patients with an increased B-cell/antibody
response indicated by high autoantibody titers.-Lee, J., Machin, M., Russell, K. 
E., Pavlidis, S., Zhu, J., Barnes, P. J., Chung, K. F., Adcock, I. M., Durham, A.
L. Corticosteroid modulation of immunoglobulin expression and B-cell function in 
COPD.

© FASEB.

PMID: 26887440  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Immunity. 2016 Feb 16;44(2):274-86. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2016.01.018.

Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 Inactivation Drives T-bet-Mediated Downregulation of
Co-receptor PD-1 to Enhance CD8(+) Cytolytic T Cell Responses.

Taylor A(1), Harker JA(2), Chanthong K(1), Stevenson PG(3), Zuniga EI(2), Rudd
CE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signalling Section, Division of Immunology, Department of Pathology,
Tennis Court Road, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK. (2)Division of
Biological Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(3)Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK. (4)Cell Signalling Section, Division of Immunology,
Department of Pathology, Tennis Court Road, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB2 1QP, UK. Electronic address: cer51@cam.ac.uk.

Despite the importance of the co-receptor PD-1 in T cell immunity, the upstream
signaling pathway that regulates PD-1 expression has not been defined. Glycogen
synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3, isoforms a and ß) is a serine-threonine kinase
implicated in cellular processes. Here, we identified GSK-3 as a key upstream
kinase that regulated PD-1 expression in CD8(+) T cells. GSK-3 siRNA
downregulation, or inhibition by small molecules, blocked PD-1 expression,
resulting in increased CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) function.
Mechanistically, GSK-3 inactivation increased Tbx21 transcription, promoting
enhanced T-bet expression and subsequent suppression of Pdcd1 (encodes PD-1)
transcription in CD8(+) CTLs. Injection of GSK-3 inhibitors in mice increased
in vivo CD8(+) OT-I CTL function and the clearance of murine gamma-herpesvirus 68
and lymphocytic choriomeningitis clone 13 and reversed T cell exhaustion. Our
findings identify GSK-3 as a regulator of PD-1 expression and demonstrate the
applicability of GSK-3 inhibitors in the modulation of PD-1 in immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4760122
PMID: 26885856  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Immunol. 2016 Feb 15;196(4):1449-54. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502396. Epub 2016
Jan 20.

Cutting Edge: Eomesodermin Is Sufficient To Direct Type 1 Innate Lymphocyte
Development into the Conventional NK Lineage.

Pikovskaya O(1), Chaix J(1), Rothman NJ(1), Collins A(1), Chen YH(1), Scipioni
AM(1), Vivier E(2), Reiner SL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032; Department of Pediatrics, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032; (2)Centre
d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille University UM2, INSERM U1104,
CNRS UMR7280, Marseille 13288, France; and Service d'Immunologie, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Marseille 13385, France. (3)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032; Department of Pediatrics, College of Physicians
and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032; sr2978@cumc.columbia.edu.

Type 1 innate lymphocytes comprise two developmentally divergent lineages, type 1
helper innate lymphoid cells (hILC1s) and conventional NK cells (cNKs). All type 
1 innate lymphocytes (ILCs) express the transcription factor T-bet, but cNKs
additionally express Eomesodermin (Eomes). We show that deletion of Eomes alleles
at the onset of type 1 ILC maturation using NKp46-Cre imposes a substantial block
in cNK development. Formation of the entire lymphoid and nonlymphoid type 1 ILC
compartment appears to require the semiredundant action of both T-bet and Eomes. 
To determine if Eomes is sufficient to redirect hILC1 development to a cNK fate, 
we generated transgenic mice that express Eomes when and where T-bet is expressed
using Tbx21 locus control to drive expression of Eomes codons. Ectopic Eomes
induces cNK-like properties across the lymphoid and nonlymphoid type 1 ILC
compartments. Subsequent to their divergent lineage specification, hILC1s and
cNKs thus possess substantial developmental plasticity.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4744497 [Available on 2017-02-15]
PMID: 26792802  [PubMed - in process]


10. Clin Immunol. 2016 Feb;163:96-107. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2015.12.015. Epub 2016 Jan
4.

The low EOMES/TBX21 molecular phenotype in multiple sclerosis reflects CD56+ cell
dysregulation and is affected by immunomodulatory therapies.

McKay FC(1), Gatt PN(2), Fewings N(3), Parnell GP(4), Schibeci SD(5), Basuki
MA(6), Powell JE(7), Goldinger A(8), Fabis-Pedrini MJ(9), Kermode AG(10), Burke
T(11), Vucic S(12), Stewart GJ(13), Booth DR(14).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology and Allergy Research, Westmead Institute for Medical
Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia.
Electronic address: fiona.mckay@sydney.edu.au. (2)Centre for Immunology and
Allergy Research, Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address:
prudence.gatt@sydney.edu.au. (3)Centre for Immunology and Allergy Research,
Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address: nicole.fewings@sydney.edu.au.
(4)Centre for Immunology and Allergy Research, Westmead Institute for Medical
Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia.
Electronic address: grant.parnell@sydney.edu.au. (5)Centre for Immunology and
Allergy Research, Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address:
Stephen.schibeci@sydney.edu.au. (6)Centre for Immunology and Allergy Research,
Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address: monicabasuki@gmail.com. (7)Institute
for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Saint Lucia, Brisbane, 4072, 
Australia. Electronic address: joseph.powell@uq.edu.au. (8)University of
Queensland Diamantina Institute, Translational Research Institute and The
Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, Australia. Electronic
address: a.goldinger@uq.edu.au. (9)Western Australian Neuroscience Research
Institute, University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009,
Australia. Electronic address: marzena.pedrini@wanri.uwa.edu.au. (10)Western
Australian Neuroscience Research Institute, University of Western Australia,
Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia; Institute for Immunology and
Infectious Diseases, Murdoch University, Murdoch, Western Australia 6150,
Australia. Electronic address: kermode@me.com. (11)Western Clinical School,
University of Sydney, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia.
Electronic address: therese.burke@sydney.edu.au. (12)Western Clinical School,
University of Sydney, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia.
Electronic address: s.vucic@neura.edu.au. (13)Centre for Immunology and Allergy
Research, Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, 
New South Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address:
graeme.stewart@sydney.edu.au. (14)Centre for Immunology and Allergy Research,
Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address: david.booth@sydney.edu.au.

Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease treated by therapies targeting
peripheral blood cells. We previously identified that expression of two MS-risk
genes, the transcription factors EOMES and TBX21 (ET), was low in blood from MS
and stable over time. Here we replicated the low ET expression in a new MS cohort
(p<0.0007 for EOMES, p<0.028 for TBX21) and demonstrate longitudinal stability
(p<10(-4)) and high heritability (h(2)=0.48 for EOMES) for this molecular
phenotype. Genes whose expression correlated with ET, especially those
controlling cell migration, further defined the phenotype. CD56+ cells and other 
subsets expressed lower levels of Eomes or T-bet protein and/or were
under-represented in MS. EOMES and TBX21 risk SNP genotypes, and serum EBNA-1
titres were not correlated with ET expression, but HLA-DRB1*1501 genotype was. ET
expression was normalised to healthy control levels with natalizumab, and was
highly variable for glatiramer acetate, fingolimod, interferon-beta, dimethyl
fumarate.

Crown Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26762769  [PubMed - in process]


11. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2016 Feb;65(2):181-92. doi: 10.1007/s00262-015-1786-1.
Epub 2016 Jan 11.

Favorable prognostic influence of T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin in
metastatic renal cell cancer patients.

Dielmann A(1), Letsch A(1), Nonnenmacher A(1), Miller K(2), Keilholz U(1), Busse 
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III (Hematology, Oncology and Tumor Immunology),
Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Urology, Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine III (Hematology, Oncology and Tumor Immunology),
Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany.
antonia.busse@charite.de.

T-box transcription factors, T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) encoded by Tbx21 
and Eomesodermin (Eomes), drive the differentiation of effector/memory T cell
lineages and NK cells. The aim of the study was to determine the prognostic
influence of the expression of these transcription factors in peripheral blood
(pB) in a cohort of 41 metastatic (m) RCC patients before receiving sorafenib
treatment and to analyze their association with the immunophenotype in pB. In
contrast to Tbx21, in the multivariate analysis including clinical features,
Eomes mRNA expression was identified as an independent good prognostic factor for
progression-free survival (PFS, p = 0.042) and overall survival (OS, p = 0.001)
in addition to a favorable ECOG performance status (p = 0.01 and p = 0.008,
respectively). Eomes expression correlated positively not only with expression of
Tbx21 and TGFß1 mRNA, but also with mRNA expression of the activation marker
ICOS, and with in vivo activated HLA-DR(+) T cells. Eomes expression was
negatively associated with TNFa-producing T cells. On protein level, Eomes was
mainly expressed by CD56(+)CD3(-) NK cells in pB. In conclusion, we identified a 
higher Eomes mRNA expression as an independent good prognostic factor for OS and 
PFS in mRCC patients treated with sorafenib.

PMID: 26753694  [PubMed - in process]


12. Immunology. 2016 Apr;147(4):476-87. doi: 10.1111/imm.12580. Epub 2016 Feb 9.

Gfi1, a transcriptional repressor, inhibits the induction of the T helper type 1 
programme in activated CD4 T cells.

Suzuki J(1,)(2), Maruyama S(3), Tamauchi H(4), Kuwahara M(2,)(3,)(5), Horiuchi
M(3), Mizuki M(3), Ochi M(3,)(6), Sawasaki T(6), Zhu J(7), Yasukawa M(1),
Yamashita M(2,)(3,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Clinical Immunology and Infectious Diseases,
Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime University, Toon, Ehime, Japan. (2)Department 
of Translational Immunology, Translational Research Center, Ehime University
Hospital, Toon, Ehime, Japan. (3)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Ehime University, Toon, Ehime, Japan. (4)Division of Fundamental
Medical Technology, Department of Medical Technology, Ehime Prefectural
University of Health Science, Iyo-gun, Ehime, Japan. (5)Division of Immune
Regulation, Department of Proteo-Inovation, Proteo-Science Centre, Ehime
University, Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan. (6)Division of Cell-Free Sciences,
Department of Proteo-Research, Proteo-Science Centre, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan. (7)Molecular and Cellular Immunoregulation Unit,
Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.

A transcriptional repressor Gfi1 promotes T helper type 2 (Th2) cell development 
and inhibits Th17 and inducible regulatory T-cell differentiation. However, the
role of Gfi1 in regulating Th1 cell differentiation and the Th1-type immune
response remains to be investigated. We herein demonstrate that Gfi1 inhibits the
induction of the Th1 programme in activated CD4 T cells. The activated
Gfi1-deficient CD4 T cells spontaneously develop into Th1 cells in an
interleukin-12- and interferon-<U+03B3>-independent manner. The increase of Th1-type
immune responses was confirmed in vivo in Gfi1-deficient mice using a murine
model of nickel allergy and delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH). The expression
levels of Th1-related transcription factors were found to increase in
Gfi1-deficient activated CD4 T cells. Tbx21, Eomes and Runx2 were identified as
possible direct targets of Gfi1. Gfi1 binds to the Tbx21, Eomes and Runx2 gene
loci and reduces the histone H3K4 methylation levels in part by modulating Lsd1
recruitment. Together, these findings demonstrate a novel regulatory role of Gfi1
in the regulation of the Th1-type immune response.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26749286  [PubMed - in process]


13. J Anat. 2016 Jan 6. doi: 10.1111/joa.12434. [Epub ahead of print]

Deletion of collapsin response mediator protein 4 results in abnormal layer
thickness and elongation of mitral cell apical dendrites in the neonatal
olfactory bulb.

Tsutiya A(1), Watanabe H(1), Nakano Y(1), Nishihara M(2), Goshima Y(3),
Ohtani-Kaneko R(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Sciences, Toyo University, Oura, Gunma, Japan.
(2)Department of Veterinary Physiology, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life 
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of
Molecular Pharmacology and Neurobiology, Yokohama City University Graduate School
of Medicine, Yokohama, Kanazawa Ward, Japan. (4)Bio-Nano Electronic Research
Centre, Toyo University, Kawagoe, Saitama, Japan.

Collapsin response mediator protein 4 (CRMP4), a member of the CRMP family, is
involved in the pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental disorders such as
schizophrenia and autism. Here, we first compared layer thickness of the
olfactory bulb between wild-type (WT) and CRMP4-knockout (KO) mice. The mitral
cell layer (MCL) was significantly thinner, whereas the external plexiform layer 
(EPL) was significantly thicker in CRMP4-KO mice at postnatal day 0 (PD0)
compared with WTs. However, differences in layer thickness disappeared by PD14.
No apoptotic cells were found in the MCL, and the number of mitral cells (MCs)
identified with a specific marker (i.e. Tbx21 antibody) did not change in
CRMP4-KO neonates. However, DiI-tracing showed that the length of mitral cell
apical dendrites was greater in CRMP4-KO neonates than in WTs. In addition,
expression of CRMP4 mRNA in WT mice was most abundant in the MCL at PD0 and
decreased afterward. These results suggest that CRMP4 contributes to dendritic
elongation. Our in vitro studies showed that deletion or knockdown of CRMP4
resulted in enhanced growth of MAP2-positive neurites, whereas overexpression of 
CRMP4 reduced their growth, suggesting a new role for CRMP4 as a suppressor of
dendritic elongation. Overall, our data suggest that disruption of CRMP4 produces
a temporary alteration in EPL thickness, which is constituted mainly of mitral
cell apical dendrites, through the enhanced growth of these dendrites.

© 2016 Anatomical Society.

PMID: 26739921  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Mucosal Immunol. 2016 Jan 6. doi: 10.1038/mi.2015.130. [Epub ahead of print]

Rhinovirus inhibits IL-17A and the downstream immune responses in allergic
asthma.

Graser A(1), Ekici AB(2), Sopel N(1), Melichar VO(3), Zimmermann T(3),
Papadopoulos NG(4), Taka S(4), Ferrazzi F(2), Vuorinen T(5), Finotto S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pneumology, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen,
Germany. (2)Institute of Humangenetics, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, 
Germany. (3)Paediatric Pneumology-Allergology, Department of Paediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. (4)Allergy
and Clinical Immunology Unit, 2nd Pediatric Clinic, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Athens, Greece. (5)Department of Virology, University of
Turku, Turku, Finland.

The proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-17A (IL-17A) is known to mediate
antimicrobial activity, but its role during rhinovirus (RV) infections and in
asthma needs further investigation. Therefore, we addressed the role of IL-17A
during allergic asthma and antiviral immune response in human and murine
immunocompetent cells. In this study we found that asthmatic children with a RV
infection in their upper airways have upregulated mRNA levels of the antiviral
cytokine interferon type I (IFN)-ß and the transcription factor T-box 21 (TBX21) 
and reduced levels of IL-17A protein in their peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
(PBMCs). We also found that IL-17A inhibited RV1b replication in infected human
lung epithelial cells A549. Furthermore, by using gene array analysis we
discovered that targeted deletion of Il17a in murine lung CD4(+) T cells impaired
Oas1g mRNA downstream of Ifnß, independently from RV infection. Additionally, in 
PBMCs of children with a RV infection in their nasalpharyngeal fluid OAS1 gene
expression was found downregulated. Finally RV1b inhibited IL-17A production in
lung CD4(+) T cells in a setting of experimental asthma. These results indicate
that the RV1b inhibits IL-17A in T helper type 17 cells and IL-17A clears RV1b
infection in epithelial cells. In both cases IL-17A contributes to fend off RV1b 
infection by inducing genes downstream of interferon type I pathway.Mucosal
Immunology advance online publication, 6 January 2016; doi:10.1038/mi.2015.130.

PMID: 26732679  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Immunology. 2016 Apr;147(4):367-76. doi: 10.1111/imm.12575. Epub 2016 Feb 23.

T-bet as a key regulator of mucosal immunity.

Mohamed R(1,)(2,)(3), Lord GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Transplantation Immunology and Mucosal Biology, Department of
Experimental Immunobiology, King's College London, London, UK. (2)National
Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre, Guy's and St Thomas'
National Health Service Foundation Trust, London, UK. (3)The Francis Crick
Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, The Ridgeway Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Initially understood to be a key regulator of interferon-<U+03B3>-producing helper T
cells, our knowledge of T-bet's functional roles has expanded to encompass a
growing range of cellular lineages. In addition to regulating other
interferon-<U+03B3>-producing adaptive immune cells, it is now clear that T-bet plays a 
fundamental role in the regulation of innate immune responses across mucosal
surfaces. This homeostatic role is demonstrated by the spontaneous colitis that
occurs when T-bet is deleted from innate immune cells in RAG(-/-) mice. Using
this model as a focal point, we review our understanding of T-bet's regulation of
adaptive and innate immune systems, focusing particularly on mucosal populations 
including innate lymphoid cells, dendritic cells and intraepithelial lymphocytes.
With the increasingly diverse effects of T-bet on different lineages, the
classical binding-centric paradigm of T-bet's molecular functionality has
increasingly struggled to account for the versatility of T-bet's biological
effects. Recent recognition of the synergistic interactions between T-bet and
other canonical transcription factors has led to a co-operative paradigm that has
provided greater explanatory power. Synthesizing insights from ChIP-seq and
comparative biology, we expand the co-operative paradigm further and suggest a
network approach as a powerful way to understand and model T-bet's diverse
functionality.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26726991  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Dairy Sci. 2016 Mar;99(3):2364-71. doi: 10.3168/jds.2015-9449. Epub 2015 Dec
24.

Short communication: Cytokine profiles from blood mononuclear cells of dairy cows
classified with divergent immune response phenotypes.

Martin CE(1), Paibomesai MA(2), Emam SM(3), Gallienne J(3), Hine BC(4),
Thompson-Crispi KA(5), Mallard BA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada; Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada. (2)Department of Pathobiology,
Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada;
Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, Guelph, ON, N1G 4Y2,
Canada. (3)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada. (4)CSIRO, Animal, Food & Health Sciences,
Armidale, NSW, Australia. (5)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary
College, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada; Center for Genetic
Improvement of Livestock, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W, Canada.
(6)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada; Center for Genetic Improvement of Livestock,
University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W, Canada. Electronic address:
bmallard@ovc.uoguelph.ca.

Genetic selection for enhanced immune response has been shown to decrease disease
occurrence in dairy cattle. Cows can be classified as high (H), average, or low
responders based on antibody-mediated immune response (AMIR), predominated by
type-2 cytokine production, and cell-mediated immune response (CMIR) through
estimated breeding values for these traits. The purpose of this study was to
identify in vitro tests that correlate with in vivo immune response phenotyping
in dairy cattle. Blood mononuclear cells (BMC) isolated from cows classified as
H-AMIR and H-CMIR through estimated breeding values for immune response traits
were stimulated with concanavalin A (ConA; Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and gene
expression, cytokine production, and cell proliferation was determined at
multiple time points. A repeated measures model, which included the effects of
immune response group, parity, and stage of lactation, was used to compare
differences between immune response phenotype groups. The H-AMIR cows produced
more IL-4 protein than H-CMIR cows at 48h; however, no difference in gene
expression of type-2 transcription factor GATA3 or IL4 was noted. The BMC from
H-CMIR cows had increased production of IFN-<U+03B3> protein at 48, 72, and 96h compared
with H-AMIR animals. Further, H-CMIR cows had increased expression of the IFNG
gene at 16, 24, and 48h post-treatment with ConA, although expression of the
type-1 transcription factor gene TBX21 did not differ between immune response
groups. Although proliferation of BMC increased from 24 to 72h after ConA
stimulation, no differences were found between the immune response groups.
Overall, stimulation of H-AMIR and H-CMIR bovine BMC with ConA resulted in
distinct cytokine production profiles according to genetically defined groups.
These distinct cytokine profiles could be used to define disease resistance
phenotypes in dairy cows according to stimulation in vitro; however, other immune
response phenotypes should be assessed.

Copyright © 2016 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 26723120  [PubMed - in process]


17. Nat Immunol. 2016 Feb;17(2):179-86. doi: 10.1038/ni.3332. Epub 2015 Nov 30.

Complementarity and redundancy of IL-22-producing innate lymphoid cells.

Rankin LC(1,)(2), Girard-Madoux MJ(3), Seillet C(1,)(2), Mielke LA(1,)(2),
Kerdiles Y(3), Fenis A(3), Wieduwild E(3), Putoczki T(1,)(2), Mondot S(4), Lantz 
O(5), Demon D(6,)(7), Papenfuss AT(1,)(2), Smyth GK(1,)(2,)(8), Lamkanfi
M(6,)(7), Carotta S(1,)(2,)(9), Renauld JC(10), Shi W(1,)(2,)(11), Carpentier
S(12), Soos T(13), Arendt C(13), Ugolini S(3), Huntington ND(1,)(2), Belz
GT(1,)(2), Vivier E(3,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, and Department of
Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. (2)Department of 
Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. (3)Centre
d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Université d'Aix-Marseille UM2, Inserm, U1104,
CNRS UMR7280, Marseille, France. (4)Labex Milieu Intérieur, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France. (5)Laboratoire d'Immunologie and Inserm U932, Institut Curie,
Paris, France. (6)Inflammation Research Center, VIB, Ghent University, Ghent,
Belgium. (7)Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(8)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Australia. (9)Boehringer-Ingelheim RCV, Vienna, Austria. (10)Ludwig Institute for
Cancer Research and Experimental Medicine Unit, Catholic University of Louvain,
Brussels, Belgium. (11)Department of Computing and Information Systems,
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. (12)MI-mAbs consortium
Aix-Marseille University, Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Marseille,
France. (13)Bioinnovation, SANOFI, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (14)Immunologie,
Hôpital de la Conception, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Marseille,
France.

Intestinal T cells and group 3 innate lymphoid cells (ILC3 cells) control the
composition of the microbiota and gut immune responses. Within the gut, ILC3
subsets coexist that either express or lack the natural cytoxicity receptor (NCR)
NKp46. We identified here the transcriptional signature associated with the
transcription factor T-bet-dependent differentiation of NCR(-) ILC3 cells into
NCR(+) ILC3 cells. Contrary to the prevailing view, we found by conditional
deletion of the key ILC3 genes Stat3, Il22, Tbx21 and Mcl1 that NCR(+) ILC3 cells
were redundant for the control of mouse colonic infection with Citrobacter
rodentium in the presence of T cells. However, NCR(+) ILC3 cells were essential
for cecal homeostasis. Our data show that interplay between intestinal ILC3 cells
and adaptive lymphocytes results in robust complementary failsafe mechanisms that
ensure gut homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4720992 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26595889  [PubMed - in process]


18. Mucosal Immunol. 2015 Nov 18. doi: 10.1038/mi.2015.110. [Epub ahead of print]

Interleukin-4 and interferon-<U+03B3> orchestrate an epithelial polarization in the
airways.

Zissler UM(1), Chaker AM(1,)(2), Effner R(1), Ulrich M(1,)(2), Guerth F(1),
Piontek G(2), Dietz K(1), Regn M(3), Knapp B(4), Theis FJ(4,)(5), Heine H(6),
Suttner K(1), Schmidt-Weber CB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Allergy & Environment (ZAUM), Technical University of Munich and
Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health,
Germany, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Medical School,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. (3)Institute of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, Medical School, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(4)Institute of Computational Biology, Technical University of Munich and
Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Munich,
Germany. (5)Department of Mathematics, Technical University of Munich, Garching, 
Germany. (6)Division of Innate Immunity, Research Center Borstel, Airway Research
Center North (ARCN), Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL),
Borstel, Germany.

Interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and interleukin-4 (IL-4) are key effector cytokines for the 
differentiation of T helper type 1 and 2 (Th1 and Th2) cells. Both cytokines
induce fate-decisive transcription factors such as GATA3 and TBX21 that
antagonize the polarized development of opposite phenotypes by direct regulation 
of each other's expression along with many other target genes. Although it is
well established that mesenchymal cells directly respond to Th1 and Th2
cytokines, the nature of antagonistic differentiation programs in airway
epithelial cells is only partially understood. In this study, primary normal
human bronchial epithelial cells (NHBEs) were exposed to IL-4, IFN-<U+03B3>, or both and
genome-wide transcriptome analysis was performed. The study uncovers an
antagonistic regulation pattern of IL-4 and IFN-<U+03B3> in NHBEs, translating the
Th1/Th2 antagonism directly in epithelial gene regulation. IL-4- and
IFN-<U+03B3>-induced transcription factor hubs form clusters, present in
antagonistically and polarized gene regulation networks. Furthermore, the
IL-4-dependent induction of IL-24 observed in rhinitis patients was downregulated
by IFN-<U+03B3>, and therefore IL-24 represents a potential biomarker of allergic
inflammation and a Th2 polarized condition of the epithelium.Mucosal Immunology
advance online publication, 18 November 2015; doi:10.1038/mi.2015.110.

PMID: 26577568  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung. 2015 Sep;62(3):275-85. doi: 10.1556/030.62.2015.3.5.

Study of Th1/Th2 balance in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with
alopecia areata.

Sadeghi S(1), Sanati MH(1), Taghizadeh M(2), Mansouri P(3), Jadali Z(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Department, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology , Tehran , Iran. (2)Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Institute ,
Karaj , Iran. (3)Skin and Stem Cell Research Center, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences , Tehran , Iran. (4)Department of Immunology, School of Public Health,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences , Tehran , Iran.

Alopecia areata represents an autoimmune pathological process driven primarily by
cellular aberrations contained within the immune system, which activates various 
humoral and cellular elements of the immune response. The aim of this study was
to determine the mRNA expression levels of T-bet and GATA-3 as potential inducers
of T helper (Th)1 and Th2 differentiation, respectively, as well as Th1(IFN-<U+03B3>)
and Th2(IL-4) cytokine mRNA expression in patients with alopecia areata. Using
real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR), the relative amounts of T-bet,
GATA-3, IFN-<U+03B3>, and IL-4 mRNA transcripts were determined in PBMCs from 20 Iranian
patients with alopecia areata and compared with those of 20 healthy control
subjects. In comparison with the normal group, T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA expression
levels were significantly up-regulated in the alopecia areata patients, while
GATA-3 and IL-4 mRNA expression levels were down-regulated. Notably, positive
correlation (P < 0.05) was found between IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet levels in patients and
controls. In addition, significant positive correlations existed between GATA-3
and IL-4 (P < 0.05). These results indicate that a Th1/Th2 imbalance exists in
alopecia areata, and it may be implicated in the pathogenesis of disease.

PMID: 26551570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cell. 2015 Nov 5;163(4):1038-1038.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.054.

SnapShot: T Cell Exhaustion.

Pauken KE(1), Wherry EJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Institute for Immunology,University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

PMID: 26544946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Exp Med. 2015 Nov 16;212(12):2015-25. doi: 10.1084/jem.20150809. Epub 2015 Oct 
26.

Terminal NK cell maturation is controlled by concerted actions of T-bet and Zeb2 
and is essential for melanoma rejection.

van Helden MJ(1), Goossens S(2), Daussy C(3), Mathieu AL(3), Faure F(3), Marçais 
A(3), Vandamme N(2), Farla N(2), Mayol K(3), Viel S(4), Degouve S(5), Debien
E(3), Seuntjens E(6), Conidi A(7), Chaix J(8), Mangeot P(3), de Bernard S(9),
Buffat L(9), Haigh JJ(10), Huylebroeck D(11), Lambrecht BN(12), Berx G(2), Walzer
T(13).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation and Mucosal Immunology, VIB Inflammation
Research Center, 9052 Ghent, Belgium GROUP-ID Consortium, Ghent University, 9000 
Ghent, Belgium Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, 
Belgium. (2)Unit of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, VIB Inflammation Research
Center, 9052 Ghent, Belgium Department for Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent
University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium. (3)Université de Lyon, 69007 Lyon, France
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1111, 69342 Lyon,
France Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 69007 Lyon, France Centre International 
de Recherche en Infectiologie, 69007 Lyon, France Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, UMR5308, 69342 Lyon, France. (4)Université de Lyon, 69007 Lyon,
France Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1111, 69342
Lyon, France Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 69007 Lyon, France Centre
International de Recherche en Infectiologie, 69007 Lyon, France Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR5308, 69342 Lyon, France Laboratoire
d'Immunologie, Hospices Civils de Lyon, 69495 Lyon, France. (5)Department for
Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium Université de
Lyon, 69007 Lyon, France Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale, U1111, 69342 Lyon, France Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 69007 Lyon,
France Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie, 69007 Lyon, France.
(6)Laboratory of Molecular Biology (Celgen), Department of Development and
Regeneration, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (7)Department of Cell Biology,
Erasmus MC, 3015 CN Rotterdam, Netherlands. (8)Centre d'Immunologie de
Marseille-Luminy, 13009 Marseille, France. (9)AltraBio SAS, 69007 Lyon, France.
(10)Department for Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, 9052 Ghent,
Belgium Australian Centre for Blood Diseases, Monash University, Melbourne,
Victoria 3004, Australia. (11)Laboratory of Molecular Biology (Celgen),
Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, 3015 CN Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(12)Laboratory of Immunoregulation and Mucosal Immunology, VIB Inflammation
Research Center, 9052 Ghent, Belgium GROUP-ID Consortium, Ghent University, 9000 
Ghent, Belgium Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus MC, 3015 CN Rotterdam,
Netherlands. (13)Université de Lyon, 69007 Lyon, France Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1111, 69342 Lyon, France Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Lyon, 69007 Lyon, France Centre International de Recherche en
Infectiologie, 69007 Lyon, France Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
UMR5308, 69342 Lyon, France Thierry.walzer@inserm.fr.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2015 Nov 16;212(12):1990.

Natural killer (NK) cell maturation is a tightly controlled process that endows
NK cells with functional competence and the capacity to recognize target cells.
Here, we found that the transcription factor (TF) Zeb2 was the most highly
induced TF during NK cell maturation. Zeb2 is known to control epithelial to
mesenchymal transition, but its role in immune cells is mostly undefined.
Targeted deletion of Zeb2 resulted in impaired NK cell maturation, survival, and 
exit from the bone marrow. NK cell function was preserved, but mice lacking Zeb2 
in NK cells were more susceptible to B16 melanoma lung metastases. Reciprocally, 
ectopic expression of Zeb2 resulted in a higher frequency of mature NK cells in
all organs. Moreover, the immature phenotype of Zeb2(-/-) NK cells closely
resembled that of Tbx21(-/-) NK cells. This was caused by both a dependence of
Zeb2 expression on T-bet and a probable cooperation of these factors in gene
regulation. Transgenic expression of Zeb2 in Tbx21(-/-) NK cells partially
restored a normal maturation, establishing that timely induction of Zeb2 by T-bet
is an essential event during NK cell differentiation. Finally, this novel
transcriptional cascade could also operate in human as T-bet and Zeb2 are
similarly regulated in mouse and human NK cells.

© 2015 van Helden et al.

PMCID: PMC4647267 [Available on 2016-05-16]
PMID: 26503444  [PubMed - in process]


22. Mol Immunol. 2015 Dec;68(2 Pt B):434-44. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.09.028. Epub 
2015 Oct 23.

Dehydrodiconiferyl alcohol (DHCA) modulates the differentiation of Th17 and Th1
cells and suppresses experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Lee J(1), Choi J(1), Lee W(1), Ko K(1), Kim S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742,
Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
sunyoung@snu.ac.kr.

Dehydrodiconiferyl alcohol (DHCA), originally isolated from the stems of
Cucurbita moschata, has previously been shown to exhibit anti-adipogenic and
anti-lipogenic effects in 3T3-L1 cells and primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs) (Lee et al., 2012). Here, we investigated whether synthetic DHCA could
suppress the CD4 T helper 17 (Th17)-mediated production of the interleukin
(IL)-17 protein. The results from RT-qPCR suggest that DHCA-mediated
down-regulation of IL-17 occurred at the transcriptional level by suppressing the
expression of RAR-related orphan receptor (ROR)<U+03B3>t, the master transcription
factor involved in the differentiation of Th17 cells. Furthermore, such
inhibition was mediated by the suppression of NF-<U+03BA>B activity. DHCA also inhibited
the Th1-mediated production of interferon (IFN) <U+03B3> by controlling the expression
of a key transcription factor known to regulate the production of this cytokine, 
T-bet. In the mouse experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) model, DHCA
showed significant therapeutic effects by inhibiting the infiltration of immune
cells into the spinal cords, decreasing the differentiation of pathogenic Th17
and Th1 cells, suppressing the expression of various pro-inflammatory cytokines, 
and eventually ameliorating the clinical symptoms of EAE mice. Taken together,
our data indicate that DHCA may be a potential candidate as an agent for the
control of Th17 and Th1-mediated inflammatory diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26477735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015 Dec 1;93(5):1118-26. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.08.034. Epub 2015 Aug 28.

Recovery Profiles of T-Cell Subsets Following Low-Dose Total Body Irradiation and
Improvement With Cinnamon.

Zheng X(1), Guo Y(2), Wang L(3), Zhang H(2), Wang S(4), Wang L(2), An L(1), Zhou 
X(2), Li X(2), Yao C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Tumor Immunology and Traditional Chinese Medicine
Immunology, Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences,
Jinan, China; School of Medicine and Life Science, University of Jinan-Shandong
Academy of Medical Science, Jinan, China. (2)Key Laboratory for Tumor Immunology 
and Traditional Chinese Medicine Immunology, Institute of Basic Medicine,
Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan, China. (3)Second Affiliated Hospital
of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, China. (4)Shandong
University, Jinan, China. (5)Key Laboratory for Tumor Immunology and Traditional 
Chinese Medicine Immunology, Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of
Medical Sciences, Jinan, China. Electronic address: yaocf9941@163.com.

PURPOSE: Inefficient T-cell reconstitution from x-ray-induced immune damage
reduces antitumor response. To understand the profile of T-cell reconstitution
after irradiation will overcome the barrier of antitumor immunity. This study
aimed to identify the recovery profile of T-cell subsets following x-ray
irradiation and to highlight the role of cinnamon on efficient T-cell restoration
postexposure in the antitumor response.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: CD3(+), CD8(+), and CD4(+) T cells and Th1, Th2, Th17, and
regulatory T (Treg) cells were evaluated at different time points after single
low-dose total body irradiation (SLTBI) with or without cinnamon treatments.
T-bet, GATA3, ROR<U+03B3>t, and Foxp3 signaling specific for Th1, Th2, Th17, and Treg
were also analyzed by RT-PCR assay. The effects of cinnamon on efficient T-cell
subset reconstitution was confirmed in a lung melanoma model in irradiated mice.
RESULTS: Reconstitution of CD4(+) T cells was delayed more than that of CD8(+) T 
cells in T-cell restoration after SLTBI. The production of IFN<U+03B3> by Th1 or Tc1
cells was sharply decreased and was accompanied by reduced T-bet mRNA, even when 
total T-cell numbers had recovered; the frequencies of Th17 and Treg cells and
their specific transcription factors (ROR<U+03B3>t and Foxp3, respectively) were
obviously increased. Irradiation-induced inefficient T-cell reconstitution
impaired the antitumor capacities in the lung melanoma model. Pretreatment with
cinnamon in irradiated mice accelerated the generation of Th1 and reduced the
differentiation of Treg cells by activating T-bet and limiting transcriptions of 
Foxp3. Improvement resulting from cinnamon pretreatment on the efficient T-cell
recovery profile from SLTBI promoted antitumor immunity in the lung melanoma
model.
CONCLUSIONS: T-cell reconstitution from SLTBI was characterized by impaired Th1
and elevated Th17 and Treg cells. Cinnamon effectively improved the imbalance of 
T-cell subsets by promoting the proliferation of Th1 and by suppressing
expansions of Th17 and Tregs. The role of cinnamon in efficient T-cell
reconstitution from SLTBI is effective in antitumor immunity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26475064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. BMC Med Genomics. 2015 Oct 15;8:66. doi: 10.1186/s12920-015-0142-9.

Gene expression profiling of the human natural killer cell response to Fc
receptor activation: unique enhancement in the presence of interleukin-12.

Campbell AR(1,)(2), Regan K(3,)(4), Bhave N(5), Pattanayak A(6), Parihar R(7),
Stiff AR(8,)(9), Trikha P(10), Scoville SD(11,)(12), Liyanarachchi S(13),
Kondadasula SV(14), Lele O(15), Davuluri R(16), Payne PR(17), Carson WE
3rd(18,)(19,)(20).

Author information: 
(1)The Arthur G. James Comprehensive Cancer Center and Solove Research Institute,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA. Amanda.Harper@osumc.edu.
(2)Medical Scientist Training Program and Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA. Amanda.Harper@osumc.edu.
(3)Medical Scientist Training Program and Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA. Kelly.Regan@osumc.edu.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
43210, USA. Kelly.Regan@osumc.edu. (5)The Arthur G. James Comprehensive Cancer
Center and Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
43210, USA. Bhave.4@osu.edu. (6)Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA. Arka.Pattanayak@osumc.edu.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, The Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA.
rxpariha@txch.org. (8)The Arthur G. James Comprehensive Cancer Center and Solove 
Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA.
Andrew.Stiff@osumc.edu. (9)Medical Scientist Training Program and Biomedical
Sciences Graduate Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA.
Andrew.Stiff@osumc.edu. (10)The Arthur G. James Comprehensive Cancer Center and
Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA.
Prashant.Trikha@osumc.edu. (11)The Arthur G. James Comprehensive Cancer Center
and Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210,
USA. Steven.Scoville@osumc.edu. (12)Medical Scientist Training Program and
Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
43210, USA. Steven.Scoville@osumc.edu. (13)Division of Human Cancer Genetics, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA. Sandya.Liyanarachchi@osumc.edu. 
(14)Departments of Oncology and Medicine, Wayne State University and Barbara Ann 
Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI, 48201, USA. vidyakon@gmail.com.
(15)Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH, 43210, USA. Omkar.Lele@osumc.edu. (16)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA.
Ramana.Davuluri@northwestern.edu. (17)Department of Biomedical Informatics, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA. Philip.Payne@osumc.edu. (18)The 
Arthur G. James Comprehensive Cancer Center and Solove Research Institute, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA. William.Carson@osumc.edu.
(19)Department of Surgery, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA.
William.Carson@osumc.edu. (20)The Ohio State University College of Medicine, N924
Doan Hall, 410 West 10th Ave., Columbus, OH, 43210, USA.
William.Carson@osumc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Traditionally, the CD56(dim)CD16(+) subset of Natural Killer (NK)
cells has been thought to mediate cellular cytotoxicity with modest cytokine
secretion capacity. However, studies have suggested that this subset may exert a 
more diverse array of immunological functions. There exists a lack of
well-developed functional models to describe the behavior of activated NK cells, 
and the interactions between signaling pathways that facilitate effector
functions are not well understood. In the present study, a combination of
genome-wide microarray analyses and systems-level bioinformatics approaches were 
utilized to elucidate the transcriptional landscape of NK cells activated via
interactions with antibody-coated targets in the presence of interleukin-12
(IL-12).
METHODS: We conducted differential gene expression analysis of CD56(dim)CD16(+)
NK cells following FcR stimulation in the presence or absence of IL-12. Next, we 
functionally characterized gene sets according to patterns of gene expression and
validated representative genes using RT-PCR. IPA was utilized for biological
pathway analysis, and an enriched network of interacting genes was generated
using GeneMANIA. Furthermore, PAJEK and the HITS algorithm were employed to
identify important genes in the network according to betweeness centrality, hub, 
and authority node metrics.
RESULTS: Analyses revealed that CD56(dim)CD16(+) NK cells co-stimulated via the
Fc receptor (FcR) and IL-12R led to the expression of a unique set of genes,
including genes encoding cytotoxicity receptors, apoptotic proteins,
intracellular signaling molecules, and cytokines that may mediate enhanced
cytotoxicity and interactions with other immune cells within inflammatory
tissues. Network analyses identified a novel set of connected key players, BATF, 
IRF4, TBX21, and IFNG, within an integrated network composed of differentially
expressed genes in NK cells stimulated by various conditions (immobilized IgG,
IL-12, or the combination of IgG and IL-12).
CONCLUSIONS: These results are the first to address the global mechanisms by
which NK cells mediate their biological functions when encountering
antibody-coated targets within inflammatory sites. Moreover, this study has
identified a set of high-priority targets for subsequent investigation into
strategies to combat cancer by enhancing the anti-tumor activity of
CD56(dim)CD16(+) NK cells.

PMCID: PMC4608307
PMID: 26470881  [PubMed - in process]


25. J Immunol. 2015 Nov 15;195(10):4712-20. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501522. Epub 2015 
Oct 5.

NK Cell Functional Impairment after Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell
Transplantation Is Associated with Reduced Levels of T-bet and Eomesodermin.

Simonetta F(1), Pradier A(2), Bosshard C(2), Masouridi-Levrat S(2), Chalandon
Y(2), Roosnek E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medical Specialties, Geneva University
Hospitals, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva 14, Switzerland
federico.simonetta@hcuge.ch. (2)Division of Hematology, Department of Medical
Specialties, Geneva University Hospitals, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva
14, Switzerland.

NK cells play a major role in protection against tumor recurrence and infection
after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). It has been
shown that NK cell function after HSCT is impaired, but underlying molecular
mechanisms are not well-known. In this report we show that the level of T-bet and
Eomesodermin (Eomes), two T-box transcription factors regulating lymphocyte
effector functions, is strongly reduced in NK cells from HSCT recipients compared
with healthy control subjects. Reduction of T-bet and Eomes expression appeared
early and persisted for years after HSCT, affecting all peripheral blood NK cells
independently of their differentiation status. Reduced T-bet levels in NK cells
from allogeneic HSCT recipients significantly correlated with reduced perforin
expression. Acute, but not chronic, graft-versus-host disease, as well as CMV
reactivation, was associated with further downregulation of T-bet expression in
NK cells. Lower levels of T-bet expression in NK cells were associated with less 
favorable outcome after HSCT as a result of increased nonrelapse mortality.
Collectively, our results provide a possible molecular explanation for the
previously reported functional exhaustion of NK cells after allogeneic HSCT and
suggest an impact of the NK transcriptional machinery status on HSCT outcome.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26438526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Genetics. 2015 Nov;201(3):1017-30. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.179176. Epub 2015
Sep 28.

MicroRNAs and Their Targets Are Differentially Regulated in Adult and Neonatal
Mouse CD8+ T Cells.

Wissink EM(1), Smith NL(2), Spektor R(3), Rudd BD(4), Grimson A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Field of Biochemistry, Molecular, and Cell Biology, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York 14853. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853. (3)Graduate Field of Genetics,
Genomics, and Development, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New
York 14853 bdr54@cornell.edu agrimson@cornell.edu. (5)Department of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853
bdr54@cornell.edu agrimson@cornell.edu.

Immunological memory, which protects organisms from re-infection, is a hallmark
of the mammalian adaptive immune system and the underlying principle of
vaccination. In early life, however, mice and other mammals are deficient at
generating memory CD8+ T cells, which protect organisms from intracellular
pathogens. The molecular basis that differentiates adult and neonatal CD8+ T
cells is unknown. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are both developmentally regulated and
required for normal adult CD8+ T cell functions. We used next-generation
sequencing to identify mouse miRNAs that are differentially regulated in adult
and neonatal CD8+ T cells, which may contribute to the impaired development of
neonatal memory cells. The miRNA profiles of adult and neonatal cells were
surprisingly similar during infection; however, we observed large differences
prior to infection. In particular, miR-29 and miR-130 have significant
differential expression between adult and neonatal cells before infection.
Importantly, using RNA-Seq, we detected reciprocal changes in expression of
messenger RNA targets for both miR-29 and miR-130. Moreover, targets that we
validated include Eomes and Tbx21, key genes that regulate the formation of
memory CD8+ T cells. Notably, age-dependent changes in miR-29 and miR-130 are
conserved in human CD8+ T cells, further suggesting that these developmental
differences are biologically relevant. Together, these results demonstrate that
miR-29 and miR-130 are likely important regulators of memory CD8+ T cell
formation and suggest that neonatal cells are committed to a short-lived effector
cell fate prior to infection.

Copyright © 2015 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4649632
PMID: 26416483  [PubMed - in process]


27. Comput Biol Chem. 2015 Dec;59 Pt B:78-90. doi:
10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.08.009. Epub 2015 Aug 25.

A survey of disease connections for CD4+ T cell master genes and their directly
linked genes.

Li W(1), Espinal-Enríquez J(2), Simpfendorfer KR(3), Hernández-Lemus E(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Robert S. Boas Center for Genomics and Human Genetics, The Feinstein
Institute for Medical Research, North Shore LIJ Health System, Manhasset, NY,
USA. Electronic address: wtli2012@gmail.com. (2)Computational Genomics
Department, National Institute of Genomic Medicine, México, D.F., Mexico;
Complexity in Systems Biology, Center for Complexity Sciences, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México, México, D.F., Mexico. (3)The Robert S. Boas Center
for Genomics and Human Genetics, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research,
North Shore LIJ Health System, Manhasset, NY, USA.

Genome-wide association studies and other genetic analyses have identified a
large number of genes and variants implicating a variety of disease etiological
mechanisms. It is imperative for the study of human diseases to put these genetic
findings into a coherent functional context. Here we use system biology tools to 
examine disease connections of five master genes for CD4+ T cell subtypes (TBX21,
GATA3, RORC, BCL6, and FOXP3). We compiled a list of genes functionally
interacting (protein-protein interaction, or by acting in the same pathway) with 
the master genes, then we surveyed the disease connections, either by
experimental evidence or by genetic association. Embryonic lethal genes (also
known as essential genes) are over-represented in master genes and their
interacting genes (55% versus 40% in other genes). Transcription factors are
significantly enriched among genes interacting with the master genes (63% versus 
10% in other genes). Predicted haploinsufficiency is a feature of most these
genes. Disease-connected genes are enriched in this list of genes: 42% of these
genes have a disease connection according to Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 
(OMIM) (versus 23% in other genes), and 74% are associated with some diseases or 
phenotype in a Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS) (versus 43% in other genes). 
Seemingly, not all of the diseases connected to genes surveyed were immune
related, which may indicate pleiotropic functions of the master regulator genes
and associated genes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26411796  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Immunol. 2015 Nov 1;195(9):4358-68. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501274. Epub 2015
Sep 25.

T-bet Is Required for the Rapid Clearance of Attenuated Rabies Virus from Central
Nervous System Tissue.

Lebrun A(1), Portocarrero C(1), Kean RB(1), Barkhouse DA(1), Faber M(2), Hooper
DC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA
19107; (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA 19107; and. (3)Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107; Department of Neurological Surgery, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107 douglas.hooper@jefferson.edu.

Much of our understanding of CNS immunity has been gained from models involving
pathological inflammation. Attenuated rabies viruses (RABV) are unique tools to
study CNS immunity in the absence of conventional inflammatory mechanisms, as
they spread from the site of inoculation to the CNS transaxonally, thereby
bypassing the blood-brain barrier (BBB), and are cleared without neutrophil or
monocyte infiltration. To better understand the role of CD4 T cell subsets in the
clearance of the virus from CNS tissues, we examined the development of antiviral
immunity in wild-type (WT) and T-bet knockout mice (T-bet(-/-)), which lack Th1
cells. Early control of RABV replication in the CNS tissues of WT mice is
associated with the production of IFN-<U+03B3>, with antiviral effects likely mediated
through the enhanced expression of type I IFNs. Of interest, IFN-a and -<U+03B3> are
overexpressed in the infected T-bet(-/-) by comparison with WT CNS tissues, and
the initial control of RABV infection is similar. Ultimately, attenuated RABV are
cleared from the CNS tissues of WT mice by Ab locally produced by the activities 
of infiltrating T and B cells. Although T and B cell infiltration into the CNS of
infected T-bet(-/-) mice is comparable, their activities are not, the consequence
being delayed, low-level Ab production and prolonged RABV replication. More
importantly, neither T-bet(-/-) mice immunized with an attenuated virus, nor WT
mice with Th2 RABV-specific immunity induced by immunization with inactivated
virus, are protected in the long term against challenge with a pathogenic RABV.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4610868 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26408670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Skin Pharmacol Physiol. 2015;28(6):296-306. doi: 10.1159/000381628. Epub 2015 Sep
12.

Perfusion Intensity Correlates with Expression Levels of Psoriasis-Related Genes 
and Proteins.

Hendriks AG(1), Steenbergen W, Zeeuwen PL, Schalkwijk J, Hondebrink E, Klitsie
MA, Schreurs R, van de Kerkhof PC, Seyger MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Previous research revealed heterogeneity in the perfusion intensity
within clinically homogenous-appearing plaques, without differences in erythema. 
In addition, an increased perfusion was found within the perilesional skin. This 
raises the question whether the heterogeneity in perfusion found both inside and 
outside a lesion influences the expression levels of genes and proteins involved 
in the pathogenesis of psoriasis.
OBJECTIVES: To correlate the perfusion intensity to mRNA and protein expression
of genes associated with the pathogenesis of psoriasis and to visualize the
dynamics of the perfusion intensity over time using laser Doppler perfusion
imaging.
METHODS: Fourteen patients with plaque psoriasis were included. The superficial
microcirculation and clinical local scores (single usability metric, SUM, scores)
were analysed in one representative lesion every 2 weeks. After 8 weeks 4
biopsies were taken, one from a highly perfused area (hotspot) and one from a low
perfusion area (coldspot) of the lesional skin, one biopsy from the highly
perfused perilesional skin and one from the distant uninvolved skin.
RESULTS: Statistically significant differences in mRNA and protein expression,
including IL-17 and TBX21/T-Bet, were found between hotspots and coldspots, and
between the highly perfused perilesional and the uninvolved skin. Hotspots tend
to remain on the same location during 8 weeks of follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Within homogenous-appearing psoriatic plaques, there are remarkable 
differences in mRNA and protein levels, which are correlated with the perfusion
intensity and can be detected by using laser Doppler perfusion imaging. In
addition, differences in mRNA and protein expression between the highly perfused 
perilesional skin and the uninvolved skin were found, indicating that several
biological changes occur well before clinical changes become manifest.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26361329  [PubMed - in process]


30. Br J Cancer. 2015 Sep 15;113(6):902-13. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2015.255. Epub 2015 Sep 
8.

Impaired T-bet-pSTAT1a and perforin-mediated immune responses in the tumoral
region of lung adenocarcinoma.

Andreev K(1), Trufa ID(1,)(2), Siegemund R(1), Rieker R(3), Hartmann A(3),
Schmidt J(4), Sirbu H(2), Finotto S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pneumology, Friedrich-Alexander-University of
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen 91054, Germany. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery,
Friedrich-Alexander-University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen 91054, Germany.
(3)Institute of Pathology, Friedrich-Alexander-University of Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Erlangen 91054, Germany. (4)Institute of Anesthesiology,
Friedrich-Alexander-University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054, Germany.

BACKGROUND: In spite of modern therapies for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), 
prognosis for many patients is still poor and survival rates are low.
Immunotherapy is the possibility to improve the lung immune response surrounding 
the tumour. However, this approach requires detailed understanding of the local
immune-responses of NSCLC patients.
METHODS: We analysed samples from three different regions within the lungs of
NSCLC patients, whereas we distinguished between patients suffering from
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. Expression of type 1 T helper
(Th1)/type 1 cytotoxic (Tc1) factors was assessed by quantitative real-time PCR, 
western blot analyses or immunohistochemistry. Cytotoxic cell activity of CD8(+) 
T cells was determined via co-culture with autologous tumour cells and apoptosis 
assay.
RESULTS: We found decreased levels of the transcription factor T-box expressed in
T cells (T-bet or Tbx21) and of the downstream activated IFN-<U+03B3>-dependent pSTAT1a 
isoform in the lung tumour areas of patients with NSCLC as compared with
tumour-free control regions. In these patients, reduced T-bet and pSTAT1a levels 
were found associated with increased immunosuppressive markers like cytotoxic T
lymphocyte-associated protein 4, programmed cell death 1 and with a suppression
of the Th1 cell cytokine production and Tc1 cell activity.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings confirm a central role of T-bet in targeted
immunotherapy for patients with NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4578079 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26348446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Immunol. 2015 Sep 1;195(5):1933-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501209.

Age-Associated B Cells: A T-bet-Dependent Effector with Roles in Protective and
Pathogenic Immunity.

Rubtsova K(1), Rubtsov AV(2), Cancro MP(3), Marrack P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206;
Department of Biomedical Science, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206;
Department of Immunology and Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of
Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045;
rubtsovak@njhealth.org. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, National Jewish
Health, Denver, CO 80206; Department of Biomedical Science, National Jewish
Health, Denver, CO 80206; Department of Immunology and Microbiology, School of
Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO
80045; (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104; (4)Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206; Department of
Biomedical Science, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206; Department of
Immunology and Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver,
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045; Department of Medicine, School of
Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO
80045; and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045.

A newly discovered B cell subset, age-associated B cells, expresses the
transcription factor T-bet, has a unique surface phenotype, and accumulates
progressively with age. Moreover, B cells with these general features are
associated with viral infections and autoimmunity in both mice and humans. In
this article, we review current understanding of the characteristics, origins,
and functions of these cells. We also suggest that the protective versus
pathogenic actions of these cells reflect appropriate versus aberrant engagement 
of regulatory mechanisms that control the Ab responses to nucleic acid-containing
Ags.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4548292 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26297793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Aug 5. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.172. [Epub ahead of print]

No significant impact of IFN-<U+03B3> pathway gene variants on tuberculosis
susceptibility in a West African population.

Meyer CG(1), Intemann CD(1), Förster B(1), Owusu-Dabo E(2), Franke A(3),
Horstmann RD(1), Thye T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, Hamburg, Germany. (2)1] Kumasi Centre for Collaborative Research in
Tropical Medicine, Kumasi, Ghana [2] Department of Community Health, College of
Health Sciences, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi,
Ghana. (3)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts University
Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

The concept of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) having a central role in cell-mediated immune
defence to Mycobacterium tuberculosis has long been proposed. Observations made
through early candidate gene studies of constituents of the IFN-<U+03B3> pathway have
identified moderately associated variants associated with resistance or
susceptibility to tuberculosis (TB). By analysing 20 major genes whose proteins
contribute to IFN-<U+03B3> signalling we have assessed a large fraction of the
variability in genes that might contribute to susceptibility to TB. Genetic
variants were identified by sequencing the promoter regions and all exons of
IFNG, IFNGR1, IFNGR2, IRF1, IL12A, IL12B, IL12RB1, IL12RB2, IL23A, IL23R, IL27,
EBI3, IL27RA, IL6ST, SOCS1, STAT1, STAT4, JAK2, TYK2 and TBX21 in 69 DNA samples 
from Ghana. In addition, we screened all exons of IFNGR1 in a Ghanaian study
group comprising 1999 TB cases and 2589 controls by high-resolution melting point
analysis. The fine-mapping approach allows for a detailed screening of all
variants, common and rare. Statistical comparisons of cases and controls,
however, did not yield significant results after correction for multiple testing 
with any of the 246 variants selected for genotyping in this investigation.
Gene-wise haplotype tests and analysis of rare variants did not reveal any
significant association with susceptibility to TB in our investigation as well.
Although this analysis was applied on a plausible set of IFN-<U+03B3> pathway genes in
the largest African TB cohort available so far, the lack of significant results
challenges the view that genetic marker of the IFN-<U+03B3> pathway have an important
impact on susceptibility to TB.European Journal of Human Genetics advance online 
publication, 5 August 2015; doi:10.1038/ejhg.2015.172.

PMID: 26242990  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


33. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 31;10(7):e0134797. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134797.
eCollection 2015.

Shifted T Helper Cell Polarization in a Murine Staphylococcus aureus Mastitis
Model.

Zhao Y(1), Zhou M(1), Gao Y(1), Liu H(1), Yang W(1), Yue J(1), Chen D(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi
Province, People's Republic of China.

Mastitis, one of the most costly diseases in dairy ruminants, is an inflammation 
of the mammary gland caused by pathogenic infection. The mechanisms of adaptive
immunity against pathogens in mastitis have not been fully elucidated. To
investigate T helper cell-mediated adaptive immune responses, we established a
mastitis model by challenge with an inoculum of 4 × 106 colony-forming units of
Staphylococcus aureus in the mammary gland of lactating mice, followed by
quantification of bacterial burden and histological analysis. The development of 
mastitis was accompanied by a significant increase in both Th17 and Th1 cells in 
the mammary gland. Moreover, the relative expression of genes encoding cytokines 
and transcription factors involved in the differentiation and function of these T
helper cells, including Il17, Rorc, Tgfb, Il1b, Il23, Ifng, Tbx21, and Il12, was 
greatly elevated in the infected mammary gland. IL-17 is essential for neutrophil
recruitment to infected mammary gland via CXC chemokines, whereas the excessive
IL-17 production contributes to tissue damage in mastitis. In addition, a shift
in T helper cell polarization toward Th2 and Treg cells was observed 5 days
post-infection, and the mRNA expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokine Il10
was markedly increased at day 7 post-infection. These results indicate that
immune clearance of Staphylococcus aureus in mastitis is facilitated by the
enrichment of Th17, Th1 and Th2 cells in the mammary gland mediated by
pro-inflammatory cytokine production, which is tightly regulated by Treg cells
and the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10.

PMCID: PMC4521801
PMID: 26230498  [PubMed - in process]


34. J Immunol. 2015 Aug 15;195(4):1665-75. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500457. Epub 2015
Jul 15.

An Excess of the Proinflammatory Cytokines IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-12 Impairs the
Development of the Memory CD8+ T Cell Response to Chlamydia trachomatis.

Zhang X(1), Starnbach MN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115 starnbach@hms.harvard.edu.

The obligate intracellular bacterium Chlamydia trachomatis is the most common
cause of bacterial sexually transmitted disease in the United States and the
leading cause of preventable blindness worldwide. Transfer of cultured
Chlamydia-specific CD8(+) T cells or vaccination with recombinant virus
expressing an MHC I-restricted Chlamydia Ag confers protection, yet surprisingly 
a protective CD8(+) T cell response is not stimulated following natural
infection. In this study, we demonstrate that the presence of excess IL-12 and
IFN-<U+03B3> contributes to poor memory CD8(+) T cell development during C. trachomatis 
infection of mice. IL-12 is required for CD8(+) T cell expansion but drives
effector CD8(+) T cells into a short-lived fate, whereas IFN-<U+03B3> signaling impairs 
the development of effector memory cells. We show that transient blockade of
IL-12 and IFN-<U+03B3> during priming promotes the development of memory precursor
effector CD8(+) T cells and increases the number of memory T cells that
participate in the recall protection against subsequent infection. Overall, this 
study identifies key factors shaping memory development of Chlamydia-specific
CD8(+) T cells that will inform future vaccine development against this and other
pathogens.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4530050 [Available on 2016-08-15]
PMID: 26179901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 28;112(30):9394-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1511711112. Epub 2015 Jul 13.

Opposing roles of STAT1 and STAT3 in IL-21 function in CD4+ T cells.

Wan CK(1), Andraski AB(1), Spolski R(1), Li P(1), Kazemian M(1), Oh J(1), Samsel 
L(2), Swanson PA 2nd(3), McGavern DB(3), Sampaio EP(4), Freeman AF(4), Milner
JD(5), Holland SM(4), Leonard WJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Immunology Center, National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892-1674; (2)Flow Cytometry Core, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1674; (3)Viral Immunology and
Intravital Imaging Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1674; (4)Laboratory of 
Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1674; (5)Laboratory
of Allergic Diseases, National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1674. (6)Laboratory of
Molecular Immunology and Immunology Center, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1674;
wjl@helix.nih.gov.

IL-21 is a type I cytokine essential for immune cell differentiation and
function. Although IL-21 can activate several STAT family transcription factors, 
previous studies focused mainly on the role of STAT3 in IL-21 signaling. Here, we
investigated the role of STAT1 and show that STAT1 and STAT3 have at least
partially opposing roles in IL-21 signaling in CD4(+) T cells. IL-21 induced
STAT1 phosphorylation, and this was augmented in Stat3-deficient CD4(+) T cells. 
RNA-Seq analysis of CD4(+) T cells from Stat1- and Stat3-deficient mice revealed 
that both STAT1 and STAT3 are critical for IL-21-mediated gene regulation.
Expression of some genes, including Tbx21 and Ifng, was differentially regulated 
by STAT1 and STAT3. Moreover, opposing actions of STAT1 and STAT3 on IFN-<U+03B3>
expression in CD4(+) T cells were demonstrated in vivo during chronic lymphocytic
choriomeningitis infection. Finally, IL-21-mediated induction of STAT1
phosphorylation, as well as IFNG and TBX21 expression, were higher in CD4(+) T
cells from patients with autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome, which is caused
by STAT3 deficiency, as well as in cells from STAT1 gain-of-function patients.
These data indicate an interplay between STAT1 and STAT3 in fine-tuning IL-21
actions.

PMCID: PMC4522759
PMID: 26170288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Transl Med. 2015 Jul 14;13:225. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0583-0.

PARP inhibition by olaparib or gene knockout blocks asthma-like manifestation in 
mice by modulating CD4(+) T cell function.

Ghonim MA(1,)(2), Pyakurel K(3), Ibba SV(4), Al-Khami AA(5,)(6), Wang J(7),
Rodriguez P(8), Rady HF(9), El-Bahrawy AH(10), Lammi MR(11), Mansy MS(12),
Al-Ghareeb K(13), Ramsay A(14), Ochoa A(15), Naura AS(16,)(17), Boulares AH(18).

Author information: 
(1)The Stanley Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. 
mghoni@lsuhsc.edu. (2)Microbiology and Immunology Department, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt. mghoni@lsuhsc.edu. (3)The Stanley
Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. kpyaku@lsuhsc.edu.
(4)The Stanley Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. 
sibba@lsuhsc.edu. (5)The Stanley Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, 
LA, 70112, USA. aalkh@lsuhsc.edu. (6)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science,
Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt. aalkh@lsuhsc.edu. (7)The Stanley Scott Cancer
Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,
1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. jwang4@lsuhsc.edu. (8)The Stanley
Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.
prodri1@lsuhsc.edu. (9)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, USA.
hrady@lsuhsc.edu. (10)The Stanley Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, 
LA, 70112, USA. alipharma2006@yahoo.com. (11)Pulmonary and Critical Care Section,
School of Medicine, Louisiana State University, New Orleans, LA, USA.
mlammi@lsuhsc.edu. (12)Microbiology and Immunology Department, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Al-Azhar University, Cairo, Egypt. moselhysalah@gmail.com.
(13)Microbiology and Immunology Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Al-Azhar
University, Cairo, Egypt. kamelalghareeb2000@gmail.com. (14)Department of
Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, USA. aramsay@lsuhsc.edu. (15)The Stanley Scott 
Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. aochoa@lsuhsc.edu. (16)The 
Stanley Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.
anaura@pu.ac.in. (17)Department of Biochemistry, Panjab University, Chandigarh,
India. anaura@pu.ac.in. (18)The Stanley Scott Cancer Center, School of Medicine, 
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 1700 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, 
LA, 70112, USA. hboulr@lsuhsc.edu.

BACKGROUND: An important portion of asthmatics do not respond to current
therapies. Thus, the need for new therapeutic drugs is urgent. We have
demonstrated a critical role for PARP in experimental asthma. Olaparib, a PARP
inhibitor, was recently introduced in clinical trials against cancer. The
objective of the present study was to examine the efficacy of olaparib in
blocking established allergic airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness similar
to those observed in human asthma in animal models of the disease.
METHODS: We used ovalbumin (OVA)-based mouse models of asthma and primary CD4(+) 
T cells. C57BL/6J WT or PARP-1(-/-) mice were subjected to OVA sensitization
followed by a single or multiple challenges to aerosolized OVA or left
unchallenged. WT mice were administered, i.p., 1 mg/kg, 5 or 10 mg/kg of olaparib
or saline 30 min after each OVA challenge.
RESULTS: Administration of olaparib in mice 30 min post-challenge promoted a
robust reduction in airway eosinophilia, mucus production and hyperresponsiveness
even after repeated challenges with ovalbumin. The protective effects of olaparib
were linked to a suppression of Th2 cytokines eotaxin, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-13,
and M-CSF, and ovalbumin-specific IgE with an increase in the Th1 cytokine IFN-<U+03B3>.
These traits were associated with a decrease in splenic CD4(+) T cells and
concomitant increase in T-regulatory cells. The aforementioned traits conferred
by olaparib administration were consistent with those observed in OVA-challenged 
PARP-1(-/-) mice. Adoptive transfer of Th2-skewed OT-II-WT CD4(+) T cells
reversed the Th2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10, the chemokine GM-CSF, the Th1
cytokines IL-2 and IFN-<U+03B3>, and ovalbumin-specific IgE production in
ovalbumin-challenged PARP-1(-/-)mice suggesting a role for PARP-1 in CD4(+) T but
not B cells. In ex vivo studies, PARP inhibition by olaparib or PARP-1 gene
knockout markedly reduced CD3/CD28-stimulated gata-3 and il4 expression in
Th2-skewed CD4(+) T cells while causing a moderate elevation in t-bet and ifn-<U+03B3>
expression in Th1-skewed CD4(+) T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings show the potential of PARP inhibition as a viable
therapeutic strategy and olaparib as a likely candidate to be tested in human
asthma clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC4501284
PMID: 26169874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 19;10(6):e0129401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129401.
eCollection 2015.

scFv from Antibody That Mimics gp43 Modulates the Cellular and Humoral Immune
Responses during Experimental Paracoccidioidomycosis.

Jannuzzi GP(1), Tavares AH(2), Kaihami GH(3), de Almeida JR(1), de Almeida SR(1),
Ferreira KS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Análises Clínicas, Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas da
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Instituto de Biologia,
Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, Brazil. (3)Departamento de Química, Instituto
de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Departamento de
Ciências Biológicas do Instituto de Ciências Ambientais, Químicas e
Farmacêuticas, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Diadema, Brazil.

Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM), caused by Paracoccidioides species is a prevalent
systemic and progressive mycosis that occurs in Latin America. It is caused by
Paracoccidioides species. Immunization with dendritic cells transfected with a
plasmid encoding the scFv (pMAC/PS-scFv) that mimics the main antigen of P.
brasiliensis (gp43) confers protection in experimental PCM. DCs link innate and
adaptive immunity by recognizing invading pathogens and selecting the type of
effector T cell to mediate the immune response. Here, we showed that
DC-pMAC/PS-scFv induces the activation of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. Moreover, our
results demonstrated that BALB/c mice infected with P. brasiliensis and treated
with DC-pMAC/PS-scFv showed the induction of specific IgG production against gp43
and IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-12 and IL-4 cytokines. Analysis of regional lymph nodes revealed
increases in the expression of clec7a, myd88, tlr2, gata3 and tbx21, which are
involved in the immune response. Taken together, our results indicate that the
scFv modulates the humoral and cellular immune responses and presents epitopes to
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.

PMCID: PMC4474724
PMID: 26091522  [PubMed - in process]


38. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Jun 18;6:e1792. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.162.

T-cell exhaustion in the tumor microenvironment.

Jiang Y(1), Li Y(2), Zhu B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, China. (2)1] Institute of Cancer, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing, China [2] Center for Experimental Therapeutics and
Reperfusion Injury, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Harvard Institutes of
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA.

T-cell exhaustion was originally identified during chronic infection in mice, and
was subsequently observed in humans with cancer. The exhausted T cells in the
tumor microenvironment show overexpressed inhibitory receptors, decreased
effector cytokine production and cytolytic activity, leading to the failure of
cancer elimination. Restoring exhausted T cells represents an inspiring strategy 
for cancer treatment, which has yielded promising results and become a
significant breakthrough in the cancer immunotherapy. In this review, we overview
the updated understanding on the exhausted T cells in cancer and their potential 
regulatory mechanisms and discuss current therapeutic interventions targeting
exhausted T cells in clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC4669840
PMID: 26086965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 2;112(22):7061-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1415675112. Epub 2015 May 18.

Th17 cells give rise to Th1 cells that are required for the pathogenesis of
colitis.

Harbour SN(1), Maynard CL(1), Zindl CL(1), Schoeb TR(2), Weaver CT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology. (2)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294. (3)Department of Pathology cweaver@uab.edu.

Th17 cells reactive to the enteric microbiota are central to the pathogenesis of 
certain types of inflammatory bowel disease. However, Th17 cells display
substantial developmental plasticity, such that some progeny of Th17 cell
precursors retain a predominantly IL-17A(+) phenotype, whereas others extinguish 
IL-17 expression and acquire expression of IFN-<U+03B3>, giving rise to "Th1-like"
cells. It remains unclear what role these subsets play in inflammatory bowel
disease. Using a Th17 transfer model of colitis, we found that IFN-<U+03B3>-deficient
Th17 cells retained an IL-17A(+) phenotype and were unable to induce colitis in
recipients. Development of disease required the transition of a subset of Th17
precursors to Th1-like cells and was contingent on the expression of both Stat4
and T-bet, but not the IL-12 or IFN-<U+03B3> receptors. Moreover, Th17 cells could
provide "help" for the development of pathogenic Th1 cells from naïve precursors.
These results indicate that Th17 cells are potent mediators of colitis
pathogenesis by dual mechanisms: by directly transitioning to Th1-like cells and 
by supporting the development of classic Th1 cells.

PMCID: PMC4460486
PMID: 26038559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Zhongguo Ying Yong Sheng Li Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Nov;30(6):567-76.

A dysfunction of CD4+ T lymphocytes in peripheral immune system of Parkinson's
disease model mice.

Huang Y, Liu Z, Wang XQ, Qiu YH, Peng YP.

OBJECTIVE: Parkinson's disease (PD), a neurodegenerative disorder, has been
reported to be associated with brain neuroinflammation in its pathogenesis.
Herein, changes in peripheral immune system were determined to better understand 
PD pathogenesis and provide possible target for treatment of PD through
improvement of immune disorder.
METHODS: 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) was
intraperitoneally injected into mice to prepare PD model. Expression levels of
pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines and transcription factors of
CD4+ T lymphocyte subsets in spleen and mesenteric lymph nodes and concentrations
of the cytokines in serum were examined on day 7 after MPTP injection.
Percentages of CD4+ T lymphocyte subsets were measured by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: MPTP induced PD-like changes such as motor and behavioral deficits and
nigrostriatal impairment. Expression levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokines
including interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>, interleukin (IL)-2, IL-17 and IL-22, in spleen and 
mesenteric lymph nodes were upregulated and their concentrations in serum were
elevated in PD progression. But, the concentrations of the anti-inflammatory
cytokines including IL-4, IL-10 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß were not
altered in the two lymphoid tissues or serum of PD mice. In addition, expression 
of T-box in T cells (T-bet), the specific transcription factor of helper T (Th) 1
cells, was downregulated, but expression of transcription factor forkhead box p3 
(Foxp3), the transcription factor of regulatory T (Treg) cells, was upregulated. 
In support of the results, the numbers of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing CD4+ cells (Th1 cells) 
were reduced but CD4+CD25+ cells (Treg cells) were elevated in both the lymphoid 
tissues of PD mice.
CONCLUSION: PD has a dysfunction of peripheral immune system. It manifests
enhancement of proinflammatory response and CD4+ T cell differentiation bias
towards Treg cells away from Th1 cells.

PMID: 26016368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2015 May 19;10(5):e0127352. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127352.
eCollection 2015.

S100A9: A Potential Biomarker for the Progression of Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver
Disease and the Diagnosis of Non-Alcoholic Steatohepatitis.

Liu X(1), Wang Y(1), Ming Y(1), Song Y(2), Zhang J(1), Chen X(1), Zeng M(1), Mao 
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Renji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease,
Shanghai, China. (2)Department Biostatistics, Institute of Medical Sciences,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver (NAFL) has the potential to progress to non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH) or to promote type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). However,
NASH and T2DM do not always develop coordinately. Additionally, there are no
definite noninvasive methods for NASH diagnosis currently. We established rat
models of NAFL, NASH, and NAFL + T2DM to recapitulate different phenotypes
associated with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and its progression.
Histologic features of rat livers were scored according to criteria established
by the Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Clinical Research Network. Microarray was
performed to assess gene expression changes in rat livers. We find that gene
expression of s100a9 was higher in NAFL group compared with control, and was
increased in NASH groups and decreased in NAFL + T2DM group compared with NAFL.
In contrast, srebf1, tbx21, and gimap4 only showed limited discriminating
abilities in different groups. There is a significant positive correlation
between serum levels of S100A9 and NAFLD Activity Score (NAS), the severity of
hepatic steatosis, and lobular inflammation (r = 0.80, 0.64 and 0.86, P < 0.001).
These findings suggest that S100A9 may be extremely useful in the diagnosis of
NASH (AUROC: 0.947, CI: 0.845-1.049). Additionally, serum S100A9 levels displayed
a strong correlation with ALT, AST and TBil (r = 0.81, 0.89 and 0.91, P < 0.001) 
but a weak correlation with FBG, HOMA-IR, TG, and TC (r = -0.41, -0.40, 0.47 and 
0.49, P < 0.05).CONCLUSIONS: The results we provide here suggest that S100A9 may 
be useful as a biomarker for the hepatic and metabolic progression of NAFLD and
the non-invasive diagnosis of NASH.

PMCID: PMC4437778
PMID: 25993652  [PubMed - in process]


42. J Orthop Res. 2015 Oct;33(10):1412-23. doi: 10.1002/jor.22944. Epub 2015 Jun 19.

Genetic loci that regulate ectopic calcification in response to knee trauma in
LG/J by SM/J advanced intercross mice.

Rai MF(1), Schmidt EJ(1), Hashimoto S(1), Cheverud JM(2), Sandell LJ(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Musculoskeletal Research Center, Washington
University School of Medicine at Barnes-Jewish Hospital, 425 S. Euclid Avenue MS 
8233, St. Louis, Missouri, 63110. (2)Department of Biology, Loyola University,
1050 W. Sheridan Road, Chicago, Illinois, 60660. (3)Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis at Engineering and Applied
Sciences, Whitaker Hall, MS 1097, St. Louis, MO, 63130. (4)Department of Cell
Biology and Physiology, Washington University School, of Medicine at
Barnes-Jewish Hospital, 425 S. Euclid Avenue MS 8233, St. Louis, Missouri, 63110.

This study reports on genetic susceptibility to ectopic calcification in the LG/J
and SM/J advanced intercross mice. Using 347 mice in 98 full-sibships,
destabilization of medial meniscus (DMM) was performed to induce joint injury. We
found that joint destabilization instigated ectopic calcifications as detected
and quantified by micro-CT. We performed quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis 
to map ectopic calcification phenotypes to discrete genomic locations. To
validate the functional significance of the selected QTL candidate genes, we
compared mRNA expression between parental LG/J and SM/J inbred strains. Overall, 
we detected 20 QTLs affecting synovial and meniscus calcification phenotypes with
11 QTLs linked to synovial calcification. Functional and bioinformatic analyses
of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) identified functional classifications
relevant to angiogenesis (Myo1e, Kif26b, Nprl3, Stab2, Fam105b), bone
metabolism/calcification (Tle3, Tgfb2, Lipc, Nfe2l1, Ank, Fam105b), arthritis
(Stab2, Tbx21, Map4k4, Hoxb9, Larp6, Col1a2, Adam10, Timp3, Nfe2l1, Trpm3), and
ankylosing-spondylitis (Ank, Pon1, Il1r2, Tbkbp1) indicating that ectopic
calcification involves multiple mechanisms. Furthermore, the expression of 11 out
of 78 candidate genes was significantly different between LG/J and SM/J.
Correlation analysis showed that Aff3, Fam81a, Syn3, and Ank were correlated with
synovial calcification. Taken together, our findings of multiple genetic loci
suggest the involvement of multiple genes contributing to ectopic calcification.

© 2015 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25989359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2014 Nov;30(11):1733-41.

[Construction and identification of luciferase reporter gene containing mouse
T-bet promoter].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu H, Zhou S.

The aim of this study is to clone the mouse T-bet promoter and enhancer,
construct and identify the firefly luciferase reporter gene plasmid
pGL4.10-TBX21pr-CNS for T-bet transcription regulation study and its function in 
signaling of multiple sclerosis. The promoter and CNS of T-bet were predicted by 
bioinformatics assay. The predicted fragment of mouse T-bet promoter plus CNS was
amplified by PCR and cloned into pGL4.10. The recombinant plasmid
pGL4.10-TBX21pr-CNS was transferred into Escherichia coli DH5a. The positive
clone was identified by double digestion with Kpn I and Sfi I and DNA sequencing.
Finally, pGL4.10-TBX21pr-CNS was cotransfected with pRL-TK into 293T cells and
Jurkat cells, pRL-TK and pGL4.10 as a control. The luciferase activity in 293T
cells (P = 0.012 2) and Jurkat cells (P = 0.002 2) was higher than that of the
control group. A fragment of 1 028 bp mouse T-bet promoter plus 1 308 bp CNS was 
successfully cloned and the firefly luciferase reporter gene plasmid
pGL4.10-TBX21pr-CNS was constructed. In 293T cells and Jurkat cells,
pGL4.10-TBX21pr-CNS has the promoter functions. This work offers a basic material
for the research of T-bet transcription.

PMID: 25985524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Immunol. 2015 Jun 15;194(12):5644-53. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401942. Epub 2015 
May 13.

CD155 (PVR/Necl5) mediates a costimulatory signal in CD4+ T cells and regulates
allergic inflammation.

Yamashita-Kanemaru Y(1), Takahashi Y(1), Wang Y(1), Tahara-Hanaoka S(2), Honda
S(1), Bernhardt G(3), Shibuya A(4), Shibuya K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki 
305-8575, Japan; (2)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan; Life Science Center of Tsukuba Advanced
Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan; (3)Institute
of Immunology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; and.
(4)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki 
305-8575, Japan; Life Science Center of Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance,
University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan; Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, University of
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan kazukos@md.tsukuba.ac.jp
ashibuya@md.tsukuba.ac.jp. (5)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan; kazukos@md.tsukuba.ac.jp
ashibuya@md.tsukuba.ac.jp.

Although Th1 and Th2 cells are known to be involved in allergic inflammatory
diseases, the molecular mechanisms underlying their differentiation are
incompletely understood. In this study, we identified CD155 as a costimulatory
molecule on CD4(+) T cells. Importantly, CD155-mediated signaling induced Th1
development in both humans and mice, as evidenced by production of IFN-<U+03B3> and
upregulation of Tbx21 transcription; these effects were independent of IL-12 but 
dependent on NF-<U+03BA>B-induced autocrine IFN-<U+03B3> that triggered positive feedback via
STAT1 activation. Mice genetically deficient in CD155 or treated with anti-CD155 
Ab exhibited attenuated Th1-type contact hypersensitivity. Thus, CD155 plays an
important regulatory role in helper T cell differentiation and allergic diseases.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25972481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Immunol. 2015 Jun 15;194(12):5654-62. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402837. Epub 2015 
May 13.

The Notch signaling pathway controls short-lived effector CD8+ T cell
differentiation but is dispensable for memory generation.

Mathieu M(1), Duval F(1), Daudelin JF(2), Labrecque N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center, Montreal, Quebec H1T 2M4,
Canada; Department of Microbiology, Infectiology and Immunology, University of
Montreal, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1J4, Canada; and. (2)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital
Research Center, Montreal, Quebec H1T 2M4, Canada; (3)Maisonneuve-Rosemont
Hospital Research Center, Montreal, Quebec H1T 2M4, Canada; Department of
Microbiology, Infectiology and Immunology, University of Montreal, Montreal,
Quebec H3T 1J4, Canada; and Department of Medicine, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec H3T 1J4, Canada nathalie.labrecque@umontreal.ca.

Following an infection, naive CD8(+) T cells expand and differentiate into two
main populations of effectors: short-lived effector cells (SLECs) and memory
precursor effector cells (MPECs). There is limited understanding of the molecular
mechanism and cellular processes governing this cell fate. Notch is a key
regulator of cell fate decision relevant in many immunological pathways. In this 
study, we add to the role of Notch in cell fate decision and demonstrate that the
Notch signaling pathway controls the MPEC/SLEC differentiation choice following
both Listeria infection and dendritic cell immunization of mice. Although fewer
SLECs were generated, Notch deficiency did not alter the rate of memory CD8(+) T 
cell generation. Moreover, we reveal that the Notch signaling pathway plays a
context-dependent role for optimal cytokine production by effector CD8(+) T
cells. Together, our results unravel critical functions for the Notch signaling
pathway during effector CD8(+) T cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25972473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Immunol Res. 2015 Jul;62(3):280-91. doi: 10.1007/s12026-015-8659-8.

Induction of a Th1 immune response and suppression of IgE via immunotherapy with 
a recombinant hybrid molecule encapsulated in liposome-protamine-DNA
nanoparticles in a model of experimental allergy.

Nouri HR(1), Varasteh A, Jaafari MR, Davies JM, Sankian M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Babol University of Medical
Sciences, Babol, Iran, nourihr851@gmail.com.

Liposome-protamine-DNA nanoparticles (LPD) are safe, effective, and non-toxic
adjuvants that induce Th1-like immune responses. We hypothesized that
encapsulation of allergens into liposomes could be an appropriate option for
immunotherapy. The present study evaluated the immunotherapeutic potential of a
recombinant hybrid molecule (rHM) encapsulated in LPD nanoparticles in a murine
model of Chenopodium album allergy. BALB/c mice were sensitized with the allergen
in alum, and the immunotherapy procedure was performed by subcutaneous injections
of LPD-rHM, rHM, or empty LPD at weekly intervals. Sensitized mice developed a
Th2-biased immune response characterized by strong specific IgG1 and IgE
production, IL-4, and the transcription factor GATA3 in spleen cell cultures.
Treatment with the LPD-rHM resulted in a reduction in IgE and a marked increase
in IgG2a. The LPD-rHM induced allergen-specific responses with relatively high
interferon-gamma production, as well as expression of the transcription factor
T-bet in stimulated splenocytes. In addition, lymphoproliferative responses were 
higher in the LPD-rHM-treated mice than in the other groups. Removal of the
nanoparticles from the rHM resulted in a decrease in the allergen's
immunogenicity. These results indicate that the rHM complexed with LPD
nanoparticles has a marked suppressive effect on the allergic response and caused
a shift toward a Th1 pathway.

PMID: 25957889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Gastroenterology. 2015 Aug;149(2):456-67.e15. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.04.017. 
Epub 2015 Apr 25.

Interleukin 6 Increases Production of Cytokines by Colonic Innate Lymphoid Cells 
in Mice and Patients With Chronic Intestinal Inflammation.

Powell N(1), Lo JW(2), Biancheri P(3), Vossenkämper A(3), Pantazi E(2), Walker
AW(4), Stolarczyk E(5), Ammoscato F(3), Goldberg R(6), Scott P(7), Canavan JB(2),
Perucha E(2), Garrido-Mesa N(2), Irving PM(8), Sanderson JD(8), Hayee B(9),
Howard JK(5), Parkhill J(7), MacDonald TT(3), Lord GM(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Immunobiology, Division of Transplantation
Immunology and Mucosal Biology, King's College London, London, United Kingdom;
Gastroenterology Department, Guy's and St Thomas' National Health Service
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom; National Institute for Health Research 
Biomedical Research Centre, Guy's and St Thomas' National Health Service
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Experimental
Immunobiology, Division of Transplantation Immunology and Mucosal Biology, King's
College London, London, United Kingdom; National Institute for Health Research
Biomedical Research Centre, Guy's and St Thomas' National Health Service
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. (3)Centre for Immunology and Infectious
Disease, Blizard Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine and
Dentistry, London, United Kingdom. (4)Pathogen Genomics Group, Wellcome Trust
Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom;
Microbiology Group, Rowett Institute of Nutrition and Health, University of
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom. (5)Department of Experimental Immunobiology, 
Division of Transplantation Immunology and Mucosal Biology, King's College
London, London, United Kingdom; National Institute for Health Research Biomedical
Research Centre, Guy's and St Thomas' National Health Service Foundation Trust,
London, United Kingdom; Division of Diabetes and Nutritional Sciences, King's
College London, London, United Kingdom. (6)Department of Experimental
Immunobiology, Division of Transplantation Immunology and Mucosal Biology, King's
College London, London, United Kingdom; Gastroenterology Department, Guy's and St
Thomas' National Health Service Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(7)Pathogen Genomics Group, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust
Genome Campus, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom. (8)Gastroenterology Department,
Guy's and St Thomas' National Health Service Foundation Trust, London, United
Kingdom. (9)Gastroenterology Department, Kings College Hospital, London, United
Kingdom. (10)Department of Experimental Immunobiology, Division of
Transplantation Immunology and Mucosal Biology, King's College London, London,
United Kingdom; National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research
Centre, Guy's and St Thomas' National Health Service Foundation Trust, London,
United Kingdom. Electronic address: graham.lord@kcl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are a heterogeneous group of
mucosal inflammatory cells that participate in chronic intestinal inflammation.
We investigated the role of interleukin 6 (IL6) in inducing activation of ILCs in
mice and in human beings with chronic intestinal inflammation.
METHODS: ILCs were isolated from colons of Tbx21(-/-) × Rag2(-/-) mice (TRUC),
which develop colitis; patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD); and
patients without colon inflammation (controls). ILCs were characterized by flow
cytometry; cytokine production was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
and cytokine bead arrays. Mice were given intraperitoneal injections of depleting
(CD4, CD90), neutralizing (IL6), or control antibodies. Isolated colon tissues
were analyzed by histology, explant organ culture, and cell culture. Bacterial
DNA was extracted from mouse fecal samples to assess the intestinal microbiota.
RESULTS: IL17A- and IL22-producing, natural cytotoxicity receptor-negative, ILC3 
were the major subset of ILCs detected in colons of TRUC mice. Combinations of
IL23 and IL1a induced production of cytokines by these cells, which increased
further after administration of IL6. Antibodies against IL6 reduced colitis in
TRUC mice without significantly affecting the structure of their intestinal
microbiota. Addition of IL6 increased production of IL17A, IL22, and interferon-<U+03B3>
by human intestinal CD3-negative, IL7-receptor-positive cells, in a
dose-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: IL6 contributes to activation of colonic natural cytotoxicity
receptor-negative, CD4-negative, ILC3s in mice with chronic intestinal
inflammation (TRUC mice) by increasing IL23- and IL1a-induced production of IL17A
and IL22. This pathway might be targeted to treat patients with IBD because IL6, 
which is highly produced in colonic tissue by some IBD patients, also increased
the production of IL17A, IL22, and interferon-<U+03B3> by cultured human colon
CD3-negative, IL7-receptor-positive cells.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4539618
PMID: 25917784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Am J Pathol. 2015 May;185(5):1487-99. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.01.025.

The PTEN-AKT-mTOR/RICTOR Pathway in Nasal Natural Killer Cell Lymphoma Is
Activated by miR-494-3p via PTEN But Inhibited by miR-142-3p via RICTOR.

Chen HH(1), Huang WT(1), Yang LW(1), Lin CW(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Tissue Bank, Center for Genomic Medicine, and the Graduate Institute of
Pathology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)The Tissue Bank, Center for Genomic Medicine, and the Graduate Institute of
Pathology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
Electronic address: chungwulin@ntu.edu.tw.

Nasal natural killer (NK) cell lymphoma (NNL) is an Epstein-Barr virus-associated
lymphoma of cytotoxic NK cell origin. The Epstein-Barr virus-encoded
miR-BART20-5p inhibits T-bet (TBX21), the master transcription factor of
cytotoxic NK cells. To further explore the roles of miRNAs in NNLs, we measured
the miRNA expression profiles of 36 NNLs. miR-21, miR-142-3p, miR-126, miR-451,
and miR-494-3p were the top five miRNAs with the highest expression levels. By
using pathway analysis, we identified associations between all of the five miRNAs
with the PTEN-AKT-mTOR pathway, in which PTEN suppresses the oncogenic AKT, and
mTOR mediates the oncogenic effects of AKT. YT and NK92 cells derived from NK
cell lymphomas were used. miR-494-3p inhibited PTEN with secondary activation of 
AKT in NK92 cells, and miR-142-3p inhibited RICTOR, a key component of the mTOR
complex, with secondary suppression of AKT in YT cells. Significantly, T-bet
inhibited the PTEN-AKT-mTOR/RICTOR pathway through induction of PTEN and
suppression of RICTOR. Therefore, a molecular circuit of T-bet, PTEN, AKT, and
RICTOR is regulated by miR-BART20-5p, miR-494-3p, and miR-142-3p. This circuit is
involved in the pathogenesis of NNL. Hence, antagomirs to miR-BART20-5p or
miR-494-3p, miR-142-3p mimics, or AKT inhibitors may be useful in NNL therapy.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25907832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 20;10(3):e0122872. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122872.
eCollection 2015.

Experimental hyperglycemia induces an increase of monocyte and T-lymphocyte
content in adipose tissue of healthy obese women.

Tencerová M(1), Kracmerová J(1), Krauzová E(1), Maliová L(1), Kovácová Z(1),
Wedellová Z(2), iklová M(1), tich V(1), Rossmeislová L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Franco-Czech Laboratory for Clinical Research on Obesity, Third Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague 10, CZ-100 00 Czech Republic;
Department of Sport Medicine, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague, Prague, CZ-100 00 Czech Republic. (2)Franco-Czech Laboratory for Clinical
Research on Obesity, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague,
Prague 10, CZ-100 00 Czech Republic; Department of Sport Medicine, Third Faculty 
of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, CZ-100 00 Czech Republic;
Second Internal Medicine Department, Vinohrady Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech
Republic.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Hyperglycemia represents one of possible mediators for
activation of immune system and may contribute to worsening of inflammatory state
associated with obesity. The aim of our study was to investigate the effect of a 
short-term hyperglycemia (HG) on the phenotype and relative content of immune
cells in circulation and subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue (SAAT) in obese
women without metabolic complications.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: Three hour HG clamp with infusion of octreotide and control
investigations with infusion of octreotide or saline were performed in three
groups of obese women (Group1: HG, Group 2: Octreotide, Group 3: Saline, n=10 per
group). Before and at the end of the interventions, samples of SAAT and blood
were obtained. The relative content of immune cells in blood and SAAT was
determined by flow cytometry. Gene expression analysis of immunity-related
markers in SAAT was performed by quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: In blood, no changes in analysed immune cell population were observed in
response to HG. In SAAT, HG induced an increase in the content of CD206 negative 
monocytes/macrophages (p<0.05) and T lymphocytes (both T helper and T cytotoxic
lymphocytes, p<0.01). Further, HG promoted an increase of mRNA levels of immune
response markers (CCL2, TLR4, TNFa) and lymphocyte markers (CD3g, CD4, CD8a,
TBX21, GATA3, FoxP3) in SAAT (p<0.05 and 0.01). Under both control infusions,
none of these changes were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute HG significantly increased the content of monocytes and
lymphocytes in SAAT of healthy obese women. This result suggests that the
short-term HG can modulate an immune status of AT in obese subjects.

PMCID: PMC4403863
PMID: 25894202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Cancer. 2015 Mar 31;14:71. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0350-0.

Correlations between immune response and vascularization qRT-PCR gene expression 
clusters in squamous cervical cancer.

Punt S(1), Houwing-Duistermaat JJ(2), Schulkens IA(3), Thijssen VL(4), Osse
EM(5), de Kroon CD(6), Griffioen AW(7), Fleuren GJ(8), Gorter A(9), Jordanova
ES(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2,
2333 ZA, Leiden, The Netherlands. B.S.Punt@lumc.nl. (2)Department of Medical
Statistics and Bioinformatics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. J.J.Houwing@lumc.nl. (3)Angiogenesis Laboratory, Department of
Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan 1118, 1081HV,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. I.Schulkens@vumc.nl. (4)Angiogenesis Laboratory,
Department of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan 1118, 
1081HV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. V.Thijssen@vumc.nl. (5)Department of
Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA, Leiden, The
Netherlands. E.M.Osse@lumc.nl. (6)Department of Gynaecology, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. C.D.de_Kroon@lumc.nl. (7)Angiogenesis
Laboratory, Department of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, De
Boelelaan 1118, 1081HV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. A.Griffioen@vumc.nl.
(8)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2,
2333 ZA, Leiden, The Netherlands. G.J.Fleuren@lumc.nl. (9)Department of
Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA, Leiden, The
Netherlands. A.Gorter@lumc.nl. (10)Department of Pathology, Leiden University
Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA, Leiden, The Netherlands.
E.S.Jordanova@lumc.nl. (11)Center for Gynecological Oncology Amsterdam, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. E.S.Jordanova@lumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: The tumour microenvironment comprises a network of immune response
and vascularization factors. From this network, we identified immunological and
vascularization gene expression clusters and the correlations between the
clusters. We subsequently determined which factors were correlated with patient
survival in cervical carcinoma.
METHODS: The expression of 42 genes was investigated in 52 fresh frozen squamous 
cervical cancer samples by qRT-PCR. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis 
and mixed-model analyses were performed to identify gene expression clusters.
Correlations and survival analyses were further studied at expression cluster and
single gene level.
RESULTS: We identified four immune response clusters: 'T cells'
(CD3E/CD8A/TBX21/IFNG/FOXP3/IDO1), 'Macrophages' (CD4/CD14/CD163), 'Th2'
(IL4/IL5/IL13/IL12) and 'Inflammation' (IL6/IL1B/IL8/IL23/IL10/ARG1) and two
vascularization clusters: 'Angiogenesis' (VEGFA/FLT1/ANGPT2/ PGF/ICAM1) and
'Vessel maturation' (PECAM1/VCAM1/ANGPT1/SELE/KDR/LGALS9). The 'T cells' module
was correlated with all modules except for 'Inflammation', while 'Inflammation'
was most significantly correlated with 'Angiogenesis' (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). High
expression of the 'T cells' cluster was correlated with earlier TNM stage
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007). High CD3E expression was correlated with improved disease-specific
survival (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.022), while high VEGFA expression was correlated with poor
disease-specific survival (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.032). Independent predictors of poor
disease-specific survival were IL6 (hazard ratio<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.3, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.011) and a high
IL6/IL17 ratio combined with low IL5 expression (hazard ratio<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.2, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.010).
CONCLUSIONS: 'Inflammation' marker IL6, especially in combination with low levels
of IL5 and IL17, was correlated with poor survival. This suggests that IL6
promotes tumour growth, which may be suppressed by a Th17 and Th2 response.
Measuring IL6, IL5 and IL17 expression may improve the accuracy of predicting
prognosis in cervical cancer.

PMCID: PMC4392729
PMID: 25889974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Sci Rep. 2015 Apr 15;5:9511. doi: 10.1038/srep09511.

Copy number variants and genetic polymorphisms in TBX21, GATA3, Rorc, Foxp3 and
susceptibility to Behcet's disease and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome.

Liao D(1), Hou S(1), Zhang J(1), Fang J(1), Liu Y(1), Bai L(1), Cao Q(1),
Kijlstra A(2), Yang P(1).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing, China.
(2)University Eye Clinic Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

This study aimed to investigate the role of genetic variants including single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variants (CNVs) of TBX21, GATA3, 
Rorc and Foxp3 genes in Behcet's disease (BD) and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH)
syndrome in a Chinese Han population. Genotyping of 25 SNPs was performed by
iPLEX system (Sequenom) or polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). TaqMan real time PCR was used to assess CNVs. The
expression of Rorc and Foxp3 were examined by real-time PCR and cytokine
production was measured by ELISA. High Rorc CNV was associated with the
susceptibility to BD (P = 8.99 × 10(-8), OR = 3.0), and low Foxp3 CNV predisposed
to BD in female patients (P = 1.92 × 10(-5), OR = 3.1). CNVs for the investigated
genes were not altered in VKH syndrome. Further functional studies demonstrated
that the relative mRNA expression levels of Rorc were increased in individuals
with high Rorc copy number, but not for Foxp3. Increased production of IL-1ß and 
IL-6 was found in individuals carrying a high CNV of Rorc. Our study showed that 
high CNVs of Rorc and low CNVs of Foxp3 confer risk for BD but not for VKH
syndrome. The tested 25 SNPs in TBX21, GATA3, Rorc and Foxp3 did not associate
with BD and VKH syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4397537
PMID: 25873156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Immunity. 2015 Apr 21;42(4):613-26. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.03.005. Epub 2015 
Apr 7.

The methylcytosine dioxygenase Tet2 promotes DNA demethylation and activation of 
cytokine gene expression in T cells.

Ichiyama K(1), Chen T(2), Wang X(3), Yan X(4), Kim BS(5), Tanaka S(6),
Ndiaye-Lobry D(7), Deng Y(2), Zou Y(2), Zheng P(1), Tian Q(4), Aifantis I(7), Wei
L(8), Dong C(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer and Immunology Research, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20010, USA. (2)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510275, China. (3)Institute for Immunology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China. (4)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 
98109, USA. (5)Department of Immunology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
77054, USA. (6)Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka
565-0871, Japan. (7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Pathology, 
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. (8)State Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China.
Electronic address: weil9@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (9)Institute for Immunology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China. Electronic address: chendong@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    Immunity. 2015 Jun 16;42(6):1214.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2015 Apr 21;42(4):593-5.

Epigenetic regulation of lineage-specific genes is important for the
differentiation and function of T cells. Ten-eleven translocation (Tet) proteins 
catalyze 5-methylcytosine (5 mC) conversion to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5 hmC) to
mediate DNA demethylation. However, the roles of Tet proteins in the immune
response are unknown. Here, we characterized the genome-wide distribution of 5
hmC in CD4(+) T cells and found that 5 hmC marks putative regulatory elements in 
signature genes associated with effector cell differentiation. Moreover, Tet2
protein was recruited to 5 hmC-containing regions, dependent on lineage-specific 
transcription factors. Deletion of Tet2 in T cells decreased their cytokine
expression, associated with reduced p300 recruitment. In vivo, Tet2 plays a
critical role in the control of cytokine gene expression in autoimmune disease.
Collectively, our findings suggest that Tet2 promotes DNA demethylation and
activation of cytokine gene expression in T cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25862091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Virulence. 2015;6(3):293-304. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2015.1029828.

TBX21-1993T/C (rs4794067) polymorphism is associated with increased risk of
chronic periodontitis and increased T-bet expression in periodontal lesions, but 
does not significantly impact the IFN-g transcriptional level or the pattern of
periodontophatic bacterial infection.

Cavalla F(1), Biguetti CC, Colavite PM, Silveira EV, Martins W Jr, Letra A,
Trombone AP, Silva RM, Garlet GP.

Author information: 
(1)a Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas; Faculdade de Odontologia de Bauru
Universidade de São Paulo (FOB/USP) ; Bauru , Brazil.

Th1-polarized host response, mediated by IFN-<U+03B3>, has been associated with
increased severity of periodontal disease as well as control of periodontal
infection. The functional polymorphism TBX21-1993T/C (rs4794067) increases the
transcriptional activity of the TBX21 gene (essential for Th1 polarization)
resulting in a predisposition to a Th-1 biased immune response. Thus, we
conducted a case-control study, including a population of healthy controls (H, n 
= 218), chronic periodontitis (CP, n = 197), and chronic gingivitis patients (CG,
n = 193), to investigate if genetic variations in TBX21 could impact the
development of Th1 responses, and consequently influence the pattern of bacterial
infection and periodontitis outcome. We observed that the polymorphic allele T
was significantly enriched in the CP patients compared to CG subjects, while the 
H controls demonstrated and intermediate genotype. Also, investigating the
putative functionality TBX21-1993T/C in the modulation of local response, we
observed that the transcripts levels of T-bet, but not of IFN-<U+03B3>, were upregulated
in homozygote and heterozygote polymorphic subjects. In addition, TBX21-1993T/C
did not influence the pattern of bacterial infection or the clinical parameters
of disease severity, being the presence/absence of red complex bacteria the main 
factor associated with the disease status and the subrogate variable probing
depth (PD) in the logistic regression analysis.

PMCID: PMC4601384
PMID: 25832120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):4056-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1418549112. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

T-bet- and STAT4-dependent IL-33 receptor expression directly promotes antiviral 
Th1 cell responses.

Baumann C(1), Bonilla WV(2), Fröhlich A(1), Helmstetter C(1), Peine M(1), Hegazy 
AN(3), Pinschewer DD(4), Löhning M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany; German Rheumatism
Research Center Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany; (2)Division of Experimental
Virology, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland;
and. (3)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical
Medicine, Experimental Medicine Division, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of 
Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, United Kingdom. (4)Division of Experimental Virology,
Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland; and
daniel.pinschewer@gmx.ch loehning@drfz.de. (5)Experimental Immunology, Department
of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
10117 Berlin, Germany; German Rheumatism Research Center Berlin, 10117 Berlin,
Germany; daniel.pinschewer@gmx.ch loehning@drfz.de.

During infection, the release of damage-associated molecular patterns, so-called 
"alarmins," orchestrates the immune response. The alarmin IL-33 plays a role in a
wide range of pathologies. Upon release, IL-33 signals through its receptor ST2, 
which reportedly is expressed only on CD4(+) T cells of the Th2 and regulatory
subsets. Here we show that Th1 effector cells also express ST2 upon
differentiation in vitro and in vivo during lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
(LCMV) infection. The expression of ST2 on Th1 cells was transient, in contrast
to constitutive ST2 expression on Th2 cells, and marked highly activated effector
cells. ST2 expression on virus-specific Th1 cells depended on the Th1-associated 
transcription factors T-bet and STAT4. ST2 deficiency resulted in a
T-cell-intrinsic impairment of LCMV-specific Th1 effector responses in both mixed
bone marrow-chimeric mice and adoptive cell transfer experiments. ST2-deficient
virus-specific CD4(+) T cells showed impaired expansion, Th1 effector
differentiation, and antiviral cytokine production. Consequently, these cells
mediated little virus-induced immunopathology. Thus, IL-33 acts as a critical and
direct cofactor to drive antiviral Th1 effector cell activation, with
implications for vaccination strategies and immunotherapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC4386370
PMID: 25829541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Jun;45(6):1794-807. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445209. Epub 2015 Apr
27.

Activated NKT cells imprint NK-cell differentiation, functionality and education.

Riese P(1), Trittel S(1,)(2), May T(3), Cicin-Sain L(2), Chambers BJ(4), Guzmán
CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vaccinology and Applied Microbiology, Helmholtz Centre for
Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany. (2)Junior Research Group Immune Aging 
and Chronic Infections, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig,
Germany. (3)Model Systems for Infection and Immunity, Helmholtz Centre for
Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany. (4)Center for Infectious Medicine,
Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Karolinska University Hospital
Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

NK cells represent a vital component of the innate immune system. The recent
discoveries demonstrating that the functionality of NK cells depends on their
differentiation and education status underscore their potential as targets for
immune intervention. However, to exploit their full potential, a detailed
understanding of the cellular interactions involved in these processes is
required. In this regard, the cross-talk between NKT cells and NK cells needs to 
be better understood. Our results provide strong evidence for NKT cell-induced
effects on key biological features of NK cells. NKT-cell activation results in
the generation of highly active CD27(high) NK cells with improved functionality. 
In this context, degranulation activity and IFN<U+03B3> production were mainly detected 
in the educated subset. In a mCMV infection model, we also demonstrated that
NKT-cell stimulation induced the generation of highly functional educated and
uneducated NK cells, crucial players in viral control. Thus, our findings reveal 
new fundamental aspects of the NKT-NK cell axis that provide important hints for 
the manipulation of NK cells in clinical settings.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25808315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Immunol. 2015 Apr 15;194(8):3784-97. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402960. Epub 2015
Mar 16.

Distinct modes of antigen presentation promote the formation, differentiation,
and activity of foxp3+ regulatory T cells in vivo.

Weissler KA(1), Garcia V(1), Kropf E(1), Aitken M(1), Bedoya F(1), Wolf AI(1),
Erikson J(1), Caton AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104. (2)The Wistar Institute,
Philadelphia, PA 19104 caton@wistar.org.

How the formation and activity of CD4(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells (Tregs) are
shaped by TCR recognition of the diverse array of peptide:MHC complexes that can 
be generated from self-antigens and/or foreign Ags in vivo remains poorly
understood. We show that a self-peptide with low (but not high) stimulatory
potency promotes thymic Treg formation and can induce conventional CD4(+) T cells
in the periphery to become Tregs that express different levels of the
transcription factor Helios according to anatomical location. When Tregs
generated in response to this self-peptide subsequently encountered the same
peptide derived instead from influenza virus in the lung-draining lymph nodes of 
infected mice, they proliferated, acquired a T-bet(+)CXCR3(+) phenotype, and
suppressed the antiviral effector T cell response in the lungs. However, these
self-antigen-selected Tregs were unable to suppress the antiviral immune response
based on recognition of the peptide as a self-antigen rather than a viral Ag.
Notably, when expressed in a more immunostimulatory form, the self-peptide
inhibited the formation of T-bet(+)CXCR3(+) Tregs in response to viral Ag, and
Ag-expressing B cells from these mice induced Treg division without upregulation 
of CXCR3. These studies show that a weakly immunostimulatory self-peptide can
induce thymic and peripheral Foxp3(+) Treg formation but is unable to activate
self-antigen-selected Tregs to modulate an antiviral immune response. Moreover, a
strongly immunostimulatory self-peptide expressed by B cells induced Tregs to
proliferate without acquiring an effector phenotype that allows trafficking from 
the draining lymph node to the lungs and, thereby, prevented the Tregs from
suppressing the antiviral immune response.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4390510 [Available on 2016-04-15]
PMID: 25780041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Jun;45(6):1727-35. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445200. Epub 2015 Apr 
17.

IL-12/15/18-preactivated NK cells suppress GvHD in a mouse model of mismatched
hematopoietic cell transplantation.

Hüber CM(1), Doisne JM(1), Colucci F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Cambridge School of
Clinical Medicine, National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Cambridge
Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, UK.

Mismatched hematopoietic cell transplants for treating leukemia are complicated
by graft versus host disease (GvHD). Here, we show that adoptively transferred
IL-12/15/18-preactivated NK cells suppress GvHD in a mouse model of fully
mismatched hematopoietic cell transplantation. These IL-12/15/18-preactivated
NK cells maintained Eomesodermin (Eomes) and T-bet expression upon transfer and, 
while there was no evidence of direct killing of donor T cells or host DCs by the
IL-12/15/18-preactivated NK cells, proliferation of donor T cells was inhibited. 
Strikingly, the graft versus leukemia effect mediated by donor T cells was
retained, resulting in improved overall survival of mice that received lymphoma
cells, donor allogeneic T cells, and IL-12/15/18-preactivated NK cells. These
results suggest that IL-12/15/18-preactivated NK cells may be useful in improving
immunotherapy of mismatched hematopoietic cell transplantation. Compared with
previously proposed protocols, our findings suggest that in vitro NK-cell
preactivation with this cytokine cocktail offers the significant advantage that
cytokines do not need to be administered systemically to sustain NK-cell
activity, thus avoiding toxicity.

© 2015 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by Wiley-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4687420
PMID: 25778912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Immunology. 2015 Aug;145(4):485-97. doi: 10.1111/imm.12463. Epub 2015 Apr 21.

MicroRNA-155 regulates interferon-<U+03B3> production in natural killer cells via Tim-3 
signalling in chronic hepatitis C virus infection.

Cheng YQ(1,)(2), Ren JP(1), Zhao J(1), Wang JM(1,)(3), Zhou Y(1,)(4), Li GY(1),
Moorman JP(1,)(5), Yao ZQ(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Inflammation, Infectious Disease and Immunity, Quillen College of
Medicine, East Tennessee State University, Johnson City, TN, USA.
(2)International Centre for Diagnosis and Treatment of Liver Diseases, Beijing,
China. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Soochow University
School of Medicine, Suzhou, China. (4)Centre of Diagnosis and Treatment for
Infectious Diseases of Chinese PLA, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xian, China. (5)HCV/HIV Program, James H. Quillen VA Medical Center, 
Johnson City, TN, USA.

Host immune responses must be tightly regulated by an intricate balance between
positive and negative signals while fighting pathogens; persistent pathogens may 
usurp these regulatory mechanisms to dampen host immunity to facilitate survival 
in vivo. Here we report that Tim-3, a negative signalling molecule expressed on
monocytes and T cells, is up-regulated on natural killer (NK) cells in
individuals chronically infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV). Additionally, the 
transcription factor T-bet was also found to be up-regulated and associated with 
Tim-3 expression in NK cells during chronic HCV infection. MicroRNA-155
(miR-155), an miRNA that inhibits signalling proteins involved in immune
responses, was down-regulated in NK cells by HCV infection. This Tim-3/T-bet
over-expression and miR-155 inhibition were recapitulated in vitro by incubating 
primary NK cells or NK92 cell line with Huh-7 hepatocytes expressing HCV.
Reconstitution of miR-155 in NK cells from HCV-infected patients led to a
decrease in T-bet/Tim-3 expression and an increase in interferon-<U+03B3> production.
Blocking Tim-3 signalling also enhanced interferon-<U+03B3> production in NK cells by
improving signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 phosphorylation.
These data indicate that HCV-induced, miR-155-regulated Tim-3 expression
regulates NK cell function, suggesting a novel mechanism for balancing immune
clearance and immune injury during chronic viral infection.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4515129 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25772938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Immunity. 2015 Mar 17;42(3):457-70. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.02.006. Epub 2015 
Mar 10.

Transcription factor Foxo1 is a negative regulator of natural killer cell
maturation and function.

Deng Y(1), Kerdiles Y(2), Chu J(3), Yuan S(4), Wang Y(3), Chen X(4), Mao H(3),
Zhang L(3), Zhang J(5), Hughes T(3), Deng Y(6), Zhang Q(6), Wang F(6), Zou X(3), 
Liu CG(7), Freud AG(3), Li X(6), Caligiuri MA(8), Vivier E(9), Yu J(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Institute of Materia Medica, 
College of Pharmacy, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China; 
The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille University UM2, Inserm
U1104, CNRS UMR7280, Marseille 13288, France. (3)The Ohio State University
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (4)The Ohio State
University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Department of
Lymphoma, Affiliated Hospital of Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing
100071, China. (5)Center for Biostatistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH 43210, USA. (6)Institute of Materia Medica, College of Pharmacy, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China. (7)Department of
Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (8)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal
Medicine, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA; The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA; The James Cancer Hospital, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA. Electronic address: michael.caligiuri@osumc.edu. (9)Centre d'Immunologie de 
Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille University UM2, Inserm U1104, CNRS UMR7280,
Marseille 13288, France; Service d'Immunologie, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de
Marseille, Marseille 13385, France. (10)Division of Hematology, Department of
Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA; The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH
43210, USA; The James Cancer Hospital, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA. Electronic address: jianhua.yu@osumc.edu.

Little is known about the role of negative regulators in controlling natural
killer (NK) cell development and effector functions. Foxo1 is a multifunctional
transcription factor of the forkhead family. Using a mouse model of conditional
deletion in NK cells, we found that Foxo1 negatively controlled NK cell
differentiation and function. Immature NK cells expressed abundant Foxo1 and
little Tbx21 relative to mature NK cells, but these two transcription factors
reversed their expression as NK cells proceeded through development. Foxo1
promoted NK cell homing to lymph nodes by upregulating CD62L expression and
inhibited late-stage maturation and effector functions by repressing Tbx21
expression. Loss of Foxo1 rescued the defect in late-stage NK cell maturation in 
heterozygous Tbx21(+/-) mice. Collectively, our data reveal a regulatory pathway 
by which the negative regulator Foxo1 and the positive regulator Tbx21 play
opposing roles in controlling NK cell development and effector functions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4400836
PMID: 25769609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 13;10(3):e0118451. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118451.
eCollection 2015.

Iron prevents the development of experimental cerebral malaria by attenuating
CXCR3-mediated T cell chemotaxis.

Van Den Ham KM(1), Shio MT(1), Rainone A(2), Fournier S(2), Krawczyk CM(2),
Olivier M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montréal,
Québec, Canada; McGill International TB Centre, Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec, Canada. (2)Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Cerebral malaria is a severe neurological complication of Plasmodium falciparum
infection. Previous studies have suggested that iron overload can suppress the
generation of a cytotoxic immune response; however, the effect of iron on
experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) is yet unknown. Here we determined that the
incidence of ECM was markedly reduced in mice treated with iron dextran.
Protection was concomitant with a significant decrease in the sequestration of
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells within the brain. CD4+ T cells demonstrated markedly
decreased CXCR3 expression and had reduced IFN<U+03B3>-responsiveness, as indicated by
mitigated expression of IFN<U+03B3>R2 and T-bet. Additional analysis of the splenic cell
populations indicated that parenteral iron supplementation was also associated
with a decrease in NK cells and increase in regulatory T cells. Altogether, these
results suggest that iron is able to inhibit ECM pathology by attenuating the
capacity of T cells to migrate to the brain.

PMCID: PMC4359107
PMID: 25768944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Mar 13;11(3):e1004740. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004740.
eCollection 2015.

Characterization of CD8+ T cell differentiation following SIV<U+0394>nef vaccination by 
transcription factor expression profiling.

Billingsley JM(1), Rajakumar PA(1), Connole MA(2), Salisch NC(3), Adnan S(1),
Kuzmichev YV(2), Hong HS(2), Reeves RK(4), Kang HJ(5), Li W(5), Li Q(6), Haase
AT(7), Johnson RP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, New England Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical
School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United States of America; Yerkes National
Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of
America. (2)Division of Immunology, New England Primate Research Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Division of Immunology, New England Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical
School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United States of America; Crucell Holland
BV, Leiden, The Netherlands. (4)Division of Immunology, New England Primate
Research Center, Harvard Medical School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United
States of America; Center for Virology and Vaccine Research, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(5)Division of Preventive and Behavioral Medicine, University of Massachusetts
Medical Center, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America. (6)Nebraska
Center for Virology and School of Biological Sciences, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska, United States of America. (7)University of
Minnesota, Microbiology Department, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of
America. (8)Division of Immunology, New England Primate Research Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United States of America; Yerkes
National Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United
States of America; Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2015 Jun;11(6):e1004968.

The onset of protective immunity against pathogenic SIV challenge in
SIV<U+0394>nef-vaccinated macaques is delayed for 15-20 weeks, a process that is related
to qualitative changes in CD8+ T cell responses induced by SIV<U+0394>nef. As a novel
approach to characterize cell differentiation following vaccination, we used
multi-target qPCR to measure transcription factor expression in naïve and memory 
subsets of CD8++ T cells, and in SIV-specific CD8+ T cells obtained from
SIV<U+0394>nef-vaccinated or wild type SIVmac239-infected macaques. Unsupervised
clustering of expression profiles organized naïve and memory CD8+ T cells into
groups concordant with cell surface phenotype. Transcription factor expression
patterns in SIV-specific CD8+ T cells in SIV<U+0394>nef-vaccinated animals were distinct
from those observed in purified CD8+ T cell subsets obtained from naïve animals, 
and were intermediate to expression profiles of purified central memory and
effector memory T cells. Expression of transcription factors elicited by SIV<U+0394>nef 
vaccination also varied over time: cells obtained at later time points,
temporally associated with greater protection, appeared more central-memory like 
than cells obtained at earlier time points, which appeared more effector
memory-like. Expression of transcription factors associated with effector
differentiation, such as ID2 and RUNX3, were decreased over time, while
expression of transcription factors associated with quiescence or memory
differentiation, such as TCF7, BCOR and EOMES, increased. CD8+ T cells specific
for a more conserved epitope expressed higher levels of TBX21 and BATF, and
appeared more effector-like than cells specific for an escaped epitope,
consistent with continued activation by replicating vaccine virus. These data
suggest transcription factor expression profiling is a novel method that can
provide additional data complementary to the analysis of memory cell
differentiation based on classical phenotypic markers. Additionally, these data
support the hypothesis that ongoing stimulation by SIV<U+0394>nef promotes a distinct
protective balance of CD8+ T cell differentiation and activation states.

PMCID: PMC4358830
PMID: 25768938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. JAMA Dermatol. 2015 Jul;151(7):753-60. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2015.2.

Immunologic Overlap of Helper T-Cell Subtypes 17 and 22 in Erythrodermic
Psoriasis and Atopic Dermatitis.

Moy AP(1), Murali M(2), Kroshinsky D(3), Duncan LM(1), Nazarian RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Service, Dermatopathology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston. (2)Pathology Service, Dermatopathology Unit,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston2Department of
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston.

IMPORTANCE: Psoriasis and atopic dermatitis (AD) are inflammatory diseases
thought to be mediated by helper T-cell subtypes 1 and 2 (TH1 and TH2),
respectively. Although psoriasis and AD show histopathologic differences during
chronic disease, they are difficult to distinguish histologically during
erythrodermic exacerbations.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the immune phenotype of helper T cells can
differentiate erythrodermic psoriasis and erythrodermic AD by studying skin
biopsy specimens of patients with psoriasis and AD during erythrodermic and
chronic disease phases.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: We conducted a retrospective study using
biopsy samples of psoriasis, AD, and erythroderma belonging to the surgical
pathology files of the James Homer Wright Pathology Laboratories, Massachusetts
General Hospital, and collected from January 1, 2004, through December 31, 2011. 
Samples were obtained from patients with chronic psoriasis (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>20), chronic AD
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>20), erythroderma subsequently diagnosed as psoriasis (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>7), and
erythroderma subsequently diagnosed as AD (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>5). We evaluated
immunohistochemical stains for CD3 and dual stains for CD4 and T-bet, GATA
binding protein 3 (GATA3), signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(STAT3), or basonuclin 2 (BNC2), which are transcription factors reported to be
specific and mutually exclusive for TH1, TH2, TH17, and TH22 cells, respectively.
Two investigators independently counted CD3+ cells and dual-labeled CD4+/T-bet+, 
CD4+/GATA3+, CD4+/STAT3+, and CD4+/BNC2+ cells in 5 consecutive high-power
fields.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: We evaluated the percentage of TH1, TH2, TH17, and
TH22 cells in CD3+ T cells and the TH1:TH2 ratio in chronic psoriasis, chronic
AD, erythrodermic psoriasis, and erythrodermic AD.
RESULTS: We found a significant difference in the TH1:TH2 ratio between chronic
psoriasis and chronic AD (0.26 and 0.09, respectively; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.005). However, we
detected no significant difference in the percentage of TH1 (6.5% and 4.8%), TH2 
(55.2% and 64.6%), TH17 (14.7% and 30.4%), and TH22 (3.8% and 3.3%) cells of CD3+
T cells or in the TH1:TH2 ratio (0.16 and 0.07) within biopsy specimens from
patients with erythrodermic psoriasis and AD, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study confirms the TH1- and TH2-skewed phenotype 
of chronic psoriasis and chronic AD, respectively. However, the immune phenotype,
as determined by immunohistochemical analysis, cannot discriminate between these 
inflammatory diseases in the erythrodermic phase. These findings advance our
understanding of the pathophysiological characteristics of erythroderma,
psoriasis, and AD and may influence therapeutic decisions.

PMID: 25760640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2015 Jul;34(7):1309-18. doi:
10.1007/s10096-015-2337-6. Epub 2015 Mar 11.

TBX21 polymorphisms are associated with virus persistence in hepatitis C virus
infection patients from a high-risk Chinese population.

Zhu DY(1), Jiang LF, Deng XZ, Xiao W, Pei JP, Li BJ, Wang CJ, Zhang JH, Zhang Q, 
Zhou ZX, Ding WL, Xu XD, Yue M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medicine,
Nanjing Medical University, No. 293, Zhongshan East Road, Nanjing, 210002, China.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a major cause of chronic liver disease and
the varied outcomes of the infection depend on both viral and host factors. We
have demonstrated that the HCV alternate reading frame protein (F protein) is
related to Th1/Th2 bias which is involved in virus persistence in chronic
hepatitis C (CHC) patients. The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis 
that genetic variants of TBX21 (T cell specific T-box transcription factor) were 
associated with the outcomes of HCV infection and F protein generation. Three
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs17250932, rs2074190, rs4794067) in the 
TBX21 gene were genotyped in a case-control study in a cohort of a high-risk
group, including 354 healthy controls and 747 CHC patients (190 anti-F protein
antibody seronegative patients and 557 anti-F protein antibody seropositive
patients). Results showed that the rs4794067 C allele in the TBX21 promoter was
significantly more common in CHC patients (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.335, 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.058-1.684,
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.015), exceptionally in anti-F protein seropositive patients (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.547,
95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.140-2.101, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005), compared with healthy controls. And the risk
effect was also significantly high in patients with HCV 1b genotype and mild
fibrosis (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.021, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.010, respectively). Compared with the most frequent
haplotype TAT, haplotype analysis showed that the distribution of TAC was
significantly different between the chronic HCV carrier group and the healthy
group, and so was the anti-F antibody seronegativity group and the anti-F
antibody seronegativity group (all P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). Our results suggested that TBX21
variants may be involved in the etiology of this disease.

PMID: 25759111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Immunol. 2015 Apr 1;194(7):3116-26. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401303. Epub 2015
Mar 4.

Demethylation of the RORC2 and IL17A in human CD4+ T lymphocytes defines Th17
origin of nonclassic Th1 cells.

Mazzoni A(1), Santarlasci V(2), Maggi L(2), Capone M(3), Rossi MC(3), Querci
V(3), De Palma R(4), Chang HD(5), Thiel A(6), Cimaz R(7), Liotta F(8), Cosmi
L(8), Maggi E(8), Radbruch A(5), Romagnani S(3), Dong J(5), Annunziato F(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence,
Florence 50134, Italy; DENOTHE Center, University of Florence, Florence 50134,
Italy; Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Second University of
Naples, Naples 80131, Italy; Center for Biomolecular Studies Supporting Human
Health, Second University of Naples, Naples 80131, Italy; (2)Department of
Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, Florence 50134,
Italy; DENOTHE Center, University of Florence, Florence 50134, Italy;
Regenerative Medicine Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence 50134, Italy;
(3)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence,
Florence 50134, Italy; DENOTHE Center, University of Florence, Florence 50134,
Italy; (4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Second University of 
Naples, Naples 80131, Italy; Center for Biomolecular Studies Supporting Human
Health, Second University of Naples, Naples 80131, Italy; (5)Cell Biology Group, 
German Rheumatism Research Center Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany; (6)Regenerative 
Immunology and Aging, Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies,
Charité University Medicine Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany; (7)Anna Meyer
Children's Hospital and University of Florence, Florence 50134, Italy; and.
(8)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence,
Florence 50134, Italy; DENOTHE Center, University of Florence, Florence 50134,
Italy; Immunology and Cellular Therapy Unit, Careggi University Hospital,
Florence 50134, Italy. (9)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine,
University of Florence, Florence 50134, Italy; DENOTHE Center, University of
Florence, Florence 50134, Italy; Regenerative Medicine Unit, Careggi University
Hospital, Florence 50134, Italy; francesco.annunziato@unifi.it.

Th17-derived Th1 lymphocytes, termed nonclassic, differ from classic Th1 cells
because of the presence of retinoic acid orphan receptor (ROR)C2 and the surface 
expression of CD161 and CCR6. We demonstrate in this article that nonclassic Th1 
cells, like Th17 cells, have a marked RORC2 and IL17A demethylation, whereas
classic Th1 cells exhibit a complete methylation of these genes. The analysis of 
RORC2 DNA methylation in the CD4(+)CD161(+) and CD4(+)CD161(-) naive Th subsets
from umbilical cord blood surprisingly revealed comparable hypermethylation
levels. PCR analysis at the single-cell level revealed that RORC2 mRNA was
expressed by none of the CD4(+)CD161(-) and present only in a minority of
CD4(+)CD161(+) naive Th cells. These findings provide two important novel
observations on the physiology of human Th17 cells: 1) they confirm at the
epigenetic level the origin of nonclassic Th1 cells from Th17 cells, also
identifying in the RORC2 and IL17A methylation status a novel tool for their
distinction from classic Th1 cells, and 2) they demonstrate that RORC2-expressing
cells are only a minority in the subset of CD4(+)CD161(+) naive Th cells, which
are known to contain all Th17 cell precursors.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25740946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Mar 4;11(3):e1004675. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004675.
eCollection 2015.

Enhanced CD8 T cell responses through GITR-mediated costimulation resolve chronic
viral infection.

Pascutti MF(1), Geerman S(1), Slot E(1), van Gisbergen KP(1), Boon L(2), Arens
R(3), van Lier RA(1), Wolkers MC(1), Nolte MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sanquin Research, Department of Hematopoiesis, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Bioceros BV, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Chronic infections are characterized by the inability to eliminate the persisting
pathogen and often associated with functional impairment of virus-specific T-cell
responses. Costimulation through Glucocorticoid-induced TNFR-related protein
(GITR) can increase survival and function of effector T cells. Here, we report
that constitutive expression of GITR-ligand (GITRL) confers protection against
chronic lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection, accelerating
recovery without increasing pathology. Rapid viral clearance in GITRL transgenic 
mice coincided with increased numbers of poly-functional, virus-specific effector
CD8+ T cells that expressed more T-bet and reduced levels of the rheostat marker 
PD-1. GITR triggering also boosted the helper function of virus-specific CD4 T
cells already early in the infection, as was evidenced by increased IL-2 and IFN<U+03B3>
production, and more expression of CD40L and T-bet. Importantly, CD4-depletion
experiments revealed that the expanded pool of virus-specific effector CD8 T
cells and the ensuing viral clearance in LCMV-infected GITRL tg mice was entirely
dependent on CD4 T cells. We found no major differences for NK cell and
regulatory T cell responses, whereas the humoral response to the virus was
increased in GITRL tg mice, but only in the late phase of the infection when the 
virus was almost eradicated. Based on these findings, we conclude that enhanced
GITR-triggering mediates its protective, anti-viral effect on the CD8 T cell
compartment by boosting CD4 T cell help. As such, increasing costimulation
through GITR may be an attractive strategy to increase anti-viral CTL responses
without exacerbating pathology, in particular to persistent viruses such as HIV
and HCV.

PMCID: PMC4349659
PMID: 25738498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2014 Oct;30(10):1586-93.

[Construction and characterization of a novel recombinant retroviral vector
expressing mouse T-bet].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang X, Zhang J, Zhang W, Guo J, Zhou X.

In order to study T-bet function in mouse cells, a novel retroviral vector
expressing mouse T-bet and reporter gene Thy1.1 was constructed. Retrovirus
particles were then produced by transfection of the recombinant retroviral
plasmid into a packaging cell line Platinum-E. The recombinant retrovirus played 
considerable infection ability. T-bet expression was then identified by FACS
after infection of CD4+ primary T cells from T-bet knockout mouse with
recombinant retrovirus. To determine if exogenous expressing T-bet has normal
function, we checked the expression level of T-bet target gene, Ifng. IFN-y
expression was upregulated in the T-bet knockout T cells infected with
recombinant retrovirus. In conclusion, we successfully constructed an effective
mouse T-bet recombinant retroviral vector.

PMID: 25726583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Virol. 2015 May;89(9):5110-23. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03478-14. Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Infection history determines the differentiation state of human CD8+ T cells.

van Aalderen MC(1), Remmerswaal EB(2), Verstegen NJ(2), Hombrink P(3), ten Brinke
A(3), Pircher H(4), Kootstra NA(5), ten Berge IJ(2), van Lier RA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands Renal Transplant Unit, Division of Internal Medicine, Academic
Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands m.c.vanaalderen@amc.uva.nl.
(2)Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands Renal Transplant Unit, Division of Internal Medicine, Academic
Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (3)Sanquin Research and Landsteiner
Laboratory, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (4)Institute for Immunology, University
Medical Centre Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (5)Department of Experimental
Immunology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

After the resolution of the acute phase of infection, otherwise quiescent
antigen-experienced CD8(+) T cells confer rapid protection upon reinfection with 
viral pathogens or, in the case of persistent viruses, help to maintain control
of the infection. Depending on the type of virus, antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells
have distinct traits, ranging from typical memory cell properties in the case of 
rapidly cleared viruses to immediate effector functions for persistent viruses.
We here show that both the differentiation stage, defined by the expression of
cell surface markers, such as CD45RA, CCR7, CD28, and CD27, and distinct
expression levels of T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes) predict the functional
profile of antigen-experienced CD8(+) T cells. Furthermore, virus-specific CD8(+)
T cells targeting different respiratory syncytial virus-, influenza A virus-,
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-, human cytomegalovirus (hCMV)-, and HIV-1-specific
epitopes adopt distinct T-bet and Eomes expression patterns that appear to be
installed early during the primary response. Importantly, the associations
between surface phenotype, T-bet/Eomes expression levels, and the expression of
markers that predict CD8(+) T-cell function change according to viral infection
history, particularly against the background of HIV-1 and, to lesser extent, of
human cytomegalovirus and/or Epstein-Barr virus infection. Thus, the
functionality of human antigen-experienced CD8(+) T cells follows at least two
dimensions, one outlined by the surface phenotype and another by the T-bet/Eomes 
expression levels, which are determined by previous or persistent viral
challenges.IMPORTANCE: Functional human CD8(+) T-cell subsets have been defined
using surface markers like CD45RA, CCR7, CD28, and CD27. However, the induction
of function-defining traits, like granzyme B expression, is controlled by
transcription factors like T-bet and Eomes. Here, we describe how T-bet and Eomes
levels distinctly relate to the expression of molecules predictive for CD8(+)
T-cell function in a surface phenotype-independent manner. Importantly, we found 
that central memory and effector memory CD8(+) T-cell subsets differentially
express T-bet, Eomes, and molecules predictive for function according to viral
infection history, particularly so in the context of HIV-1 infection and, to
lesser extent, of latent EBV- and/or hCMV-infected, otherwise healthy adults.
Finally, we show that the distinct phenotypes and T-bet/Eomes levels of different
virus-specific CD8(+) T-cell populations are imprinted early during the acute
phase of primary infection in vivo. These findings broaden our understanding of
CD8(+) T-cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4403462
PMID: 25717102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Immunity. 2015 Feb 17;42(2):252-64. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.01.013.

The transcription factor KLF2 restrains CD4<U+207A> T follicular helper cell
differentiation.

Lee JY(1), Skon CN(1), Lee YJ(1), Oh S(2), Taylor JJ(3), Malhotra D(3), Jenkins
MK(3), Rosenfeld MG(2), Hogquist KA(1), Jameson SC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN
55414, USA; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of
Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA. (2)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute; Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (3)Center for Immunology, University of
Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA; Department of Microbiology,
University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA. (4)Center for
Immunology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA;
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota Medical 
School, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA. Electronic address: james024@umn.edu.

T follicular helper (Tfh) cells are essential for efficient B cell responses, yet
the factors that regulate differentiation of this CD4(+) T cell subset are
incompletely understood. Here we found that the KLF2 transcription factor serves 
to restrain Tfh cell generation. Induced KLF2 deficiency in activated CD4(+) T
cells led to increased Tfh cell generation and B cell priming, whereas KLF2
overexpression prevented Tfh cell production. KLF2 promotes expression of the
trafficking receptor S1PR1, and S1PR1 downregulation is essential for efficient
Tfh cell production. However, KLF2 also induced expression of the transcription
factor Blimp-1, which repressed transcription factor Bcl-6 and thereby impaired
Tfh cell differentiation. Furthermore, KLF2 induced expression of the
transcription factors T-bet and GATA3 and enhanced Th1 differentiation. Hence,
our data indicate KLF2 is pivotal for coordinating CD4(+) T cell differentiation 
through two distinct and complementary mechanisms: via control of T cell
localization and by regulation of lineage-defining transcription factors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4409658
PMID: 25692701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Apr;25(2):353-62. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.02.005.
Epub 2015 Feb 14.

Telocinobufagin enhances the Th1 immune response and protects against Salmonella 
typhimurium infection.

Wu SC(1), Fu BD(1), Shen HQ(1), Yi PF(1), Zhang LY(1), Lv S(1), Guo X(1), Xia
F(1), Wu YL(1), Wei XB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Jilin University, No. 5333, Xi'an Road, Changchun, Jilin 130062, PR China.
(2)Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Jilin University, No. 5333, Xi'an Road, Changchun, Jilin 130062, PR China.
Electronic address: weixub13@163.com.

Ideal potential vaccine adjuvants to stimulate a Th1 immune response are urgently
needed to control intracellular infections in clinical applications.
Telocinobufagin (TBG), an active component of Venenum bufonis, exhibits
immunomodulatory activity. Therefore, we investigated whether TBG enhances the
Th1 immune response to ovalbumin (OVA) and formalin-inactivated Salmonella
typhimurium (FIST) in mice. TBG augmented serum OVA- and FIST-specific IgG and
IgG2a and the production of IFN<U+03B3> by antigen-restimulated splenocytes. TBG also
dramatically enhanced splenocyte proliferative responses to concanavalin A,
lipopolysaccharide, and OVA and substantially increased T-bet mRNA levels and the
CD3(+)/CD3(+)CD4(+)/CD3(+)CD8(+) phenotype in splenocytes from OVA-immunized
mice. In in vivo protection studies, TBG significantly decreased the bacterial
burdens in the spleen and prolonged the survival time of FIST-immunized mice
challenged with live S. typhimurium. In vivo neutralization of IFN<U+03B3> with
anti-IFN<U+03B3> mAbs led to a significant reduction in FIST-specific IgG2a and IFN<U+03B3>
levels and in anti-Salmonella effect in TBG/FIST-immunized mice. In conclusion,
these results suggest that TBG enhances a Th1 immune response to control
intracellular infections.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25687199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Feb 6;11(2):e1004635. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004635.
eCollection 2015.

IFN<U+03B3> signaling endows DCs with the capacity to control type I inflammation during
parasitic infection through promoting T-bet+ regulatory T cells.

Lee HM(1), Fleige A(2), Forman R(3), Cho S(1), Khan AA(4), Lin LL(1), Nguyen
DT(1), O'Hara-Hall A(5), Yin Z(6), Hunter CA(5), Muller W(3), Lu LF(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, California, United States of America. (2)Technical University
Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany. (3)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. (4)Department of Human Genetics,
Institute for Genomics and Systems Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America. (5)Department of Pathobiology, School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America. (6)The First Affiliated Hospital, International
Imunology Center, The Biomedical Translational Research Institute, Key Laboratory
of Molecular Immunology and Antibody Engineering of Guangdong Province, Jinan
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's Republic of China. (7)Division of
Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California,
United States of America; Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2015 Mar;11(3):e1004741.

IFN<U+03B3> signaling drives dendritic cells (DCs) to promote type I T cell (Th1)
immunity. Here, we show that activation of DCs by IFN<U+03B3> is equally crucial for the
differentiation of a population of T-bet+ regulatory T (Treg) cells specialized
to inhibit Th1 immune responses. Conditional deletion of IFN<U+03B3> receptor in DCs but
not in Treg cells resulted in a severe defect in this specific Treg cell subset, 
leading to exacerbated immune pathology during parasitic infections.
Mechanistically, IFN<U+03B3>-unresponsive DCs failed to produce sufficient amount of
IL-27, a cytokine required for optimal T-bet induction in Treg cells. Thus, IFN<U+03B3> 
signalling endows DCs with the ability to efficiently control a specific type of 
T cell immunity through promoting a corresponding Treg cell population.

PMCID: PMC4450074
PMID: 25658840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 4;5:8234. doi: 10.1038/srep08234.

Jagged-1 signaling suppresses the IL-6 and TGF-ß treatment-induced Th17 cell
differentiation via the reduction of ROR<U+03B3>t/IL-17A/IL-17F/IL-23a/IL-12rb1.

Wang Y(1), Xing F(1), Ye S(2), Xiao J(2), Di J(2), Zeng S(2), Liu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Tissue Transplantation and Immunology, Department of
Immunobiology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China [2] Key Laboratory of
Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Jinan
University, Guangzhou 510632, China. (2)Institute of Tissue Transplantation and
Immunology, Department of Immunobiology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632,
China. (3)Department of Stomatology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.

Jagged-1 signaling has recently been reported to be involved in the Th17 cell
differentiation. However, little is known about its mechanisms. Soluble Jagged-1 
was used to activate the Jagged-1-Notch signaling to interfere with the IL-6 and 
TGF-ß-induced Th17 cell skewing. Genes relevant to the autoimmunity or
inflammation were screened for the first time in this system by qPCR array for
the differential expressions. The 18 genes out of 84, including Clec7a, Il12b,
Il12rb1, Il12rb2, Csf3, Il15, Il17a, Il17f, Il17rc, Il17rd, Il17re, Il23a, Myd88,
Socs1, Stat4, Stat5a, Sykb and Tbx21, were downregulated, but only Cxcl2, Cxcl12 
and Mmp3 were upregulated. The expressions of the genes, Ror<U+03B3>t, Il17a, Il17f,
Il12rb1 and Il23a, induced by simultaneous IL-6 and TGF-ß treatment were
significantly suppressed by Jagged-1, followed by the reduction of ROR<U+03B3>t, IL-17A,
and IL-17F. Consistent with the attenuation of ROR<U+03B3>t, and the reduced production 
and secretion of IL-17A and IL-17F in the cell supernatant and the in situ
stained cells, the number of CD4(+)IL-17(+) cells was also diminished. It is
concluded that the Jagged-1-Notch signaling can suppress the IL-6 and TGF-ß
treatment-induced Th17 cell skewing through the attenuation of ROR<U+03B3>t and, hence
by, the down-regulation of IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-23a, and IL-12rb1.

PMCID: PMC4316398
PMID: 25648768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Immunol. 2015 Mar 1;194(5):2358-68. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401992. Epub 2015
Jan 30.

A novel model for IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated autoinflammatory syndromes.

Reinhardt RL(1), Liang HE(2), Bao K(3), Price AE(2), Mohrs M(4), Kelly BL(5),
Locksley RM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143; Department of Medicine, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143; Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143; Department of
Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710; (2)Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143; Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143; (3)Department of Immunology,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710; (4)Trudeau Institute, Saranac
Lake, NY 12983; and. (5)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, 
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143; Department of Medicine, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143; Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143;
Richard.Locksley@ucsf.edu.

Autoinflammatory disease and hyperinflammatory syndromes represent a growing
number of diseases associated with inappropriately controlled inflammation in
multiple organs. Systemic inflammation commonly results from dysregulated
activation of innate immune cells, and therapeutic targeting of the IL-1ß pathway
has been used to ameliorate some of these diseases. Some hyperinflammatory
syndromes, however, such as hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis and the newly
classified proteasome disability syndromes, are refractory to such treatments,
suggesting that other factors or environmental stressors may be contributing. In 
comparing two cytokine reporter mouse strains, we identify IFN-<U+03B3> as a mediator of
systemic autoinflammatory disease. Chronically elevated levels of IFN-<U+03B3> resulted 
in progressive multiorgan inflammation and two copies of the mutant allele
resulted in increased mortality accompanied by myeloproliferative disease.
Disease was alleviated by genetic deletion of T-bet. These studies raise the
possibility that therapeutics targeting the IFN-<U+03B3> pathway might be effective in
hyperinflammatory conditions refractory to IL-1ß-targeted therapies.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4337485
PMID: 25637019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nat Commun. 2015 Jan 23;6:6072. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7072.

An IL-27/NFIL3 signalling axis drives Tim-3 and IL-10 expression and T-cell
dysfunction.

Zhu C(1), Sakuishi K(1), Xiao S(1), Sun Z(2), Zaghouani S(1), Gu G(1), Wang C(1),
Tan DJ(1), Wu C(1), Rangachari M(1), Pertel T(1), Jin HT(3), Ahmed R(3), Anderson
AC(1), Kuchroo VK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Evergrande Center for Immunologic Diseases, Ann Romney Center for Neurologic
Diseases, Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital, 77 Avenue
Louis Pasteur, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (2)New England Biolabs Inc., 240
County Road, Ipswich, Massachusetts 01938, USA. (3)Emory Vaccine Center,
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2015;6:7657.

The inhibitory receptor T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain-3 (Tim-3) has
emerged as a critical regulator of the T-cell dysfunction that develops in
chronic viral infections and cancers. However, little is known regarding the
signalling pathways that drive Tim-3 expression. Here, we demonstrate that
interleukin (IL)-27 induces nuclear factor, interleukin 3 regulated (NFIL3),
which promotes permissive chromatin remodelling of the Tim-3 locus and induces
Tim-3 expression together with the immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10. We further
show that the IL-27/NFIL3 signalling axis is crucial for the induction of Tim-3
in vivo. IL-27-conditioned T helper 1 cells exhibit reduced effector function and
are poor mediators of intestinal inflammation. This inhibitory effect is NFIL3
dependent. In contrast, tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes from IL-27R(-/-) mice
exhibit reduced NFIL3, less Tim-3 expression and failure to develop dysfunctional
phenotype, resulting in better tumour growth control. Thus, our data identify an 
IL-27/NFIL3 signalling axis as a key regulator of effector T-cell responses via
induction of Tim-3, IL-10 and T-cell dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC4311884
PMID: 25614966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Immunity. 2015 Jan 20;42(1):108-22. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.12.018. Epub 2014 
Dec 25.

Individual T helper cells have a quantitative cytokine memory.

Helmstetter C(1), Flossdorf M(2), Peine M(1), Kupz A(3), Zhu J(4), Hegazy AN(5), 
Duque-Correa MA(6), Zhang Q(2), Vainshtein Y(2), Radbruch A(7), Kaufmann SH(6),
Paul WE(4), Höfer T(8), Löhning M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Charité-University Medicine Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany; German Rheumatism
Research Center (DRFZ), a Leibniz Institute, 10117 Berlin, Germany. (2)Division
of Theoretical Systems Biology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120
Heidelberg, Germany; Bioquant Center, University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany. (3)Department of Immunology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology,
10117 Berlin, Germany; Queensland Tropical Health Alliance Research Laboratory,
James Cook University, Cairns Campus, Smithfield, QLD 4878, Australia.
(4)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (5)Experimental Immunology, Department of
Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Charité-University Medicine Berlin, 10117
Berlin, Germany; German Rheumatism Research Center (DRFZ), a Leibniz Institute,
10117 Berlin, Germany; Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and
Endocrinology, Charité, 10117 Berlin, Germany. (6)Department of Immunology, Max
Planck Institute for Infection Biology, 10117 Berlin, Germany. (7)German
Rheumatism Research Center (DRFZ), a Leibniz Institute, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
(8)Division of Theoretical Systems Biology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Bioquant Center, University of Heidelberg, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: t.hoefer@dkfz-heidelberg.de.
(9)Experimental Immunology, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Charité-University Medicine Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany; German Rheumatism
Research Center (DRFZ), a Leibniz Institute, 10117 Berlin, Germany. Electronic
address: loehning@drfz.de.

The probabilistic expression of cytokine genes in differentiated T helper (Th)
cell populations remains ill defined. By single-cell analyses and mathematical
modeling, we show that one stimulation featured stable cytokine nonproducers as
well as stable producers with wide cell-to-cell variability in the magnitude of
expression. Focusing on interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) expression by Th1 cells,
mathematical modeling predicted that this behavior reflected different
cell-intrinsic capacities and not mere gene-expression noise. In vivo, Th1 cells 
sort purified by secreted IFN-<U+03B3> amounts preserved a quantitative memory for both 
probability and magnitude of IFN-<U+03B3> re-expression for at least 1 month.
Mechanistically, this memory resulted from quantitatively distinct transcription 
of individual alleles and was controlled by stable expression differences of the 
Th1 cell lineage-specifying transcription factor T-bet. Functionally, Th1 cells
with graded IFN-<U+03B3> production competence differentially activated
Salmonella-infected macrophages for bacterial killing. Thus, individual Th cells 
commit to produce distinct amounts of a given cytokine, thereby generating
functional intrapopulation heterogeneity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4562415
PMID: 25607461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Transplantation. 2015 Feb;99(2):391-9. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000000585.

CD27low natural killer cells prolong allograft survival in mice by controlling
alloreactive CD8+ T cells in a T-bet-dependent manner.

Lantow M(1), Eggenhofer E, Sabet-Baktach M, Renner P, Rovira J, Koehl GE, Schlitt
HJ, Geissler EK, Kroemer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, University of
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Natural killer (NK) cells play a dichotomous role in alloimmune
responses because they are known to promote both allograft survival and
rejection. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of functionally
distinct NK cell subsets in alloimmunity with the hypothesis that this dichotomy 
is explained by the functional heterogeneity of distinct NK cell subsets.
METHODS: Because T-bet controls thematuration of NK cells from CD27high to
terminally differentiated CD27low NK cells, we used Rag-/-T-bet-/- mice that
lackmature CD27low NK cells to study the distinct roles of CD27low versus
CD27high NK cells in a model of Tcellmediated skin transplant rejection under
costimulatory blockade conditions.
RESULTS: We found that T cellreconstituted Rag1-/- recipients (possessing
CD27low NK cells) show significantly prolonged allograft survival on
costimulatory blockade when compared to Rag1-/-T-bet-/- mice (lacking CD27low NK 
cells), indicating that CD27low but not CD27high NK cells enhance allograft
survival. Critically, Rag1-/-T-bet-/- recipients showed strikingly increased
alloreactive memory CD8+ Tcell responses, as indicated by increased CD8+ Tcell
proliferation and interferon-<U+03B3> production. Therefore, we speculated that CD27low 
NK cells directly regulate alloreactive CD8+ Tcell responses under costimulatory 
blockade conditions. To test this, we adoptively transferred CD27low NK cells
into Rag1-/-T-bet-/- skin transplant recipients and found that the CD27low NK
cells restore better allograft survival by inhibiting the proliferation of
alloreactive interferon-<U+03B3>+CD8+ T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, mature CD27low NK cells promote allograft survival under
costimulatory blockade conditions by regulating alloreactive memory CD8+ T-cell
responses.

PMID: 25606781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015 Apr;3(4):356-67. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0186.
Epub 2015 Jan 19.

Identification of chimeric antigen receptors that mediate constitutive or
inducible proliferation of T cells.

Frigault MJ(1), Lee J(1), Basil MC(1), Carpenito C(1), Motohashi S(2), Scholler
J(1), Kawalekar OU(1), Guedan S(1), McGettigan SE(1), Posey AD Jr(1), Ang S(3),
Cooper LJ(3), Platt JM(1), Johnson FB(1), Paulos CM(4), Zhao Y(1), Kalos M(1),
Milone MC(1), June CH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (2)Department of
Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Division of Pediatrics, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Hollings Cancer Center at the
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina. Department of
Surgery, Hollings Cancer Center at the Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina. (5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. cjune@exchange.upenn.edu.

This study compared second-generation chimeric antigen receptors (CAR) encoding
signaling domains composed of CD28, ICOS, and 4-1BB (TNFRSF9). Here, we report
that certain CARs endow T cells with the ability to undergo long-term autonomous 
proliferation. Transduction of primary human T cells with lentiviral vectors
encoding some of the CARs resulted in sustained proliferation for up to 3 months 
following a single stimulation through the T-cell receptor (TCR). Sustained
numeric expansion was independent of cognate antigen and did not require the
addition of exogenous cytokines or feeder cells after a single stimulation of the
TCR and CD28. Results from gene array and functional assays linked sustained
cytokine secretion and expression of T-bet (TBX21), EOMES, and GATA-3 to the
effect. Sustained expression of the endogenous IL2 locus has not been reported in
primary T cells. Sustained proliferation was dependent on CAR structure and high 
expression, the latter of which was necessary but not sufficient. The mechanism
involves constitutive signaling through NF-<U+03BA>B, AKT, ERK, and NFAT. The propagated
CAR T cells retained a diverse TCR repertoire, and cellular transformation was
not observed. The CARs with a constitutive growth phenotype displayed inferior
antitumor effects and engraftment in vivo. Therefore, the design of CARs that
have a nonconstitutive growth phenotype may be a strategy to improve efficacy and
engraftment of CAR T cells. The identification of CARs that confer constitutive
or nonconstitutive growth patterns may explain observations that CAR T cells have
differential survival patterns in clinical trials.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4390458
PMID: 25600436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Inflammation. 2015;38(3):1281-8. doi: 10.1007/s10753-014-0098-5.

Blockade of Notch Signalling by <U+03B3>-Secretase Inhibitor in Lung T Cells of
Asthmatic Mice Affects T Cell Differentiation and Pulmonary Inflammation.

Zhou M(1), Cui ZL, Guo XJ, Ren LP, Yang M, Fan ZW, Han RC, Xu WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200092, China.

Notch is a single-pass transmembrane receptor protein expressed by T cells, which
contributes to the pathogenesis of asthma through regulation of the development
and differentiation of T cells. <U+03B3>-Secretase inhibitor (GSI) acts as an effective 
blocker of Notch signalling. The present study aimed to investigate the role of
GSI MW167 in T cell differentiation and antigen-induced airway inflammation. An
OVA-induced airway inflammation mouse model was established. Blockade of Notch
signalling was achieved using MW167. The expression of IL-4, IL-5, IFN-<U+03B3>, Notch1 
signalling and pro-inflammatory transcription factors in activated lung T cells
was evaluated. Finally, the therapeutic effect of MW167 was investigated by
haematoxylin and eosin staining, real-time PCR and ELISA. The expression of IL-4 
and IL-5 decreased and that of IFN-<U+03B3> increased significantly, and the protein
expression levels of pro-inflammatory transcription factors reduced in active
lung T cells after administration of MW167, compared to the control group. MW167 
treatment prevented OVA-induced airway inflammation and histological changes. The
serum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) levels of IL-4 and IL-5 in
MW167-treated mice decreased significantly, whereas those of IFN-<U+03B3> increased,
relative to the levels in OVA-challenged animals treated with PBS. Our findings
indicate that Notch signalling plays an important role in the pathogenesis of
asthma and that MW167 may be a potential therapeutic target for allergen-induced 
airway inflammation.

PMID: 25586485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Mar;97(3):583-98. doi: 10.1189/jlb.4A0714-326R. Epub 2015 Jan
12.

NKG2D ligand overexpression in lupus nephritis correlates with increased NK cell 
activity and differentiation in kidneys but not in the periphery.

Spada R(1), Rojas JM(1), Pérez-Yagüe S(1), Mulens V(1), Cannata-Ortiz P(1),
Bragado R(1), Barber DF(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid, Spain; and
Department of Immunology and Pathology, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz-Universidad Autónoma Madrid, Spain.
(2)*Department of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid, Spain; and
Department of Immunology and Pathology, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz-Universidad Autónoma Madrid, Spain
dfbarber@cnb.csic.es.

NK cells are a major component of the immune system, and alterations in their
activity are correlated with various autoimmune diseases. In the present work, we
observed an increased expression of the NKG2D ligand MICA in SLE patients'
kidneys but not healthy subjects. We also show glomerulus-specific expression of 
the NKG2D ligands Rae-1 and Mult-1 in various murine SLE models, which correlated
with a higher number of glomerular-infiltrating NK cells. As the role of NK cells
in the immunopathogenesis of SLE is poorly understood, we explored NK cell
differentiation and activity in tissues and organs in SLE-prone murine models by 
use of diseased and prediseased MRL/MpJ and MRL/lpr mice. We report here that
phenotypically iNK cells accumulate only in the spleen but not in BM or kidneys
of diseased mice. Infiltrating NK cells in kidneys undergoing a lupus nephritic
process showed a more mature, activated phenotype compared with kidney, as well
as peripheral NK cells from prediseased mice, as determined by IFN-<U+03B3> and STAT5
analysis. These findings and the presence of glomerulus-specific NKG2D ligands in
lupus-prone mice identify a role for NK cells and NKG2D ligands in the lupus
nephritic process, which could aid in understanding their role in human SLE.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 25583577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Tumour Biol. 2015 May;36(5):3985-93. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3042-x. Epub 2015
Jan 11.

Association between the genetic variations within TBX21 gene promoter and the
clinicopathological characteristics of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in a
high-risk Chinese population.

Li H(1), Zhen H, Han L, Yan B, Yu J, Zhu S, Cao B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical
University, 100050, Beijing, China.

The correlation between TBX21 gene (T-box transcription factor protein 21;
T-bet), which was a pivotal transcriptional regulation gene for Th1/Th2
polarization, and the development risk of esophagus squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) was assessed in a high-risk Chinese population. A total of 302 ESCC cases 
and 311 normal controls coming from the highest incidence area of China were
enrolled in this study. Three polymorphisms at -1499, -1514, and -1993 located in
the TBX21 promoter were identified by the polymerase chain reaction-restriction
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method. Logistic regression was used to
determine whether the inherited variations of the TBX21 gene would associate with
the risk and the clinicopathological characteristics of ESCC. Among the ESCC
patients, an association between the TBX21 -1514T/C or -1993T/C polymorphisms and
the lymph node or distant metastasis was found (odds ratios (ORs) were 9.46 and
4.35, respectively, all P < 0.01). By the log-additive model analysis, the
results exhibited that three haplotypes, ACC, ACT, and ATC, were significantly
related to the development risk of ESCC (OR = 11.81, 3.44, 2.37, respectively,
all P < 0.05). TBX21 gene -1514 and -1993 polymorphisms might be counted as the
influential factors for lymph node and distant metastasis to ESCC. Especially,
the ACC, ACT, and ATC haplotypes derived from the TBX21 gene would increase the
susceptibility to ESCC in the high-risk Chinese population.

PMID: 25577251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Jan;31(1):72-6.

[Th2 differentiation features of Mycobacterium tuberculosis heat resistant
antigen-activated human <U+03B3>dT cells and the regulation of transcription factor
T-bet/GATA-3 on differentiation].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu A(1), Lv H(2), Zhang L(2), Hu J(2), Wang F(2), Li B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, First Affiliated Hospital, Bengbu Medical
College, Bengbu 233004; Department of Immunology, Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu 
233030, China. (2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, First Affiliated Hospital,
Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu 233004, China. (3)Department of Immunology, Bengbu
Medical College, Bengbu 233030; Anhui Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity,
Bengbu 233030, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate Th2 differentiation features of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis heat resistant antigens (MTB-HAg)-activated human <U+03B3>dT cells and the 
regulation of transcription factor T-box expression in T cells (T-bet) and
GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3) on differentiation.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were stimulated with MTB-HAg 
to generate MTB-HAg-activated T cells (MTBAT) and expanded in the neutral
condition or Th2 polarizing condition. After restimulation for 6 hours with
phorbol myristate acetate (PMA, 10 ng/mL), ionomycin (500 ng/mL) and monensin
(2.5 µmol/L), intracellular cytokines (IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4) of <U+03B3>dT cells and aßT cells
among MTBAT were detected by four-color fluorescence mAb staining combined with
flow cytometry. The highly purified <U+03B3>dT cells and CD4<U+207A> T cells were sorted by
flow cytometer from MTBAT that were cultured in neutral and Th2 polarizing
conditions for 28 days. The expressions of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA in purified <U+03B3>dT 
cells and CD4<U+207A> T cells were determined by reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR)
technique.
RESULTS: <U+03B3>dT cells among MTBAT cultured in the neutral or Th2 polarizing
condition predominantly produced IFN-<U+03B3>, whereas the percentage of IFN-<U+03B3><U+207A> aßT
cells significantly decreased in the Th2 polarizing condition as the culture time
went by. Compared with the neutral condition, Th0 type (IFN-<U+03B3><U+207A> IL-4<U+207A>) <U+03B3>dT cells
significantly increased, and Th2 type (IFN-<U+03B3><U+207B> IL-4<U+207A>) aßT cells also significantly
increased in the Th2 polarizing condition. RT-PCR showed that mRNA expression of 
T-bet was still at a high level in <U+03B3>dT cells that were expanded in the Th2
polarizing condition, but at a low level in Th2 polarized CD4<U+207A> T cells. Moreover,
the mRNA expressions of GATA-3 in both Th2 polarized <U+03B3>dT cells and CD4<U+207A>T cells
were up-regulated.
CONCLUSION: In the Th2 polarizing condition, the majority of <U+03B3>dT cells in MTBAT
still remained Th1 profile, whereas the portion of <U+03B3>dT cells differentiated into 
Th0 type cells. Both transcription factor T-bet and GATA-3 failed to display a
fully cross-regulation function in Th2 polarized <U+03B3>dT cells.

PMID: 25575062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Blood. 2015 Jan 8;125(2):215-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-11-610618.

A lymphocyte-mediated cause of secondary PAP.

Trapnell BC(1).

Author information: 
(1)CINCINNATI CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL; UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI.

Comment on
    Blood. 2015 Jan 8;125(2):370-82.

In this issue of Blood, Iriguchi et al report that T-lymphocyterestricted
overexpression of T-bet causes a maturational arrest in mononuclear phagocyte
lineage cells and severe secondary pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP).

PMID: 25573969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2014 Nov;45(6):941-5.

[Regulation of Thl/Th2 cells by T cell-mediated transcription factor in rats with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang CY(1), Liu XG, Wang CB, Ji QR, Fang L, Li Ze geng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, China.

OBJECTIVE: To determine T box expressed in T cells (T bet), GATA binding
protein-3 (GATA 3), and retinoid-related orphan nuclear receptor gammat
(RORgammat) in rats with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: Thirty rats were randomly divided into a control and a COPD group. The
COPD model was established through smoking and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) tracheal 
instillation. Pulmonary function of the rats was measured 28 d after the
establishment of the COPD model by a spirometer. Enzyme linked immunosorbent
assay was performed to detect serum <U+03B3> interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>), interleukin (IL)-4, and
IL-17. The expressions of T-bet, GATA-3, and RORgammat protein in lung tissues
were determined by Western blot.
RESULTS: Compared with the controls, the COPD rats had decreased pulmonary
function and expression of serum IL-4, and increased INF-<U+03B3>, IL- 17, Th1/Th2,
T-bet, T bet /GATA-3, and RORgammat protein (P<0. 05). Forced expiratory volume
in 0. 3 seconds (FEV 0.3) was negatively correlated with INF <U+03B3> and T-bet/GATA-3. 
Forced vital capacity (FVC) was positively correlated with IL 4. FEV0.3/FVC was
negatively correlated with Thl/Th2, T-bet and T-bet/GATA-3. Peak expiratory flow 
(PEF) was negatively correlated with IL-17, T bet, and RORgammat (P<0. 05).
Thl/Th2 was positively correlated with T bet/GATA-3. IL-17 was positively
correlated with RORgammat. T bet/GATA-3 was positively correlated with RORgammat 
(P<0. 05).
CONCLUSION: Imbalanced regulation of T bet / GATA 3 and RORgammat on Th1/Th2 and 
Th17 cells is associated with the occurrence of COPD.

PMID: 25571720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Toxicol Sci. 2015 Apr;144(2):284-97. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu315. Epub 2015 Jan 5.

Role of miRNA in the regulation of inflammatory genes in staphylococcal
enterotoxin B-induced acute inflammatory lung injury and mortality.

Rao R(1), Nagarkatti P(2), Nagarkatti M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29209
mitzi.nagarkatti@uscmed.sc.edu. (2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and
Immunology, School of Medicine, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South
Carolina 29209.

Exposure to Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) causes food poisoning, acute
inflammatory lung injury, toxic shock syndrome, and often death. In this study,
we investigated whether microRNA (miRNA) play a role in regulating SEB-driven
inflammation in the lungs. Exposure to SEB caused immune cell infiltration,
robust cytokine and chemokine production, compromised lung function, and 100%
mortality in mice. We assessed miRNA and mRNA expression in lung infiltrating
mononuclear cells following exposure to SEB and found 89 miRNA that were
dysregulated (>2-fold) compared with vehicle controls. In silico analysis
revealed that the miRNA exhibited biological functions pertaining to cell death
and survival, cellular proliferation, and cell cycle progression. Through the use
of q-RT PCR, we validated 9 specific miRNA (miR-155, miR-132, miR-31, miR-222,
miR-20b, miR-34a, miR-192, miR-193*, and let-7e) and observed that they were
predicted to bind the 3'-UTR of a number of genes that were either involved in
the stringent regulation of inflammation (Smad3, Tgfb, Runx1, and Foxo3) or those
that contributed to its exacerbation (Stat3, Ptgs2, Ccnd1, Ccne1, Nf<U+03BA>B, and
Tbx21). Further, by increasing or decreasing the levels of miR-132 (a miRNA
highly induced by SEB), we noted the corresponding decrease or increase in the
levels of its predicted target FOXO3. As a result of FOXO3 suppression by
miR-132, we saw increase in Ifn-<U+03B3>, Ccnd, and Ccne1. Taken together, our data
support the role for miRNA in actively participating and orchestrating
SEB-mediated inflammation in the lungs and provide several therapeutic targets
for the treatment of SEB-driven toxicity via the modulation of miRNA.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4372662
PMID: 25564423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Infect. 2015 May;70(5):445-56. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2014.12.010. Epub 2014 Dec
31.

Transcriptomic correlates of organ failure extent in sepsis.

Almansa R(1), Heredia-Rodríguez M(2), Gomez-Sanchez E(3), Andaluz-Ojeda D(4),
Iglesias V(5), Rico L(6), Ortega A(7), Gomez-Pesquera E(8), Liu P(9), Aragón
M(10), Eiros JM(11), Jiménez-Sousa MÁ(12), Resino S(13), Gómez-Herreras I(14),
Bermejo-Martín JF(15), Tamayo E(16).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital
Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3,
47005 Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la Investigación, Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: ralmansa@saludcastillayleon.es. (2)Grupo
de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic 
address: maria_her_05@hotmail.com. (3)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en
Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid,
SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de
Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida
Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address:
esthergzam@hotmail.com. (4)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos 
(BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida 
Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Medicina Intensiva,
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3,
47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: davidandaluz78@yahoo.es. (5)Grupo de
Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la Investigación, Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: viglesiasl@saludcastillayleon.es. (6)Grupo
de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la Investigación, Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: lrico@saludcastillayleon.es. (7)Grupo de
Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la Investigación, Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: aortegaa@saludcastillayleon.es. (8)Grupo
de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic 
address: egp29@hotmail.com. (9)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados
Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología,
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3,
47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: liupili@hotmail.com. (10)Grupo de
Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic 
address: mrt.aragon@gmail.com. (11)Dpto de Microbiología, Universidad de
Valladolid, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 7, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic
address: jmeirosbouza@gmail.com. (12)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados
Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Unidad de Infección Viral e
Inmunidad, Centro Nacional de Microbiología - Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Carretera Majadahonda- Pozuelo km. 2, Majadahonda, 28220 Madrid, Spain.
Electronic address: jimenezsousa@yahoo.es. (13)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica
en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid,
SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Unidad de
Infección Viral e Inmunidad, Centro Nacional de Microbiología - Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, Carretera Majadahonda- Pozuelo km. 2, Majadahonda, 28220
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: salvador.resino@gmail.com. (14)Grupo de
Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico
Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005
Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic 
address: jgomez012001@yahoo.es. (15)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados 
Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Unidad Apoyo a la
Investigación, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address:
jfbermejo@saludcastillayleon.es. (16)Grupo de Investigación Biomédica en Cuidados
Críticos (BioCritic), Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL/IECSYL,
Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3, 47005 Valladolid, Spain; Servicio de Anestesiología,
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, SACYL, Avenida Ramón y Cajal, 3,
47005 Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: tamayo@med.uva.es.

OBJECTIVES: Sepsis is characterised by the frequent presence of organ failure and
marked immunologic alterations. We studied the association between the extent of 
organ failure and the transcriptomic response of septic patients.
METHODS: Gene expression profiles in the blood of 74 surgical patients with
sepsis were compared with those of 30 surgical patients with no sepsis.
Differentially expressed genes were assessed for their correlation with the
sequential organ failure (SOFA) score.
RESULTS: The expression levels of a group of genes participating in the cell
cycle (HIST1H1C, CKS2, CCNA2, CDK1, CCNB2, CIT, CCNB1, AURKA, RAD51), neutrophil 
protease activity (ELANE, ADORA3, MPO, MMP8, CTSG), IL-1R and IL-18R response
correlated directly with SOFA and mortality. Genes involved in T cell (LCK, CD3G,
CD3D, ZAP70, ICOS, CD3E, CD28, IL2RB, CD8B, CD8A, CD40LG, IL23A, CCL5, SH2D1A,
ITK, CD247, TBX21, GATA3, CCR7, LEF1, STAT4) and NK cell immunity (CD244, KLRK1, 
KLRD1) were inversely associated with SOFA and mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: The extent of organ failure in sepsis correlates directly with the
existence of imbalanced innate and adaptive responses at the transcriptomic
level. Quantification of the expression levels of the genes identified here could
contribute to the simultaneous assessment of disease severity and immunological
alterations in sepsis.

Copyright © 2014 The British Infection Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25557485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Immunol. 2015 Feb 1;194(3):1131-40. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401617. Epub 2015
Jan 2.

Diverse roles for T-bet in the effector responses required for resistance to
infection.

Harms Pritchard G(1), Hall AO(1), Christian DA(1), Wagage S(1), Fang Q(1),
Muallem G(1), John B(1), Glatman Zaretsky A(1), Dunn WG(1), Perrigoue J(1),
Reiner SL(2), Hunter CA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104; (2)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 
10032; and Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University College of Physicians
and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032. (3)Department of Pathobiology, School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104;
chunter@vet.upenn.edu.

The transcription factor T-bet has been most prominently linked to NK and T cell 
production of IFN-<U+03B3>, a cytokine required for the control of a diverse array of
intracellular pathogens. Indeed, in mice challenged with the parasite Toxoplasma 
gondii, NK and T cell responses are characterized by marked increases of T-bet
expression. Unexpectedly, T-bet(-/-) mice infected with T. gondii develop a
strong NK cell IFN-<U+03B3> response that controls parasite replication at the challenge
site, but display high parasite burdens at secondary sites colonized by T. gondii
and succumb to infection. The loss of T-bet had a modest effect on T cell
production of IFN-<U+03B3> but did not impact on the generation of parasite-specific T
cells. However, the absence of T-bet resulted in lower T cell expression of
CD11a, Ly6C, KLRG-1, and CXCR3 and fewer parasite-specific T cells at secondary
sites of infection, associated with a defect in parasite control at these sites. 
Together, these data highlight T-bet-independent pathways to IFN-<U+03B3> production and
reveal a novel role for this transcription factor in coordinating the T cell
responses necessary to control this infection in peripheral tissues.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4297724
PMID: 25556247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Clin Invest. 2015 Feb;125(2):571-82. doi: 10.1172/JCI75183. Epub 2015 Jan 2.

TLR4 genotype and environmental LPS mediate RSV bronchiolitis through Th2
polarization.

Caballero MT, Serra ME, Acosta PL, Marzec J, Gibbons L, Salim M, Rodriguez A,
Reynaldi A, Garcia A, Bado D, Buchholz UJ, Hijano DR, Coviello S, Newcomb D,
Bellabarba M, Ferolla FM, Libster R, Berenstein A, Siniawaski S, Blumetti V,
Echavarria M, Pinto L, Lawrence A, Ossorio MF, Grosman A, Mateu CG, Bayle C,
Dericco A, Pellegrini M, Igarza I, Repetto HA, Grimaldi LA, Gudapati P, Polack
NR, Althabe F, Shi M, Ferrero F, Bergel E, Stein RT, Peebles RS, Boothby M,
Kleeberger SR, Polack FP.

While 30%-70% of RSV-infected infants develop bronchiolitis, 2% require
hospitalization. It is not clear why disease severity differs among healthy,
full-term infants; however, virus titers, inflammation, and Th2 bias are proposed
explanations. While TLR4 is associated with these disease phenotypes, the role of
this receptor in respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) pathogenesis is controversial.
Here, we evaluated the interaction between TLR4 and environmental factors in RSV 
disease and defined the immune mediators associated with severe illness. Two
independent populations of infants with RSV bronchiolitis revealed that the
severity of RSV infection is determined by the TLR4 genotype of the individual
and by environmental exposure to LPS. RSV-infected infants with severe disease
exhibited a high GATA3/T-bet ratio, which manifested as a high IL-4/IFN-<U+03B3> ratio
in respiratory secretions. The IL-4/IFN-<U+03B3> ratio present in infants with severe
RSV is indicative of Th2 polarization. Murine models of RSV infection confirmed
that LPS exposure, Tlr4 genotype, and Th2 polarization influence disease
phenotypes. Together, the results of this study identify environmental and
genetic factors that influence RSV pathogenesis and reveal that a high IL-4/IFN-<U+03B3>
ratio is associated with severe disease. Moreover, these molecules should be
explored as potential targets for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC4319428
PMID: 25555213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Int J Med Sci. 2015 Jan 1;12(1):7-16. doi: 10.7150/ijms.8352. eCollection 2015.

The expression levels of transcription factors T-bet, GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t and FOXP3 in 
peripheral blood lymphocyte (PBL) of patients with liver cancer and their
significance.

Lin ZW(1), Wu LX(2), Xie Y(1), Ou X(1), Tian PK(1), Liu XP(1), Min J(3), Wang
J(3), Chen RF(3), Chen YJ(3), Liu C(3), Ye H(3), Ou QJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of HepatobiliaryLaparoscope-Surgery, Peking University Shenzhen 
Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518036, China; (2)2. Department of Hepatobiliary
Surgery, The Central People Hospital of Huizhou City, Huizhou, Guangdong, China
516001; (3)3. Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery of Sun Yat-Sen Memorial
Hospital Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120, China.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the expression of transcriptional factors (TFs) T-bet,
GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t and FOXP in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of patients
with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and to evaluate the correlation between the
imbalances of Th1/Th2, Th17/Treg at the expression levels and liver cancer
Methods: The peripheral venous blood was drawn from 20 HCC-patients (HCC-group)
and 20 health participants (C-group). The expression levels of Th1, Th2 and Th17 
and the major Treg-specific TFs T-bet, GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t and FOXP3 in the PBMC were
measured with quantitative real-time PCR(RT-qPCR).
RESULTS: The mRNA level of Th1-specific TF T-bet in HCC-group was significantly
lower than that of C-group (52.34±34.07 VS 104.01±56.00, P<0.01); the mRNA level 
of Th2-specifc TF, GATA-3, in HCC group was significantly higher than that in
C-group (1.38±1.15 VS 0.58±0.65, P<0.05) and T-bet mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA ratio was
significantly lower in HCC-group than in C-group (86.01±116.71 VS 461.88±708.81, 
P<0.05). The mRNA level of Th17-specific TF ROR<U+03B3>t in HCC-group was significantly 
higher than that of C-group (72.32±32.82 VS 33.07±22.86, P<0.01). Treg-specific
TF FOXP3 mRNA level was significant higher in HCC-group than in C-group
(3.17±1.59 VS 1.39±1.13, P<0.01) CONCLUSION: T-bet mRNA level was reduced whereas
GATA-3 mRNA level was increased and T-bet/GATA-3 ratio was significantly reduced 
in PBMC, indicating that Th1/Th2 ratio was of imbalance at TF levels in PBMC of
HCC, displaying Th2 thrift phenomena. The mRNA levels of ROR<U+03B3>t and FOXP3 in PBMC 
of HCC were significantly increased, indicating the existence of a predominant
phenomenon of Th17- and Treg-expressing PBMC in HCC.

PMCID: PMC4278870
PMID: 25552913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cell Immunol. 2015 Apr;294(2):80-3. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2014.12.002. Epub 2014
Dec 13.

TLR7, IFN<U+03B3>, and T-bet: their roles in the development of ABCs in female-biased
autoimmunity.

Rubtsova K(1), Marrack P(2), Rubtsov AV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Denver, CO 80206, USA; Department of
Biomedical Science, National Jewish Health and Department of Immunology and
Microbiology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80206,
USA. Electronic address: rubtsovak@njhealth.org. (2)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Denver, CO 80206, USA; Department of Biomedical Science, National
Jewish Health and Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80206, USA; Department of Medicine,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado Health Sciences
Center, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Denver, CO
80206, USA; Department of Biomedical Science, National Jewish Health and
Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado Health Sciences
Center, Denver, CO 80206, USA.

The majority of autoimmune diseases have a strong gender bias, affecting mostly
females. Gender-specific factors like sex-hormones, the presence or absence of a 
second X chromosome, and gender-specific gut microbiota may contribute to this
bias. In this review we will discuss the role of the X chromosome encoded
toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) and interferon gamma (IFN<U+03B3>) in the development of
autoimmunity. We will also review recent data indicating how these factors may
affect an immune response in a gender-dependent manner.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4380581
PMID: 25541140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015 Feb;3(2):116-24. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0159.
Epub 2014 Dec 16.

Checkpoint blockade immunotherapy relies on T-bet but not Eomes to induce
effector function in tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells.

Berrien-Elliott MM(1), Yuan J(1), Swier LE(1), Jackson SR(1), Chen CL(1), Donlin 
MJ(2), Teague RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Saint Louis University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. (2)Department of Molecular Microbiology 
and Immunology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saint Louis University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. (3)Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. Saint
Louis University Cancer Center, St. Louis, Missouri. rteague@slu.edu.

Coinhibitory receptor blockade is a promising strategy to boost T-cell immunity
against a variety of human cancers. However, many patients still do not benefit
from this treatment, and responders often experience immune-related toxicities.
These issues highlight the need for advanced mechanistic understanding to improve
patient outcomes and uncover clinically relevant biomarkers of treatment
efficacy. However, the T-cell-intrinsic signaling pathways engaged during
checkpoint blockade treatment are not well defined, particularly for combination 
approaches. Using a murine model to study how effector CD8(+) T-cell responses to
tumors may be enhanced in a tolerizing environment, we identified a critical role
for the T-box transcription factor T-bet. Combination blockade of CTLA-4, PD-1,
and LAG-3 induced T-bet expression in responding tumor/self-reactive CD8(+) T
cells. Eradication of established leukemia using this immunotherapy regimen
depended on T-bet induction, which was required for IFN<U+03B3> production and
cytotoxicity by tumor-infiltrating T cells, and for efficient trafficking to
disseminated tumor sites. These data provide new insight into the success of
checkpoint blockade for cancer immunotherapy, revealing T-bet as a key
transcriptional regulator of tumor-reactive CD8(+) T-cell effector
differentiation under otherwise tolerizing conditions.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4324019
PMID: 25516478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Immunol Methods. 2015 Feb;417:45-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2014.12.005. Epub 2014 
Dec 13.

Potentiation of antigen-specific antibody production by peptides derived from
Ag85B of Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Kato M(1), Hanyu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-Peak Co., Ltd., 584-70 Shimonojo, Takasaki 370-0854, Japan. (2)Molecular
Composite Medicine Research Group, Biomedical Research Institute, National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi,
Tsukuba 305-8566, Japan. Electronic address: y.hanyu@aist.go.jp.

To generate high-titer monoclonal antibodies, strong immuno-stimulation must be
used for eliciting an intense cellular immune response. Here, we report that
antigen-specific antibody production was potentiated by Peptide-25 derived from
Ag85B of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and that the production of antigen-specific 
IgG1 in particular was markedly potentiated; specifically, this occurred because 
the use of Peptide-25 resulted in an increase in the number of antigen-specific
antibody-producing cells. We studied the activation of T cells by the peptide by 
examining gene expression. The observed expression pattern of GATA-3 and T-bet
suggests that the peptide modulates the Th1/Th2 balance during immunization. This
potentiation, which was remarkably high in BALB/c mice, could be applied in the
immunization performed for monoclonal antibody production in vivo and in vitro.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25514091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Immunol. 2015 Jan 15;194(2):827-35. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401350. Epub 2014
Dec 10.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells express CD38 in response to Th1 cell-derived
IFN-<U+03B3> by a T-bet-dependent mechanism.

Bürgler S(1), Gimeno A(2), Parente-Ribes A(3), Wang D(3), Os A(3), Devereux S(4),
Jebsen P(5), Bogen B(6), Tjønnfjord GE(7), Munthe LA(8).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immune Regulation, Department of Immunology, University of Oslo,
Oslo University Hospital, NO-0424 Oslo, Norway; Department of Hematology, Oslo
University Hospital, NO-0424 Oslo, Norway; Experimental Infectious Diseases and
Cancer Research, University Children's Hospital Zürich, University of Zürich,
CH-8008 Zurich, Switzerland; Simone.Buergler@kispi.uzh.ch ludvig@medisin.uio.no
gtjonnfj@ous-hf.no. (2)Centre for Immune Regulation, Department of Immunology,
University of Oslo, Oslo University Hospital, NO-0424 Oslo, Norway; Department of
Hematology, Oslo University Hospital, NO-0424 Oslo, Norway; (3)Centre for Immune 
Regulation, Department of Immunology, University of Oslo, Oslo University
Hospital, NO-0424 Oslo, Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Oslo, NO-0424 Oslo, Norway; (4)Department of Hematological Medicine, King's
College London, London SE5 9RS, United Kingdom; (5)Department of Pathology, Oslo 
University Hospital, NO-0424 Oslo, Norway; and. (6)Centre for Immune Regulation, 
Department of Immunology, University of Oslo, Oslo University Hospital, NO-0424
Oslo, Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, NO-0424 Oslo,
Norway; K. G. Jebsen Centre for Influenza Vaccine Research, Department of
Immunology, Oslo University Hospital, University of Oslo, NO-0424 Oslo, Norway.
(7)Department of Hematology, Oslo University Hospital, NO-0424 Oslo, Norway;
Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, NO-0424 Oslo, Norway;
Simone.Buergler@kispi.uzh.ch ludvig@medisin.uio.no gtjonnfj@ous-hf.no. (8)Centre 
for Immune Regulation, Department of Immunology, University of Oslo, Oslo
University Hospital, NO-0424 Oslo, Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine,
University of Oslo, NO-0424 Oslo, Norway; Simone.Buergler@kispi.uzh.ch
ludvig@medisin.uio.no gtjonnfj@ous-hf.no.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a B cell malignancy associated with
increased levels of inflammatory cytokines. Similarly, expression of CD38 on CLL 
cells correlates with CLL cell survival and proliferation, but the mechanisms
that regulate CD38 expression and inflammatory cytokines remain unclear. We have 
recently demonstrated that patients have CLL-specific Th cells that support CLL
proliferation. In this article, we show that CLL cells attract such Th cells,
thereby establishing an Ag-dependent collaboration. Blocking experiments
performed in vitro as wells as in vivo, using a xenograft model, revealed that
secretion of IFN-<U+03B3> was a major mechanism by which CLL-specific Th cells increased
CD38 on CLL cells. The expression of the transcription factor T-bet in peripheral
blood CLL cells significantly correlated with CD38 expression, and transient
transfection of CLL cells with T-bet resulted in T-bet(hi)CD38(hi) cells.
Finally, chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that T-bet can bind
to regulatory regions of the CD38 gene. These data suggest that CLL cells attract
CLL-specific Th cells and initiate a positive feedback loop with upregulation of 
T-bet, CD38, and type 1 chemokines allowing further recruitment of Th cells and
increased type 1 cytokine secretion. This insight provides a cellular and
molecular mechanism that links the inflammatory signature observed in CLL
pathogenesis with CD38 expression and aggressive disease and suggests that
targeting the IFN-<U+03B3>/IFN-<U+03B3>R/JAK/STAT/T-bet/CD38 pathway could play a role in the
therapy of CLL.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25505279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Nat Immunol. 2015 Feb;16(2):197-206. doi: 10.1038/ni.3053. Epub 2014 Dec 15.

Dynamic expression of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 by regulatory T
cells maintains immunotolerance.

Yu F(1), Sharma S(1), Edwards J(1), Feigenbaum L(2), Zhu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (2)Laboratory
Animal Sciences Program, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland, USA.

Regulatory T cells (Treg cells) can express the transcription factors T-bet and
GATA-3, but the function of this expression and whether such cells represent
stable subsets is still unknown. By using various reporter tools, we found that
the expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in Treg cells was dynamically influenced by
the cytokine environment. Treg cell-specific deletion of the gene encoding either
T-bet (Tbx21) or GATA-3 (Gata3) alone did not result in loss of Treg cell
function; however, mice with combined deficiency in both genes in Treg cells
developed severe autoimmune-like diseases. Loss of Treg cell function correlated 
with upregulation of expression of the transcription factor ROR<U+03B3>t and reduced
expression of the transcription factor Foxp3. Thus, in the steady state,
activated Treg cells transiently upregulated either T-bet or GATA-3 to maintain T
cell homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4297509
PMID: 25501630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Immunol Invest. 2015;44(2):189-98. doi: 10.3109/08820139.2014.953635. Epub 2014
Dec 11.

Whether vitamin A supplementation is effective in T-bet and IFN-<U+0263> gene expression
reduction?

Sezavar H(1), Saboor-Yaraghi AA, Salehi E, Mottaghi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine,
Iran University of Medical Sciences , Tehran , Iran .

BACKGROUND: The aim of present study is evaluation of vitamin A supplementation
efficacy on IFN-<U+0263> and T-bet gene expression in atherosclerotic patients.
METHODS: Thirty-one patients and 15 healthy controls participated in this study. 
Healthy control and patients in Vitamin A group received 25<U+2009>000<U+2009>IU retinyl
palmitate daily for 4 months. Control patients also received 1 pearl of placebo
per day up to 4 months. Gene expression levels were assessed by real-time PCR
using SYBR green detection method.
RESULTS: IFN-<U+03B3> gene expression in fresh cells of patients taking vitamin A
declined slightly (0.85-fold, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.068), whereas the expression of this gene was
increased in patients taking placebo, and in healthy control subjects 1.2-fold
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.267) and 1.7-fold (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.580), respectively. There were no significant
difference (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.159) between 3 groups in terms of IFN-<U+03B3> gene expression in
cells stimulated with PHA. In order to determine whether PHA stimulation of PBMCs
in vitro had an effect on T-bet expression, we measured the difference between
the 3 groups of studied. The results showed significant differences between the
groups (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.046). IFN-<U+03B3> gene expression in cells activated with ox-LDL in
healthy control subjects and patients taking vitamin A, was reduced 0.43
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0001) and 0.41 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001) respectively, but in placebo patients was
increased 2.2-fold (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.959).
CONCLUSION: Considering role of vitamin A on suppression of Th1 cells in
atherosclerotic patients, it can be concluded that vitamin A supplementation may 
be advantageous for these patients.

PMID: 25496023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Immunology. 2015 May;145(1):124-35. doi: 10.1111/imm.12431.

Knockdown of T-bet expression in Mart-127-35 -specific T-cell-receptor-engineered
human CD4(+)  CD25(-) and CD8(+) T cells attenuates effector function.

Jha SS(1), Chakraborty NG, Singh P, Mukherji B, Dorsky DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
CT, USA.

Gene transfer to create tumour epitope-specific cytolytic T cells for adoptive
immunotherapy of cancer remains an area of active inquiry. When the Mart-127-35
-specific DMF5 T-cell receptor (TCR) is transferred into peripheral human CD4(+) 
T cells, the reprogrammed cells exhibit a T helper type 1 (Th1) phenotype with
significant multifactorial effector capabilities. The T-bet transcription factor 
plays an important role in determination of the Th1 differentiation pathway. To
gain a deeper understanding of how T-bet controls the outcome of human T-cell
reprogramming by gene transfer, we developed a system for examining the effects
of short hairpin RNA-mediated T-bet gene knockdown in sorted cell populations
uniformly expressing the knockdown construct. In this system, using activated
peripheral human CD4(+)  CD25(-) and CD8(+) T cells, T-bet knockdown led to
attenuation of the interferon-<U+03B3> response to both antigen-specific and
non-specific TCR stimulation. The interleukin-2 (IL-2) antigen-specific response 
was not attenuated by T-bet knockdown. Also, in TCR-reprogrammed CD8(+) cells,
the cytolytic effector response was attenuated by T-bet knockdown. T-bet
knockdown did not cause redirection into a Th2 differentiation pathway, and no
increased IL-4, IL-10, or IL-17 response was detected in this system. These
results indicate that T-bet expression is required for maintenance of the CD4(+) 
 CD25(-) and CD8(+) effector phenotypes in TCR-reprogrammed human T cells. They
also suggest that the activation protocol necessary for transduction with
retrovectors and lentivectors may commit the reprogrammed cells to the Th1
phenotype, which cannot be altered by T-bet knockdown but that there is,
nevertheless, a continuous requirement of T-bet expression for interferon-<U+03B3> gene 
activation.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4405330 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25495780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2015 May;73(5):445-59. doi: 10.1111/aji.12350. Epub 2014 Dec
10.

The placental immune milieu is characterized by a Th2- and anti-inflammatory
transcription profile, regardless of maternal allergy, and associates with
neonatal immunity.

Abelius MS(1), Janefjord C, Ernerudh J, Berg G, Matthiesen L, Duchén K, Nilsson
LJ, Jenmalm MC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Paediatrics, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden; Unit of Autoimmunity and Immune
Regulation, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping
University, Linköping, Sweden.

PROBLEM: How maternal allergy affects the systemic and local immunological
environment during pregnancy and the immune development of the offspring is
unclear.
METHOD OF STUDY: Expression of 40 genes was quantified by PCR arrays in placenta,
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), and cord blood mononuclear cells
(CBMC) from 7 allergic and 12 non-allergic women and their offspring.
RESULTS: Placental gene expression was dominated by a Th2-/anti-inflammatory
profile, irrespectively of maternal allergy, as compared to gene expression in
PBMC. p35 expression in placenta correlated with fetal Tbx21 (<U+03C1> = -0.88, P <
0.001) and IL-5 expression in PBMC with fetal galectin1 (<U+03C1> = 0.91, P < 0.001).
Increased expression of Th2-associated CCL22 in CBMC preceded allergy
development.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression locally and systemically during pregnancy was partly
associated with the offspring's gene expression, possibly indicating that the
immunological milieu is important for fetal immune development. Maternal allergy 
was not associated with an enhanced Th2 immunity in placenta or PBMC, while a
marked prenatal Th2 skewing, shown as increased CCL22 mRNA expression, might
contribute to postnatal allergy development.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25491384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Apr;45(4):1192-205. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444633. Epub 2015 Jan
22.

miR-148a is upregulated by Twist1 and T-bet and promotes Th1-cell survival by
regulating the proapoptotic gene Bim.

Haftmann C(1), Stittrich AB, Zimmermann J, Fang Z, Hradilkova K, Bardua M,
Westendorf K, Heinz GA, Riedel R, Siede J, Lehmann K, Weinberger EE, Zimmel D,
Lauer U, Häupl T, Sieper J, Backhaus M, Neumann C, Hoffmann U, Porstner M, Chen
W, Grün JR, Baumgrass R, Matz M, Löhning M, Scheffold A, Wittmann J, Chang HD,
Rajewsky N, Jäck HM, Radbruch A, Mashreghi MF.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum Berlin (DRFZ), an institute of the Leibniz 
AssociationBerlin, Berlin, Germany.

Repeatedly activated T helper 1 (Th1) cells present during chronic inflammation
can efficiently adapt to the inflammatory milieu, for example, by expressing the 
transcription factor Twist1, which limits the immunopathology caused by Th1
cells. Here, we show that in repeatedly activated murine Th1 cells, Twist1 and
T-bet induce expression of microRNA-148a (miR-148a). miR-148a regulates
expression of the proapoptotic gene Bim, resulting in a decreased Bim/Bcl2 ratio.
Inhibition of miR-148a by antagomirs in repeatedly activated Th1 cells increases 
the expression of Bim, leading to enhanced apoptosis. Knockdown of Bim expression
by siRNA in miR-148a antagomir-treated cells restores viability of the Th1 cells,
demonstrating that miR-148a controls survival by regulating Bim expression. Thus,
Twist1 and T-bet not only control the differentiation and function of Th1 cells, 
but also their persistence in chronic inflammation.

© 2014 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by WILEY-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4406154
PMID: 25486906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Dec;23(2):688-95. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.10.023.
Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Iminosugar derivative WGN-26 suppresses acute allograft rejection via inhibiting 
the IFN-<U+03B3>/p-STAT1/T-bet signaling pathway.

Gao X(1), Yang H(2), Xu Y(2), Xiong Y(3), Wang G(4), Ye X(5), Ye J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, PR China; Modern Research Center for
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing
100029, PR China. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, PR China.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, PR China; Institute of Mental
Health, Peking University, Beijing 100191, PR China. (4)State Key Laboratory of
Natural and Biomimetic Drugs and School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking
University, Beijing 100191, PR China. (5)State Key Laboratory of Natural and
Biomimetic Drugs and School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University,
Beijing 100191, PR China. Electronic address: xinshan@bjmu.edu.cn. (6)Department 
of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking
University, Beijing 100191, PR China. Electronic address: yejia@bjmu.edu.cn.

This study aimed to investigate the effect of the iminosugar derivative WGN-26 on
suppressing acute allograft rejection and to explore the underlying mechanisms.
The results demonstrated that WGN-26 (12, 6 and 3mg/kg) significantly prolonged
the skin allograft survival time in a dose-dependent manner and minimized the
pathological changes. The minimum lethal dose was 320 mg/kg. By exploring the
potential cellular and molecular mechanisms, we found that WGN-26
dose-dependently inhibited T lymphocyte proliferation, as determined through the 
single mixed lymphocyte reaction (sMLR) or the ConA-induced T cell proliferation 
assay in allograft recipients. The FCM results indicated that WGN-26 particularly
reduced the percentage of CD3(+)CD4(+) T cells in allograft recipients. After
treatment with WGN-26, the secretion of IFN-<U+03B3> in allograft recipients was
lowered, whereas the IL-4 and IL-17 levels remained stable. Furthermore, we found
that WGN-26 inhibited the phosphorylation of STAT1 and accelerated the
degradation of T-bet protein in allograft recipients. This study provides the
first report that the iminosugar derivative WGN-26 dose-dependently prolongs skin
allograft survival and that the possible mechanism is mediated by inhibiting
CD4(+) T cell proliferation and suppressing the IFN-<U+03B3>/p-STAT1/T-bet signaling
pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2014 Dec;94(6):579-88.

IL-27 and IL-27-producing CD4+ T cells in human tuberculous pleural effusion.

Xia H, Ye ZJ, Zhou Q, You WJ, Cui A, Wang XJ, Zhai K, Jin XG, Tong ZH, Shi HZ.

The objective of the present study was to figure out whether human
IL-27-producing CD4(+) T cells represent a distinct T cell subset in tuberculosis
pleural effusion (TPE). Distribution, phenotypic features of IL-27-producing
CD4(+) T cells in TPE were determined. The required transcription factors and
signal transductions for IL-27-producing CD4(+) T cell differentiation were
explored. The immune regulation of IL-27 on pleural mesothelial cells was
observed. We have determined the presence of a subset of human Th cells that
infiltrated into tuberculous pleural effusion, which was characterized by the
secretion of IL-27, and somehow IFN-<U+03B3>, but not of IL-4, IL-9, IL-17, or IL-22.
These IL-27-producing CD4(+) T cells were effector memory cells and exhibited a
transcription profile clearly separated from those of Th2, Th17, Th9, and Th22
cells. The in vitro experiments showed that IL-1ß, IL-2 and IL-12, or their
various combinations could promote IL-27(+)CD4(+) T cell differentiation from
naive CD4(+) T cells by means of phosphorylation of STAT3, STAT4, or/and STAT5.
Transcription factors c-Fos and T-bet were required for IL-27(+)CD4(+) T cell
differentiation. By activating STAT3 signaling, IL-27 not only restored a clear
epithelial phenotype of pleural mesothelial cells, but also further reversed
IFN-<U+03B3>-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition of pleural mesothelial cells.
These data suggested that human IL-27(+)CD4(+) T cells might represent a distinct
human T cell subset with unique expression profiles of transcription factors and 
proinflammatory cytokines, and these IL-27(+)CD4(+) T cells may play important
roles in tuberculosis immunity by affecting pleural mesothelial cells.

PMID: 25443503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2015 Jan;72(1):159-67. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2014.09.022. Epub 
2014 Oct 18.

Expression of helper T cell master regulators in inflammatory dermatoses and
primary cutaneous T-cell lymphomas: diagnostic implications.

Hsi AC(1), Lee SJ(2), Rosman IS(3), Carson KR(4), Kelley A(1), Viele V(1), Pang
X(5), Musiek A(2), Schaffer A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Washington University Dermatopathology Center, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. (2)Division of Dermatology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. (3)Washington
University Dermatopathology Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri; Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Division of Dermatology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. (4)Division of Medical
Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
(5)Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri.
(6)Washington University Dermatopathology Center, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Division of Dermatology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. Electronic
address: aschaffer@path.wustl.edu.

BACKGROUND: Mycosis fungoides (MF) is a neoplasm of skin-homing CD4(+) helper T
(TH) lymphocytes with dysregulation of TH1 and TH2 immunity. Diagnosis of MF is
challenging, as there is significant morphologic overlap with other dermatologic 
entities.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated diagnostic utility of TH1- and TH2-specific markers,
T-bet, and GATA-3, respectively, in MF and its reactive and neoplastic mimics.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining for CD3/T-bet and CD3/GATA-3 was performed 
on inflammatory dermatoses (n = 56), MF (n = 37), Sezary syndrome (SS; n = 8),
and cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma (C-ALCL; n = 14).
RESULTS: Inflammatory dermatoses showed epidermal T cells predominantly
expressing GATA-3, except psoriasis, which exhibited a mixed GATA-3/T-bet
staining. In contrast, neoplastic T cells in patch stage MF showed markedly
increased T-bet positivity with minimal GATA-3 expression. Plaque stage MF had
a mixed T-bet/GATA-3 phenotype, whereas tumor stage MF and SS exhibited diffuse
GATA-3 expression. C-ALCL lacked significant staining for both markers.
LIMITATIONS: Sample size was relatively small.
CONCLUSIONS: A predominance of T-bet(+) T cells in the epidermis support patch
stage MF over dermatitis. A predominance of GATA-3(+) T cells in the dermis
support CD30(+) MF with large cell transformation over C-ALCL. These stains
do not allow distinction between dermatitis and cutaneous infiltrates of SS.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25440432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Mol Med (Berl). 2015 Apr;93(4):457-67. doi: 10.1007/s00109-014-1232-4. Epub
2014 Nov 28.

The pathogenic Th profile of human activated memory Th cells in early rheumatoid 
arthritis can be modulated by VIP.

Jimeno R(1), Gomariz RP, Garín M, Gutiérrez-Cañas I, González-Álvaro I, Carrión
M, Galindo M, Leceta J, Juarranz Y.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Biología, Universidad
Complutense de Madrid, 28040, Madrid, Spain.

Our aim is to study the behavior of memory Th cells (Th17, Th17/1, and Th1
profiles) from early rheumatoid arthritis (eRA) patients after their in vitro
activation/expansion to provide information about its contribution to RA
chronicity. Moreover, we analyzed the potential involvement of vasoactive
intestinal peptide (VIP) as an endogenous healing mediator. CD4(+)CD45RO(+) T
cells from PBMCs of HD and eRA were activated/expanded in vitro in the
presence/absence of VIP. FACS, ELISA, RT-PCR, and immunocytochemistry analyses
were performed. An increase in CCR6(+)/RORC(+) cells and in RORC-proliferating
cells and a decrease in T-bet-proliferating cells and T-bet(+)/RORC(+) cells were
shown in eRA. mRNA expression of IL-17, IL-2, RORC, RORA, STAT3, and Tbx21 and
protein secretion of IL-17, IFN<U+03B3>, and GM-CSF were higher in eRA. VIP decreased
the mRNA expression of IL-22, IL-2, STAT3, Tbx21, IL-12Rß2, IL-23R, and IL-21R in
HD and it decreased IL-21, IL-2, and STAT3 in eRA. VIP decreased IL-22 and GM-CSF
secretion and increased IL-9 secretion in HD and it decreased IL-21 secretion in 
eRA. VPAC2/VPAC1 ratio expression was increased in eRA. All in all, memory Th
cells from eRA patients show a greater proportion of Th17 cells with a pathogenic
Th17 and Th17/1 profile compared to HD. VIP is able to modulate the pathogenic
profile, mostly in HD. Our results are promising for therapy in the early stages 
of RA because they suggest that targeting molecules involved in the pathogenic
Th17, Th17/1, and Th1 phenotypes and targeting VIP receptors could have a
therapeutic effect modulating these subsets.KEY MESSAGES: Th17 cells are more
important than Th1 in the contribution to pathogenesis in eRA patients.
Pathogenic Th17 and Th17/1 profile are abundant in activated/expanded memory Th
cells from eRA patients. VIP decreases the pathogenic Th17, Th1, and Th17/1
profiles, mainly in healthy donors. The expression of VIP receptors is reduced in
eRA patients respect to healthy donors, whereas the ratio of VPAC2/VPAC1
expression is higher.

PMCID: PMC4366555
PMID: 25430993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Blood. 2015 Jan 29;125(5):753-61. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-08-593202. Epub 2014
Nov 20.

Early-onset Evans syndrome, immunodeficiency, and premature immunosenescence
associated with tripeptidyl-peptidase II deficiency.

Stepensky P(1), Rensing-Ehl A(2), Gather R(3), Revel-Vilk S(1), Fischer U(4),
Nabhani S(4), Beier F(5), Brümmendorf TH(5), Fuchs S(3), Zenke S(2), Firat E(6), 
Pessach VM(7), Borkhardt A(4), Rakhmanov M(2), Keller B(2), Warnatz K(2), Eibel
H(2), Niedermann G(6), Elpeleg O(8), Ehl S(9).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Department,
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel; (2)Center for
Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center Freiburg and. (3)Center for
Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center Freiburg and Faculty of
Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; (4)Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Hematology, and Clinical Immunology, University Children's Hospital,
Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany; (5)Department of
Hematology, Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplantation, Rheinisch Westfälische
Technische Hochschule Aachen University Medical School, Aachen, Germany;
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany; (7)Department of Dermatology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel; (8)Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research,
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel; and. (9)Center for 
Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center Freiburg and Center for
Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center, University of
Freiburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Jan 29;125(5):741-2.

Autoimmune cytopenia is a frequent manifestation of primary immunodeficiencies.
Two siblings presented with Evans syndrome, viral infections, and progressive
leukopenia. DNA available from one patient showed a homozygous frameshift
mutation in tripeptidyl peptidase II (TPP2) abolishing protein expression. TPP2
is a serine exopeptidase involved in extralysosomal peptide degradation. Its
deficiency in mice activates cell death programs and premature senescence.
Similar to cells from naïve, uninfected TPP2-deficient mice, patient cells showed
increased major histocompatibility complex I expression and most CD8(+) T-cells
had a senescent CCR7-CD127(-)CD28(-)CD57(+) phenotype with poor proliferative
responses and enhanced staurosporine-induced apoptosis. T-cells showed increased 
expression of the effector molecules perforin and interferon-<U+03B3> with high
expression of the transcription factor T-bet. Age-associated B-cells with a
CD21(-) CD11c(+) phenotype expressing T-bet were increased in humans and mice,
combined with antinuclear antibodies. Moreover, markers of senescence were also
present in human and murine TPP2-deficient fibroblasts. Telomere lengths were
normal in patient fibroblasts and granulocytes, and low normal in lymphocytes,
which were compatible with activation of stress-induced rather than replicative
senescence programs. TPP2 deficiency is the first primary immunodeficiency
linking premature immunosenescence to severe autoimmunity. Determination of
senescent lymphocytes should be part of the diagnostic evaluation of children
with refractory multilineage cytopenias.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4463807
PMID: 25414442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Immunol. 2015 Jan 1;194(1):125-33. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401644. Epub 2014 Nov
17.

OX40- and CD27-mediated costimulation synergizes with anti-PD-L1 blockade by
forcing exhausted CD8+ T cells to exit quiescence.

Buchan SL(1), Manzo T(2), Flutter B(2), Rogel A(1), Edwards N(2), Zhang L(2),
Sivakumaran S(2), Ghorashian S(2), Carpenter B(2), Bennett CL(2), Freeman GJ(3), 
Sykes M(4), Croft M(5), Al-Shamkhani A(1), Chakraverty R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Sciences Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton,
Southampton SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom; (2)Transplantation Immunology Group, Cancer
Institute, University College London, London NW3 2PF, United Kingdom; Institute
for Immunity and Transplantation, University College London, London NW3 2PF,
United Kingdom; (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; (4)Columbia Center for Translational
Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032; and.
(5)Institute of Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037. (6)Transplantation
Immunology Group, Cancer Institute, University College London, London NW3 2PF,
United Kingdom; Institute for Immunity and Transplantation, University College
London, London NW3 2PF, United Kingdom; r.chakraverty@ucl.ac.uk.

Exhaustion of chronically stimulated CD8(+) T cells is a significant obstacle to 
immune control of chronic infections or tumors. Although coinhibitory checkpoint 
blockade with anti-programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) Ab can restore functions to 
exhausted T cell populations, recovery is often incomplete and dependent upon the
pool size of a quiescent T-bet(high) subset that expresses lower levels of PD-1. 
In a model in which unhelped, HY-specific CD8(+) T cells gradually lose function 
following transfer to male bone marrow transplantation recipients, we have
explored the effect of shifting the balance away from coinhibition and toward
costimulation by combining anti-PD-L1 with agonistic Abs to the TNFR superfamily 
members, OX40 and CD27. Several weeks following T cell transfer, both agonistic
Abs, but especially anti-CD27, demonstrated synergy with anti-PD-L1 by enhancing 
CD8(+) T cell proliferation and effector cytokine generation. Anti-CD27 and
anti-PD-L1 synergized by downregulating the expression of multiple
quiescence-related genes concomitant with a reduced frequency of T-bet(high)
cells within the exhausted population. However, in the presence of persistent Ag,
the CD8(+) T cell response was not sustained and the overall size of the effector
cytokine-producing pool eventually contracted to levels below that of controls.
Thus, CD27-mediated costimulation can synergize with coinhibitory checkpoint
blockade to switch off molecular programs for quiescence in exhausted T cell
populations, but at the expense of losing precursor cells required to maintain a 
response.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4272895
PMID: 25404365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Immunol. 2015 Jan 1;194(1):388-97. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401618. Epub 2014 Nov
17.

T-bet is critical for the development of acute graft-versus-host disease through 
controlling T cell differentiation and function.

Fu J(1), Wang D(2), Yu Y(2), Heinrichs J(3), Wu Y(4), Schutt S(4), Kaosaard K(2),
Liu C(5), Haarberg K(2), Bastian D(4), McDonald DG(6), Anasetti C(2), Yu XZ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Ph.D. Program, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612;
Immunology, Blood and Marrow Transplantation, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and
Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612; Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425; (2)Immunology, Blood 
and Marrow Transplantation, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 
Tampa, FL 33612; (3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University
of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425; Department of Pathology and Cell
Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612; (4)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC
29425; (5)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611; (6)Department of Radiation
Oncology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425; and.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425; Department of Medicine, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425 yux@musc.edu.

T-bet is a master regulator for IFN-<U+03B3> production and Th1 differentiation. We
evaluated the roles of T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> in T cell responses in acute
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and found that T-bet(-/-) T cells induced
significantly less GVHD compared with wild-type or IFN-<U+03B3>(-/-) counterparts in
both MHC-mismatched and MHC-matched but minor histocompatibility Ag-mismatched
models driven by CD4 T cells. T-bet(-/-), but not IFN-<U+03B3>(-/-), CD4 T cells had a
markedly reduced ability to cause tissue damage in liver and gut. This distinct
outcome is reflected by the differential gene expression on donor CD4 T cells
deficient for T-bet or IFN-<U+03B3>. At mRNA and protein levels, we defined several
T-bet-dependent molecules that may account for the impaired ability of T-bet(-/-)
T cells to migrate into target organs and to produce Th1-related cytokines.
Moreover, these molecules were independent of either endogenous IFN-<U+03B3>, such as
CXCR3 and programmed death-1, or systematic IFN-<U+03B3>, such as NKG2D, I-A(b), and
granzyme B. Although both T-bet(-/-) and IFN-<U+03B3>(-/-) CD4 T cells are prone to
differentiate into Th17 cells, polarized Th17 cells deficient for T-bet but not
for IFN-<U+03B3> had a significantly reduced ability to cause GVHD. Finally, T-bet(-/-) 
T cells had a compromised graft-versus-leukemia effect, which could be
essentially reversed by neutralization of IL-17 in the recipients. We conclude
that T-bet is required for Th1 differentiation and migration, as well as for
optimal function of Th17 cells. Thus, targeting T-bet or regulating its
downstream effectors independent of IFN-<U+03B3> may be a promising strategy to control 
GVHD in the clinic.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4314960
PMID: 25404360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Inflammation. 2015;38(3):995-1002. doi: 10.1007/s10753-014-0063-3.

Alterations of T helper lymphocyte subpopulations in sepsis, severe sepsis, and
septic shock: a prospective observational study.

Li J(1), Li M, Su L, Wang H, Xiao K, Deng J, Jia Y, Han G, Xie L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the Chinese PLA General Hospital, NO.28
Fuxing Road, Haidian District, 100853, Beijing, China.

Circulating lymphocyte number was significantly decreased in patients with
sepsis. However, it remains unknown which severity phase (sepsis, severe sepsis, 
and septic shock) does it develop and what happen on each subpopulation. Eight
patients with differing severities of sepsis (31 sepses, 33 severe sepses, and 16
septic shocks) were enrolled. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) of Th1, Th2, and Th17; regulatory T (Treg) cell-specific transcription
factor T-bet; GATA-3; RORgammat (ROR<U+03B3>t); forkhead box P3 (FOXP3); and IL-17 mRNA 
were performed, and the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used to
detect serum interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>, IL-4, and IL-10. In this study, the Th1, Th2,
Treg transcription factors, and related cytokines IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, and IL-10 levels
of sepsis and severe sepsis patients in peripheral blood were significantly
higher than those of the normal controls. Except for IL-17, the T-bet, GATA-3,
and IFN-<U+03B3> levels of septic shock patients were lower than those of sepsis
patients. We also observed that the proportions of Th17/Treg in the sepsis and
septic shock groups were inversed. From the above, the inflammatory response
especially the adaptive immune response is still activated in sepsis and severe
sepsis, but significant immunosuppression was developed in septic shock. In
addition, the proportion of Th17/Treg inversed may be associated with the illness
aggravation of patients with sepsis.

PMID: 25403265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Sep 15;7(10):6906-13. eCollection 2014.

T-box transcription factor 21 expression in breast cancer and its relationship
with prognosis.

Yu H(1), Yang J(1), Jiao S(1), Li Y(1), Zhang W(2), Wang J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, General Hospital of PLA Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, 401 Hospital of PLA Qingdao, China. (3)Department of 
General Surgery, General Hospital of PLA Beijing, China.

PURPOSE: T-box transcription factor 21 (T-bet) is a key lineage-defining
transcription factor. The purpose of this study was to verify the relationship
between expression in primary tumors and prognosis of breast cancer.
METHODS: T-protein expression was immunohistochemically detected on
surgically-obtained tumor samples of 130 (stage I-III) invasive breast carcinomas
from Chinese subjects, who were followed up for a mean time of 112 months.
RESULTS: T-bet was expressed in the nuclei and cytoplasm of both tumor cells and 
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. In LOG-RANK analysis, higher density of
interstitial T-bet+ interstitial lymphocytes was related with longer distant
disease-free survival (DDFS) (P = 0.047); higher tumor nuclei T-bet expression
was related with shorter DFS (P = 0.021) and DDFS (P = 0.026). Cox multivariate
analysis showed that density of interstitial T-bet+ interstitial lymphocytes was 
an independent positive prognostic factor for DFS (HR = 0.474, P = 0.051) and
DDFS (HR = 0.414, P = 0.030); tumor nuclei CTLA-4 expression was an independent
adverse prognostic factor for DFS (HR = 3.007, P = 0.003), DDFS (HR = 2.931, P = 
0.005) and OS (HR = 2.352, P = 0.029).
CONCLUSIONS: This study found that, high tumor nuclei T-bet expression in primary
tumors of breast cancer was correlated with poor prognosis and high density of
T-bet+ interstitial lymphocytes in primary tumors of breast cancer were
correlated with favorable prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4230155
PMID: 25400774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 15;193(12):6152-60. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303422. Epub 2014 
Nov 14.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a negatively regulates IFN-<U+03B3> expression in T
cells.

Tanaka S(1), Tanaka K(2), Magnusson F(2), Chung Y(2), Martinez GJ(2), Wang YH(2),
Nurieva RI(2), Kurosaki T(3), Dong C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Inflammation and Cancer, MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054; Laboratory of Lymphocyte Differentiation, World
Premier International Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; and. (2)Department of Immunology and Center for
Inflammation and Cancer, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054;
(3)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Differentiation, World Premier International
Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871,
Japan; and. (4)Department of Immunology and Center for Inflammation and Cancer,
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054; Institute for Immunology, Tsinghua 
University, Beijing 100084, China chendong@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Humoral immunity, including Ab switching and somatic hypermutation, is critically
regulated by CD4(+) T cells. T follicular helper (Tfh) cells have been recently
shown to be a distinct T cell subset important in germinal center reactions. The 
transcriptional regulation of Tfh cell development and function has not been well
understood. In this study, we report that C/EBPa, a basic region/leucine zipper
transcription factor, is highly expressed in Tfh cells. Cebpa-deficient CD4(+) T 
cells exhibit enhanced IFN-<U+03B3> expression in vitro and in vivo. T cell-specific
Cebpa knockout mice, although not defective in Tfh cell generation, produce
significantly increased levels of IgG2a/b and IgG3 following immunization with a 
protein Ag. Moreover, C/EBPa binds to the Ifng gene and inhibits T-bet-driven
Ifng transcription in a DNA binding-dependent manner. Our study thus demonstrates
that C/EBPa restricts IFN-<U+03B3> expression in T cells to allow proper class switching
by B cells.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4385522
PMID: 25398328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 19;289(51):35561-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.608745. Epub 2014
Nov 5.

Human memory, but not naive, CD4+ T cells expressing transcription factor T-bet
might drive rapid cytokine production.

Yu SF(1), Zhang YN(1), Yang BY(1), Wu CY(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute of Immunology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Key Laboratory
of Tropical Disease Control Research of Ministry of Education, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. (2)From the Institute of Immunology, Zhongshan
School of Medicine, Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control Research of
Ministry of Education, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
changyou_wu@yahoo.com.

We found that after stimulation for a few hours, memory but not naive CD4(+) T
cells produced a large amount of IFN-<U+03B3>; however, the mechanism of rapid response 
of memory CD4(+) T cells remains undefined. We compared the expression of
transcription factors in resting or activated naive and memory CD4(+) T cells and
found that T-bet, but not pSTAT-1 or pSTAT-4, was highly expressed in resting
memory CD4(+) T cells and that phenotypic characteristics of T-bet(+)CD4(+) T
cells were CD45RA(low)CD62L(low) CCR7(low). After short-term stimulation,
purified memory CD4(+) T cells rapidly produced effector cytokines that were
closely associated with the pre-existence of T-bet. By contrast, resting naive
CD4(+) T cells did not express T-bet, and they produced cytokines only after
sustained stimulation. Our further studies indicated that T-bet was expressed in 
the nuclei of resting memory CD4(+) T cells, which might have important
implications for rapid IFN-<U+03B3> production. Our results indicate that the
pre-existence and nuclear mobilization of T-bet in resting memory CD4(+) T cells 
might be a possible transcriptional mechanism for rapid production of cytokines
by human memory CD4(+) T cells.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4271239
PMID: 25378399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Nov 18;111(46):16484-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1417215111. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

EGR2 is critical for peripheral naïve T-cell differentiation and the T-cell
response to influenza.

Du N(1), Kwon H(1), Li P(1), West EE(1), Oh J(1), Liao W(1), Yu Z(2), Ren M(1),
Leonard WJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Immunology Center, and. (2)Pathology
Core, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892-1674. (3)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Immunology
Center, and wjl@helix.nih.gov.

Early growth response 2 (EGR2) transcription factor negatively regulates T-cell
activation, in contrast to the positive regulation of this process by EGR1. Here,
we unexpectedly found that EGR2 promotes peripheral naïve T-cell differentiation,
with delayed T-cell receptor-induced proliferation in naïve T cells from Egr2
conditional knockout (CKO) mice and decreased production of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, IL-9,
and IL-17A in cells subjected to T-helper differentiation. Moreover, genes that
promote T-cell activation, including Tbx21 and Notch1, had decreased expression
in Egr2 CKO T cells and are direct EGR2 target genes. Following influenza
infection, Egr2 CKO mice had delayed viral clearance, more weight loss, and more 
severe pathological changes in the lung than did WT and Egr1 KO mice, with
decreased production of effector cytokines, increased infiltration of
antigen-specific memory-precursor CD8(+) T cells, and lower numbers of
lung-resident memory CD8(+) T cells. Thus, unexpectedly, EGR2 can function as a
positive regulator that is essential for naïve T-cell differentiation and in vivo
T-cell responses to a viral infection.

PMCID: PMC4246296
PMID: 25368162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Immunity. 2014 Oct 16;41(4):514-5. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.09.018.

CD4 helpers put tissue-resident memory cells in their place.

Mackay LK(1), Carbone FR(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne at 
the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Parkville, VIC 3010,
Australia. (2)The Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of
Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Parkville,
VIC 3010, Australia. Electronic address: fcarbone@unimelb.edu.au.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2014 Oct 16;41(4):633-45.

The regulation of tissue-resident memory cell development is poorly understood.
In this issue of Immunity, Laidlaw et al. (2014) demonstrate that CD4(+) T cells 
promote development of lung-resident memory cells by limiting T-bet expression
and directing CD8(+) T cells to the airway epithelium.

PMID: 25367567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 1;193(11):5480-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303417. Epub 2014
Oct 29.

T Cell factor 1 represses CD8+ effector T cell formation and function.

Tiemessen MM(1), Baert MR(1), Kok L(1), van Eggermond MC(1), van den Elsen PJ(1),
Arens R(1), Staal FJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, 2300 RC/Leiden, the Netherlands. (2)Department of
Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300
RC/Leiden, the Netherlands f.j.t.staal@lumc.nl.

The Wnt-responsive transcription factor T cell factor 1 (Tcf1) is well known for 
its role in thymic T cell development and the formation of memory CD8(+) T cells.
However, its role in the initial phases of CD8(+) T effector cell formation has
remained unexplored. We report that high levels of Wnt signaling and Tcf1 are
operational in naive and memory CD8(+) T cells, whereas Wnt signaling and Tcf1
were low in effector CD8(+) T cells. CD8(+) T cells deficient in Tcf1 produce
IFN-<U+03B3> more rapidly, coinciding with increased demethylation of the IFN-<U+03B3> enhancer
and higher expression of the transcription factors Tbet and Blimp1. Moreover,
virus-specific Tcf1(-/-) CD8(+) T cells show accelerated expansion in acute
infection, which is associated with increased IFN-<U+03B3> and TNF production and lower 
viral load. Genetic complementation experiments with various Tcf1 isoforms
indicate that Tcf1 dosage and protein stability are critical in suppressing IFN-<U+03B3>
production. Isoforms lacking the ß-catenin binding domain are equally effective
in inhibiting CD8(+) effector T cell formation. Thus, Tcf1 functions as a
repressor of CD8(+) effector T cell formation in a ß-catenin/Wnt-independent
manner.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25355919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Blood. 2014 Dec 18;124(26):3905-13. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-06-582965. Epub 2014 
Oct 28.

TOX2 regulates human natural killer cell development by controlling T-BET
expression.

Vong QP(1), Leung WH(1), Houston J(1), Li Y(1), Rooney B(1), Holladay M(1),
Oostendorp RA(2), Leung W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN; (2)Third Department of Internal
Medicine, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, 81675
München, Germany; and. (3)Department of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Cellular 
Therapy, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN; Department of
Pediatrics, University of Tennessee, Memphis, TN.

Thymocyte selection-associated high mobility group box protein family member 2
(TOX2) is a transcription factor belonging to the TOX family that shares a highly
conserved high mobility group DNA-binding domain with the other TOX members.
Although TOX1 has been shown to be an essential regulator of T-cell and natural
killer (NK) cell differentiation in mice, little is known about the roles of the 
other TOX family members in lymphocyte development, particularly in humans. In
this study, we found that TOX2 was preferentially expressed in mature human NK
cells (mNK) and was upregulated during in vitro differentiation of NK cells from 
human umbilical cord blood (UCB)-derived CD34(+) cells. Gene silencing of TOX2
intrinsically hindered the transition between early developmental stages of NK
cells, whereas overexpression of TOX2 enhanced the development of mNK cells from 
UCB CD34(+) cells. We subsequently found that TOX2 was independent of ETS-1 but
could directly upregulate the transcription of TBX21 (encoding T-BET).
Overexpression of T-BET rescued the TOX2 knockdown phenotypes. Given the
essential function of T-BET in NK cell differentiation, TOX2 therefore plays a
crucial role in controlling normal NK cell development by acting upstream of
TBX21 transcriptional regulation.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4282154
PMID: 25352127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Blood. 2015 Jan 8;125(2):370-82. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-05-575225. Epub 2014 Oct
27.

T-cell-restricted T-bet overexpression induces aberrant hematopoiesis of myeloid 
cells and impairs function of macrophages in the lung.

Iriguchi S(1), Kikuchi N(2), Kaneko S(1), Noguchi E(3), Morishima Y(4), Matsuyama
M(4), Yoh K(5), Takahashi S(6), Nakauchi H(7), Ishii Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan; Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan; (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan; Kasumigaura Medical Center, Tsuchiura, Japan; (3)Department of
Medical Genetics. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan; (5)Department of Nephrology, and. (6)Department of Anatomy and
Embryology, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan; International Institute for
Integrative Sleep Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan; Life Science
Center, Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba,
Japan; and Laboratory Animal Resource Center, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba,
Japan. (7)Center for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan;

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Jan 8;125(2):215-6.

Although overexpression of T-bet, a master transcription factor in type-1 helper 
T lymphocytes, has been reported in several hematologic and immune diseases, its 
role in their pathogenesis is not fully understood. In the present study, we used
transgenic model mice (T-bet(tg/wt) and T-bet(tg/tg)) to investigate the effects 
of T-bet overexpression selectively in T lymphocytes on the development of
hematologic and immune diseases. The results showed that T-bet overexpression in 
T cells spontaneously induced maturation arrest in the mononuclear phagocyte
lineage, as well as spontaneous dermatitis and pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
(PAP)-like disease in T-bet(tg/wt) and T-bet(tg/tg) mice, respectively.
T-bet(tg/tg) alveoli with the PAP phenotype showed remarkable reorganization of
alveolar mononuclear phagocyte subpopulations and impaired function, in addition 
to augmented T-cell infiltration. In addition, PAP development in T-bet(tg/tg)
mice was found to be associated with increased migration of myeloid cells from
the bone marrow into the peripheral blood. These findings reveal an unexpected
link between T-bet overexpression in T lymphocytes and the development of PAP
caused by reorganization of mononuclear phagocytes in the lung, and provide new
insight into the molecular pathogenesis of secondary PAP accompanied by
hematologic disorders.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4300389
PMID: 25349175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Transplantation. 2015 Apr;99(4):890-4. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000000445.

The transcription factor, T-bet, primes intestine transplantation rejection and
is associated with disrupted mucosal homeostasis.

Ranganathan S(1), Ashokkumar C, Ningappa M, Schmitt L, Higgs BW, Sindhi R.

Author information: 
(1)1Division of Pediatric Pathology, Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital
of Pittsburgh of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
2Hillman Center for Pediatric Transplantation of the Children's Hospital of
Pittsburgh of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
3Histology Core Laboratory, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor, t-bet, promotes inflammatory polarization
and intestinal homing of many inflammatory cells. In previous studies, the t-bet 
and granulysin genes were upregulated in peripheral blood before and after
intestine transplantation (ITx) rejection, but not during rejection, possibly
because of sequestration in allograft mucosa. Mucosal sequestration of t-bet and 
granulysin may also explain the presence of inflammatory CD14+ monocyte-derived
macrophages (MDM) and immunoglobulin G+ B-cell lineage cells, and loss of mature 
non-inflammatory CD138+ plasma cells in allograft mucosa during ITx rejection in 
these previous studies.
METHODOLOGY: T-bet-stained and granulysin-stained cells, MDM and CD138+ plasma
cells were evaluated with immunohistochemistry in serial biopsies from 17
children, in whom changes in MDM and CD138+ plasma cells were observed
previously.
RESULTS: T-bet-positive mucosal cells were significantly higher in postperfusion 
(P = 0.035) and early posttransplant biopsies (P = 0.016) among rejectors,
compared with nonrejectors. T-bet-positive cell counts per high-power field (hpf)
were (a) positively correlated with MDM counts/hpf in postperfusion (Spearman r =
0.73; P = 0.01) and early posttransplant biopsies (r = 0.54, r = 0.046), and (b) 
negatively correlated with CD138+B-/pre-plasma cells in early posttransplant
biopsies (r = 0.63, P = 0.038). T-bet expression in CD14+ monocytes, CD19+B
cells, and several other leukocyte subsets was higher in random blood samples
from two rejectors, compared with those from five normal human subjects and three
nonrejectors. Scant granulysin-stained mucosal cells precluded additional
evaluation of this cytotoxin and its role in ITx rejection.
SIGNIFICANCE: The transcription factor, t-bet, primes ITx rejection, and
associates with disrupted homeostatic relationships between innate and adaptive
immune cells in the allograft mucosa during rejection.

PMID: 25340608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 1;193(11):5709-22. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401436. Epub 2014
Oct 22.

T-bet:Eomes balance, effector function, and proliferation of
cytomegalovirus-specific CD8+ T cells during primary infection differentiates the
capacity for durable immune control.

Popescu I(1), Pipeling MR(1), Shah PD(2), Orens JB(2), McDyer JF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; and.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205. (3)Division of 
Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; and
mcdyerjf@upmc.edu.

CMV remains an important opportunistic pathogen in solid organ transplantation,
particularly in lung transplant recipients (LTRs). LTRs mismatched for CMV
(donor+/recipient-; D+R-) are at high-risk for active CMV infection and increased
mortality, however the immune correlates of viral control remain incompletely
understood. We prospectively studied 23 D+R- LTRs during primary CMV infection to
determine whether acute CD8(+) T cell parameters differentiated the capacity for 
viral control in early chronic infection. T-box transcription factors expression 
patterns of T-bet > Eomesodermin (Eomes) differentiated LTR controllers from
viremic relapsers and reciprocally correlated with granzyme B loading, and CMV
phosphoprotein 65 (pp65)-specific CD8(+)IFN-<U+03B3>(+) and CD107a(+) frequencies. LTR
relapsers demonstrated reduced CD8(+)Ki67(+) cells ex vivo and substantially
impaired CD8(+)pp65-specific in vitro proliferative responses at 6 d, with
concomitantly lower pp65-specific CD4(+)IL-2(+) frequencies, as compared with LTR
controllers. However, CMV-specific in vitro proliferative responses could be
significantly rescued, most effectively with pp65 Ag and exogenous IL-2,
resulting in an increased T-bet:Eomes balance, and enhanced effector function.
Using class I CMV tetramers, we observed similar frequencies between relapsers
and controllers, although reduced T-bet:Eomes balance in tetramer(+) cells from
relapsers, along with impaired CD8(+) effector responses to tetramer-peptide
restimulation. Taken together, these data show impaired CMV-specific CD8(+)
effector responses is not for complete lack of CMV-specific cells but rather
underscores the importance of the T-bet:Eomes balance, with CMV-specific
proliferation a key factor driving early T-bet expression and effector function
in CD8(+) T cells during primary infection and differentiating the capacity of
high-risk LTRs to establish immune control during early chronic infection.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4239205
PMID: 25339676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Open Rheumatol J. 2014 Sep 29;8:29-42. doi: 10.2174/1874312901408010029.
eCollection 2014.

Systemic Sclerosis is a Complex Disease Associated Mainly with Immune Regulatory 
and Inflammatory Genes.

Jin J(1), Chou C(2), Lima M(3), Zhou D(4), Zhou X(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Medical School at Houston, USA ; Duke University, USA.
(2)University of Texas Medical School at Houston, USA. (3)University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, USA ; Rice University, USA. (4)University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, USA ; Washington University, USA.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a fibrotic and autoimmune disease characterized
clinically by skin and internal organ fibrosis and vascular damage, and
serologically by the presence of circulating autoantibodies. Although
etiopathogenesis is not yet well understood, the results of numerous genetic
association studies support genetic contributions as an important factor to SSc. 
In this paper, the major genes of SSc are reviewed. The most recent genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) are taken into account along with robust candidate
gene studies. The literature search was performed on genetic association studies 
of SSc in PubMed between January 2000 and March 2014 while eligible studies
generally had over 600 total participants with replication. A few genetic
association studies with related functional changes in SSc patients were also
included. A total of forty seven genes or specific genetic regions were reported 
to be associated with SSc, although some are controversial. These genes include
HLA genes, STAT4, CD247, TBX21, PTPN22, TNFSF4, IL23R, IL2RA, IL-21,
SCHIP1/IL12A, CD226, BANK1, C8orf13-BLK, PLD4, TLR-2, NLRP1, ATG5, IRF5, IRF8,
TNFAIP3, IRAK1, NFKB1, TNIP1, FAS, MIF, HGF, OPN, IL-6, CXCL8, CCR6, CTGF, ITGAM,
CAV1, MECP2, SOX5, JAZF1, DNASEIL3, XRCC1, XRCC4, PXK, CSK, GRB10, NOTCH4, RHOB, 
KIAA0319, PSD3 and PSOR1C1. These genes encode proteins mainly involved in immune
regulation and inflammation, and some of them function in transcription, kinase
activity, DNA cleavage and repair. The discovery of various SSc-associated genes 
is important in understanding the genetics of SSc and potential pathogenesis that
contribute to the development of this disease.

PMCID: PMC4200700
PMID: 25328554  [PubMed]


116. EMBO J. 2014 Nov 18;33(22):2721-34. doi: 10.15252/embj.201487900. Epub 2014 Oct
15.

Peripheral natural killer cell maturation depends on the transcription factor
Aiolos.

Holmes ML(1), Huntington ND(2), Thong RP(1), Brady J(3), Hayakawa Y(4), Andoniou 
CE(5), Fleming P(5), Shi W(6), Smyth GK(7), Degli-Esposti MA(5), Belz GT(2),
Kallies A(2), Carotta S(2), Smyth MJ(8), Nutt SL(9).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Vic.,
Australia. (2)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville,
Vic., Australia Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Vic., Australia. (3)Cancer Immunology Program, The Peter MacCallum
Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Vic., Australia. (4)Division of Pathogenic
Biochemistry, Institute of Natural Medicine, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan.
(5)Immunology and Virology Program, Centre for Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 
The University of Western Australia, Nedlands, WA, Australia Centre for
Experimental Immunology, Lions Eye Institute, Nedlands, WA, Australia. (6)The
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Vic., Australia
Department of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Vic., Australia. (7)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, Vic., Australia The Department of Mathematics and
Statistics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic., Australia. (8)QIMR
Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Qld, Australia School of Medicine,
University of Queensland, Herston, Qld, Australia. (9)The Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Vic., Australia Department of Medical
Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic., Australia
nutt@wehi.edu.au.

Natural killer (NK) cells are an innate lymphoid cell lineage characterized by
their capacity to provide rapid effector functions, including cytokine production
and cytotoxicity. Here, we identify the Ikaros family member, Aiolos, as a
regulator of NK-cell maturation. Aiolos expression is initiated at the point of
lineage commitment and maintained throughout NK-cell ontogeny. Analysis of cell
surface markers representative of distinct stages of peripheral NK-cell
maturation revealed that Aiolos was required for the maturation in the spleen of 
CD11b(high)CD27(-) NK cells. The differentiation block was intrinsic to the
NK-cell lineage and resembled that found in mice lacking either T-bet or Blimp1; 
however, genetic analysis revealed that Aiolos acted independently of all other
known regulators of NK-cell differentiation. NK cells lacking Aiolos were
strongly hyper-reactive to a variety of NK-cell-mediated tumor models, yet
impaired in controlling viral infection, suggesting a regulatory function for
CD27(-) NK cells in balancing these two arms of the immune response. These data
place Aiolos in the emerging gene regulatory network controlling NK-cell
maturation and function.

© 2014 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4282578
PMID: 25319415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Immunity. 2014 Oct 16;41(4):633-45. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.09.007. Epub 2014 
Oct 9.

CD4+ T cell help guides formation of CD103+ lung-resident memory CD8+ T cells
during influenza viral infection.

Laidlaw BJ(1), Zhang N(2), Marshall HD(1), Staron MM(1), Guan T(1), Hu Y(3),
Cauley LS(3), Craft J(4), Kaech SM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA. (2)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100094, China.
(3)Department of Immunology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
CT 06030, USA. (4)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Department of Internal Medicine
(Rheumatology), Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
Electronic address: joseph.craft@yale.edu. (5)Department of Immunobiology, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, 4000 Jones Bridge Road, Chevy Chase, MD 20815-6789, USA. Electronic
address: susan.kaech@yale.edu.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2014 Oct 16;41(4):514-5.

Tissue-resident memory T (Trm) cells provide enhanced protection against
infection at mucosal sites. Here we found that CD4(+) T cells are important for
the formation of functional lung-resident CD8(+) T cells after influenza virus
infection. In the absence of CD4(+) T cells, CD8(+) T cells displayed reduced
expression of CD103 (Itgae), were mislocalized away from airway epithelia, and
demonstrated an impaired ability to recruit CD8(+) T cells to the lung airways
upon heterosubtypic challenge. CD4(+) T cell-derived interferon-<U+03B3> was necessary
for generating lung-resident CD103(+) CD8(+) Trm cells. Furthermore, expression
of the transcription factor T-bet was increased in "unhelped" lung Trm cells, and
a reduction in T-bet rescued CD103 expression in the absence of CD4(+) T cell
help. Thus, CD4(+) T cell-dependent signals are important to limit expression of 
T-bet and allow for the development of CD103(+) CD8(+) Trm cells in the lung
airways following respiratory infection.

PMCID: PMC4324721
PMID: 25308332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Helicobacter. 2015 Feb;20(1):41-8. doi: 10.1111/hel.12174. Epub 2014 Oct 11.

Enhanced expression of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase in Helicobacter
pylori-infected human gastric mucosa modulates Th1/Th2 pathway and interleukin 17
production.

Larussa T(1), Leone I, Suraci E, Nazionale I, Procopio T, Conforti F, Abenavoli
L, Hribal ML, Imeneo M, Luzza F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science, University of Catanzaro "Magna Graecia",
Catanzaro, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase (IDO) interferes with immune responses.
Host immune response against Helicobacter pylori is involved in the persistence
of the infection and its related diseases.
AIM: To investigate the role of IDO in the regulation of Th1/Th2 and Th17
pathways in H. pylori infection.
METHODS: Gastric biopsy samples were taken from 42 patients who underwent
endoscopy and evaluated for the expression of IDO by Western blotting. Gastritis 
was assessed by the Sydney system score. In a subgroup of patients, biopsies were
treated with the IDO inhibitor 1-methyl-L-tryptophan and the expression of
interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) mRNA and that of T-bet, interleukin-17 (IL-17), and IL-4
determined by real-time PCR and Western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: IDO expression was found to be enhanced (p = .001) in gastric biopsies
from H. pylori-infected (n = 18) compared with uninfected (n = 24) patients.
Levels of IDO expression were inversely related to the gastritis score
(r = -.684, p = .002) in H. pylori-infected gastric mucosa, but not in uninfected
mucosa. In gastric biopsy cultures, IDO inhibition increased the expression of
IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA (p = .014), T-bet (p = .045), and IL-17 (p = .02) while decreasing
that of IL-4 (p = .048).
CONCLUSIONS: In H. pylori-infected human gastric mucosa, an enhanced expression
of IDO is capable of modulating Th1/Th2 and Th17 pathways. This mechanism lowers 
gastric inflammation, possibly contributing to the persistence of H. pylori.
Targeting the IDO pathway may be a new strategy for modulating H. pylori-induced 
mucosal immune response.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25308308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Jan;398(1-2):245-9. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2227-8. Epub
2014 Oct 9.

The effects of galectin-1 on the gene expression of the transcription factors
TBX21, GATA-3, FOXP3 and RORC.

Yakushina VD(1), Vasil'eva OA, Ryazantseva NV, Novitsky VV, Tashireva LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Laboratory Medicine, Department of
Pathophysiology, Science and Educational Center of Molecular Medicine, Siberian
State Medical University, Tomsk, Russia, yakushinavd@mail.ru.

CD4(+) T cells orchestrate the immune response by differentiating into T helper
(Th) or regulatory (Treg) cell subsets that secrete distinct sets of cytokines.
They also play a critical role in the pathogenesis of autoimmunity, asthma,
allergy and, likely, cancer. The mechanisms involved in the regulation of CD4(+) 
T cell homeostasis by galectin-1 remain poorly characterized. To investigate
whether galectin-1 modulates the differentiation of CD4(+) T cells, the effects
of galectin-1 on the mRNA expression levels of TBX21, GATA-3, FOXP3 and RORC in
activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells were examined. The expression levels
of GATA-3 and FOXP3 mRNA were up-regulated after treatment with 1.0 µg/ml
galectin-1 and were unchanged (for GATA-3) or slightly elevated (for FOXP3)
compared with untreated cells when 2.0 µg/ml galectin-1 was added. At the same
time, at both concentrations of galectin-1, we observed reduced TBX21 and RORC
mRNA expression levels. These findings support the concept that galectin-1 skews 
the differentiation of CD4(+) T cells towards Th2 and Treg cells.

PMID: 25292313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Neuroimmunol. 2014 Nov 15;276(1-2):142-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2014.09.006. 
Epub 2014 Sep 16.

ROR<U+03B3>t, but not T-bet, overexpression exacerbates an autoimmune model for multiple
sclerosis.

Martinez NE(1), Sato F(1), Omura S(1), Kawai E(1), Takahashi S(2), Yoh K(3),
Tsunoda I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Molecular and Tumor
Virology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA
71130, USA. (2)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine,
International Institute for Integrative Sleep Medicine (WPI-IIIS), Life Science
Center, Tsukuba Research Alliance (TARA), Laboratory Animal Resource Center
(LARC), University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8575, Japan. (3)Department
of Nephrology, Division of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8575, Japan. (4)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Center for Molecular and Tumor Virology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA 71130, USA. Electronic address:
itsuno@lsuhsc.edu.

Th17 cells play an important role in multiple sclerosis (MS) and its autoimmune
model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). However, studies have not
addressed how enhanced Th17 immune responses can affect demyelinating diseases.
We induced EAE with MOG in ROR<U+03B3>t transgenic C57BL/6 mice that overexpress a Th17 
inducing transcription factor. ROR<U+03B3>t transgenic mice developed more severe EAE
than wild-type mice with more robust anti-MOG Th17 immune responses. In contrast,
mice overexpressing T-bet, a Th1-inducing transcription factor, were resistant to
EAE. Therefore, a genetic bias toward Th17 immune responses could contribute to
CNS immunopathology.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4252371
PMID: 25288300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2015 May;52(5):622-33. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2014-0059OC.

CD8(+)IL-17(+) T Cells Mediate Neutrophilic Airway Obliteration in
T-bet-Deficient Mouse Lung Allograft Recipients.

Lendermon EA(1), Dodd-o JM, Coon TA, Miller HL, Ganguly S, Popescu I, O'Donnell
CP, Cardenes N, Levine M, Rojas M, Weathington NM, Zhao J, Zhao Y, McDyer JF.

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and.

Acute cellular rejection is a known risk factor for the development of
obliterative bronchiolitis, which limits the long-term survival of lung
transplant recipients. However, the T cell effector mechanisms in both of these
processes remain incompletely understood. Using the mouse orthotopic lung
transplant model, we investigated whether C57BL/6 T-bet(-/-) recipients of major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC)-mismatched BALB/c lung grafts develop rejection 
pathology and allospecific cytokine responses that differ from wild-type mice.
T-bet(-/-) recipients demonstrated vigorous allograft rejection at 10 days,
characterized by neutrophilic inflammation and predominantly CD8(+) T cells
producing allospecific IL-17 and/or IFN-<U+03B3>, in contrast to IFN-<U+03B3>-dominant
responses in WT mice. CD4(+) T cells produced IL-17 but not IFN-<U+03B3> responses in
T-bet(-/-) recipients, in contrast to WT controls. Costimulation blockade using
anti-CD154 Ab significantly reduced allospecific CD8(+)IFN-<U+03B3>(+) responses in both
T-bet(-/-) and WT mice but had no attenuating effect on lung rejection pathology 
in T-bet(-/-) recipients or on the development of obliterative airway
inflammation that occurred only in T-bet(-/-) recipients. However, neutralization
of IL-17A significantly attenuated costimulation blockade-resistant rejection
pathology and airway inflammation in T-bet(-/-) recipients. In addition, CXCL1
(neutrophil chemokine) was increased in T-bet(-/-) allografts, and IL-17 induced 
CXCL1 from mouse lung epithelial cells in vitro. Taken together, our data show
that T-bet-deficient recipients of complete MHC-mismatched lung allografts
develop costimulation blockade-resistant rejection characterized by neutrophilia 
and obliterative airway inflammation that is predominantly mediated by
CD8(+)IL-17(+) T cells. Our data support T-bet-deficient mouse recipients of lung
allografts as a viable animal model to study the immunopathogenesis of small
airway injury in lung transplantation.

PMCID: PMC4491136 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25286244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Tumour Biol. 2014 Dec;35(12):12235-44. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2532-6. Epub 2014 
Oct 1.

Downregulation of Runx3 is closely related to the decreased Th1-associated
factors in patients with gastric carcinoma.

Li Y(1), Ji X, Su Z, Tong J, Xia S, Chen X, Lu P, Barnie PA, Wang S, Huang X, Xu 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine,
Jiangsu University, Xuefu Road 301, 212013, Zhenjiang, People's Republic of
China.

Runt-related transcription factor 3 (Runx3) is a tumor-suppressor gene and plays 
an important role in immune regulation, whose reduced expression may play an
important role in the development and progression of gastric carcinoma. The aim
of this study was to investigate the role of Runx3 on the levels of transcription
factors in patients with gastric carcinoma and analyze the relationship between
the expression of Runx3 and Th1-type cytokines in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs). Our results showed that the expression levels of Runx3, T-bet, and
IFN-<U+03B3> in patients with gastric carcinoma were obviously lower than those in
control groups, and there was a positive correlation between the expression of
Runx3 and T-bet or IFN-<U+03B3> in patients (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). In order to further confirm this
result, the Runx3 gene was constructed into pIRES2-eGFP and the recombined
plasmid was transfected into SGC-7901 cells with liposome in vitro, the results
obtained from the reverse transcription PCR indicated that the mRNA of Runx3,
T-bet, or IFN-<U+03B3> was significantly upregulated individually in Runx3
gene-transfected SGC-7901 cells. It suggested that the Runx3 and Th1-associated
factors including T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> synchronization declines in gastric carcinoma
may contribute to the development of cancer.

PMID: 25270738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mucosal Immunol. 2015 Mar;8(2):429-40. doi: 10.1038/mi.2014.81. Epub 2014 Oct 1.

MAIT cells are licensed through granzyme exchange to kill bacterially sensitized 
targets.

Kurioka A(1), Ussher JE(1), Cosgrove C(1), Clough C(1), Fergusson JR(1), Smith
K(1), Kang YH(1), Walker LJ(1), Hansen TH(2), Willberg CB(3), Klenerman P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Peter Medawar Building for Pathogen Research, Nuffield Department of Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (2)Department of Pathology and Immunology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA. (3)1] Peter
Medawar Building for Pathogen Research, Nuffield Department of Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK [2] National Institute for Health Research
Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells are an innate-like T-cell population 
restricted by the non-polymorphic, major histocompatibility complex class
I-related protein 1, MR1. MAIT cells are activated by a broad range of bacteria
through detection of riboflavin metabolites bound by MR1, but their direct
cytolytic capacity upon recognition of cognate target cells remains unclear. We
show that resting human MAIT cells are uniquely characterized by a lack of
granzyme (Gr) B and low perforin expression, key granule proteins required for
efficient cytotoxic activity, but high levels of expression of GrA and GrK.
Bacterial activation of MAIT cells rapidly induced GrB and perforin, licensing
these cells to kill their cognate target cells. Using a novel flow
cytometry-based killing assay, we show that licensed MAIT cells, but not ex vivo 
MAIT cells from the same donors, can efficiently kill Escherichia coli-exposed
B-cell lines in an MR1- and degranulation-dependent manner. Finally, we show that
MAIT cells are highly proliferative in response to antigenic and cytokine
stimulation, maintaining high expression of GrB, perforin, and GrA, but reduced
expression of GrK following antigenic proliferation. The tightly regulated
cytolytic capacity of MAIT cells may have an important role in the control of
intracellular bacterial infections, such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

PMCID: PMC4288950
PMID: 25269706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;841:45-65. doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-9487-9_3.

Th1/Th2 cell's function in immune system.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang Y, Gu W, He L, Sun B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai, 200031, China.

CD4+ T helper cells regulate appropriate cellular and humoral immune responses to
a wide range of pathogens and get involved in many diseases progress. The balance
of the earliest determined CD4+ T helper cell subsets, Th1 and Th2, play an
important role in allergy and autoimmune diseases. During the research, Animal
models in immunology research are necessary and always the powerful tools for the
basic scientific research. With the new sequence technologies, the finding of key
gene mutation in Th1/Th2 cells has been proved to be related to human diseases.
Here, we review four animal models about four key genes in Th1/Th2 cells to
introduce the balance between Th1/Th2 cells. Furthermore, the related genetic
mutations in human diseases and the new therapies are reviewed in this chapter,
which show the importance of Th1/Th2 cells in human diseases further.

PMID: 25261204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:928743. doi: 10.1155/2014/928743. Epub 2014 Aug 28.

OCH ameliorates bone marrow failure in mice via downregulation of T-bet
expression.

Qiao X(1), Xie X(1), Shi W(1), Tang J(1), Shao Y(1), Li F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University, 389 Xincun
Road, Shanghai 200065, China.

The aim of this study is to evaluate the immune mechanism of OCH in the treatment
of AA (also named bone marrow failure, BMF) induced in mice. OCH at a dose of
400<U+2009>µg/kg was injected intraperitoneally (I.P.) prior to the induction of BMF.
Our study showed that the incidence of BMF was 100% in BMF group and 13% in OCH
treatment group. Significant higher level of IL-4 and lower level of IFN-<U+03B3> were
observed in OCH group than that in BMF group (P < 0.05) as well as untreated
group over BMF (P < 0.05). However, there was no significant difference between
OCH and untreated group. Compared with untreated, the expression level of T-bet
in OCH and BMF was all significantly higher. However, T-bet expression level was 
lower in OCH than in BMF. In addition, OCH treatment increased NKT cell fractions
of bone marrow and the colonies of CFU-GM. In conclusion, treatment of OCH prior 
to the induction of BMF could prevent the incidence of BMF possibly through
downregulating T-bet expression leading to the transition of immune response from
Th1 to Th2, suggesting OCH might be a new therapeutic approach in the treatment
of BMF or AA.

PMCID: PMC4164259
PMID: 25254224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Blood. 2014 Nov 27;124(23):3409-19. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-07-587642. Epub 2014 
Sep 24.

Disruption of hSWI/SNF complexes in T cells by WAS mutations distinguishes
X-linked thrombocytopenia from Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.

Sarkar K(1), Sadhukhan S(2), Han SS(3), Vyas YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University of Iowa Children's
Hospital, Iowa City, IA; and Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology,
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA. (2)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital
of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University of Iowa Children's
Hospital, Iowa City, IA; and.

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS), an immunodeficiency disorder, and X-linked
thrombocytopenia (XLT), a bleeding disorder, both arise from nonsynonymous
mutations in WAS, which encodes a hematopoietic-specific WASp. Intriguingly, XLT 
evolves into WAS in some patients but not in others; yet the biological basis for
this cross-phenotype (CP) effect remains unclear. Using human T-helper (TH) cells
expressing different disease-causing WAS mutations, we demonstrated that
hSWI/SNF-like complexes require nuclear-WASp to execute their
chromatin-remodeling activity at promoters of WASp-target, immune function genes 
during TH1 differentiation. Hot-spot WAS mutations Thr45Met and Arg86Cys, which
result in XLT-to-WAS disease progression, impair recruitment of hBRM- but not
BRG1-enriched BAF complexes to IFNG and TBX21 promoters. Moreover, promoter
enrichment of histone H2A.Z and its catalyzing enzyme EP400 are both impaired.
Consequently, activation of Notch signaling, a hBRM-regulated event, and its
downstream effector NF-<U+03BA>B are both compromised, along with decreased
accessibility of nucleosomal DNA and inefficient transcription-elongation of
WASp-target TH1 genes. In contrast, patient mutations Ala236Gly and Arg477Lys
that manifest in XLT without progressing to WAS do not disrupt chromatin
remodeling or transcriptional reprogramming of TH1 genes. Our study defines an
indispensable relationship between nuclear-WASp- and hSWI/SNF-complexes in gene
activation and reveals molecular distinctions in TH cells that might contribute
to disease severity in the XLT/WAS clinical spectrum.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4246038
PMID: 25253772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 15;193(8):3959-65. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401099. Epub 2014
Sep 15.

Regulation of the Th1 genomic locus from Ifng through Tmevpg1 by T-bet.

Collier SP(1), Henderson MA(2), Tossberg JT(2), Aune TM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232; and. (2)Department of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232. (3)Department of
Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232; and Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232 tom.aune@vanderbilt.edu.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), critical regulators of protein-coding genes, are
likely to be coexpressed with neighboring protein-coding genes in the genome. How
the genome integrates signals to achieve coexpression of lncRNA genes and
neighboring protein-coding genes is not well understood. The lncRNA Tmevpg1
(NeST, Ifng-AS1) is critical for Th1-lineage-specific expression of Ifng and is
coexpressed with Ifng. In this study, we show that T-bet guides epigenetic
remodeling of Tmevpg1 proximal and distal enhancers, leading to recruitment of
stimulus-inducible transcription factors, NF-<U+03BA>B and Ets-1, to the locus.
Activities of Tmevpg1-specific enhancers and Tmevpg1 transcription are dependent 
upon NF-<U+03BA>B. Thus, we propose that T-bet stimulates epigenetic remodeling of
Tmevpg1-specific enhancers and Ifng-specific enhancers to achieve
Th1-lineage-specific expression of Ifng.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4185266
PMID: 25225667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Exp Med. 2014 Sep 22;211(10):2047-59. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131333. Epub 2014 Sep 
15.

Dysfunctional CD8+ T cells in hepatitis B and C are characterized by a lack of
antigen-specific T-bet induction.

Kurktschiev PD(1), Raziorrouh B(2), Schraut W(2), Backmund M(3), Wächtler M(4),
Wendtner CM(4), Bengsch B(5), Thimme R(5), Denk G(6), Zachoval R(6), Dick A(7),
Spannagl M(7), Haas J(8), Diepolder HM(6), Jung MC(9), Gruener NH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 80539 Munich, Germany
Department of Medicine II, University Hospital Munich, 80539 Munich, Germany
peter.kurktschiev@med.uni-muenchen.de. (2)Institute for Immunology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 80539 Munich, Germany Department of Medicine II,
University Hospital Munich, 80539 Munich, Germany. (3)Department of Medicine II, 
University Hospital Munich, 80539 Munich, Germany PiT - Praxis im Tal, 80331
Munich, Germany. (4)Department of Medicine, Klinikum Schwabing, 81925 Munich,
Germany. (5)Department of Medicine II, University Hospital Freiburg, 79106
Freiburg, Germany. (6)Department of Medicine II, University Hospital Munich,
80539 Munich, Germany. (7)Laboratory of Immunogenetics and Molecular Diagnostics,
80539 Munich, Germany. (8)Division of Infection and Pathway Medicine, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4SB, Scotland, UK. (9)Leberzentrum München, 80336
Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Nov;11(11):643.

The transcription factor T-bet regulates the production of interferon-<U+03B3> and
cytotoxic molecules in effector CD8 T cells, and its expression correlates with
improved control of chronic viral infections. However, the role of T-bet in
infections with differential outcome remains poorly defined. Here, we report that
high expression of T-bet in virus-specific CD8 T cells during acute hepatitis B
virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection was associated with spontaneous
resolution, whereas T-bet deficiency was more characteristic of chronic evolving 
infection. T-bet strongly correlated with interferon-<U+03B3> production and
proliferation of virus-specific CD8 T cells, and its induction by antigen and
IL-2 stimulation partially restored functionality in previously dysfunctional
T-bet-deficient CD8 T cells. However, restoration of a strong interferon-<U+03B3>
response required additional stimulation with IL-12, which selectively induced
the phosphorylation of STAT4 in T-bet(+) CD8 T cells. The observation that T-bet 
expression rendered CD8 T cells responsive to IL-12 suggests a stepwise mechanism
of T cell activation in which T-bet facilitates the recruitment of additional
transcription factors in the presence of key cytokines. These findings support a 
critical role of T-bet for viral clearance and suggest T-bet deficiency as an
important mechanism behind chronic infection.

© 2014 Kurktschiev et al.

PMCID: PMC4172217
PMID: 25225458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Clin Exp Immunol. 2015 Feb;179(2):197-209. doi: 10.1111/cei.12455.

T-bet regulates differentiation of forkhead box protein 3+ regulatory T cells in 
programmed cell death-1-deficient mice.

Tahara M(1), Kondo Y, Yokosawa M, Tsuboi H, Takahashi S, Shibayama S, Matsumoto
I, Sumida T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) plays an important role in peripheral T cell
tolerance, but whether or not it affects the differentiation of helper T cell
subsets remains elusive. Here we describe the importance of PD-1 in the control
of T helper type 1 (Th1) cell activation and development of forkhead box protein 
3 (FoxP3(+)) regulatory T cells (Tr(egs)). PD-1-deficient T cell-specific T-bet
transgenic (P/T) mice showed growth retardation, and the majority died within 10 
weeks. P/T mice showed T-bet over-expression, increased interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>
production by CD4(+) T cells and significantly low FoxP3(+) T(reg) cell
percentage. P/T mice developed systemic inflammation, which was probably induced 
by augmented Th1 response and low FoxP3(+) T(reg) count. The study identified a
unique, previously undescribed role for PD-1 in Th1 and T(reg) differentiation,
with potential implication in the development of Th1 cell-targeted therapy.

© 2014 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC4298397
PMID: 25219397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Immunol Lett. 2014 Nov;162(1 Pt A):217-22. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2014.09.002. Epub
2014 Sep 8.

Up-regulation of Galectin-9 in vivo results in immunosuppressive effects and
prolongs survival of liver allograft in rats.

Liu YM(1), Chen Y(2), Li JZ(3), Gong JP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Hepatobiliary Surgery and Department of
Hepatobiliary Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, 
76# Linjiang Road, Chongqing 400010, China. Electronic address:
ncisgibbs@163.com. (2)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Hepatobiliary Surgery and
Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing
Medical University, 76# Linjiang Road, Chongqing 400010, China. Electronic
address: doctorcy007@163.com. (3)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Hepatobiliary
Surgery and Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital,
Chongqing Medical University, 76# Linjiang Road, Chongqing 400010, China.
Electronic address: vitamin198305@163.com. (4)Chongqing Key Laboratory of
Hepatobiliary Surgery and Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Second Affiliated 
Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, 76# Linjiang Road, Chongqing 400010,
China. Electronic address: gongjianping11@126.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Acute rejection is still a major cause of graft
dysfunction and would jeopardize recipients' post-transplantation survival.
Current studies demonstrate that Galectin-9 (Gal-9) is associated with
down-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, thus, possesses a negative immune 
regulatory role. However, the specific role of Gal-9 in liver transplant remains 
unknown.
METHODS: To establish acute rejection models of rat liver transplantation
(Lewis-BN, n = 45), recipients were randomly divided into following three groups:
the transfected group (n = 15); the blank plasmid group (n = 15); and the control
group (n = 15). The transfected group was perfused with Ad-galectin-9 through the
portal vein during the cold ischemia period. The blank plasmid group was perfused
with non-target vector, and the control group was perfused with saline. The acute
rejection was assayed by pathological examination; Gal-9, T-bet, ROR<U+03B3>t, GATA3 and
Foxp3 mRNA expression was detected by real-time PCR; Western blots and
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays were performed to measure IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-10 and
IL-17 expression.
RESULTS: The pathological change of the transfected group was ameliorated than
that of the other two groups. The Gal-9 mRNA level in the transfected group was
much higher than that in the other two groups (*P < 0.05); T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA
levels were significantly lower in the transfected group than in the other two
groups while GATA3 and Foxp3 were not shown statistics significances (*P < 0.05).
The IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 levels in the transfected group were significantly lower than
in the other two groups (*P < 0.05 for both protein and serum levels).
CONCLUSION: Up-regulation of Gal-9 in vivo turns immune system toward
immnuosuppression and prolongs rats liver allograft survival by the diminishment 
of Th1/Th17.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25218666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Adv Immunol. 2014;124:171-206. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800147-9.00006-6.

Roles for helper T cell lineage-specifying transcription factors in cellular
specialization.

Weinmann AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. 
Electronic address: weinmann@uab.edu.

The development of specialized helper T cells has garnered much attention because
of their critical role in coordinating the immune response to invading pathogens.
Recent research emphasizing novel functions for specialized helper T cells in a
variety of infectious disease settings, as well as autoimmune states, has
reshaped our view on the capabilities of helper T cells. Notably, one previously 
underappreciated aspect of the lifespan of helper T cells is that they often
retain the capacity to respond to changes in the environment by altering the
composition of helper T cell lineage-specifying transcription factors they
express, which, in turn, changes their phenotype. This emerging realization is
changing our views on the stability versus flexibility of specialized helper T
cell subtypes. Now, there is a new concerted effort to define the mechanistic
events that contribute to the potential for flexibility in specialized helper T
cell gene expression programs in the different environmental circumstances that
allow for the re-expression of helper T cell lineage-specifying transcription
factors. In addition, we are also now beginning to appreciate that "helper T
cell" lineage-specifying transcription factors are expressed in diverse types of 
innate and adaptive immune cells and this may allow them to play roles in
coordinating aspects of the immune response. Our current challenges include
defining the conserved mechanisms that are utilized by these lineage-specifying
transcription factors to coordinate gene expression programs in different
settings as well as the mechanistic events that contribute to the differential
downstream consequences that these factors mediate in unique cellular
environments. In this review, we will explore our evolving views on these topics,
often times using the Th1-lineage-specifying transcription factor T-bet as an
example.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25175776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 1;193(7):3322-31. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400775. Epub 2014
Aug 29.

IL-21 is a central memory T cell-associated cytokine that inhibits the generation
of pathogenic Th1/17 effector cells.

Kastirr I(1), Maglie S(2), Paroni M(2), Alfen JS(2), Nizzoli G(2), Sugliano E(2),
Crosti MC(2), Moro M(2), Steckel B(3), Steinfelder S(3), Stölzel K(4), Romagnani 
C(5), Botti F(6), Caprioli F(7), Pagani M(2), Abrignani S(2), Geginat J(8).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale di Genetica Molecolare "Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi," 20122 
Milan, Italy; Deutsches Rheumaforschungszentrum, 10117 Berlin, Germany; Charité
Research Centre for Immunosciences, 10115 Berlin, Germany; (2)Istituto Nazionale 
di Genetica Molecolare "Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi," 20122 Milan, Italy;
(3)Deutsches Rheumaforschungszentrum, 10117 Berlin, Germany; Charité Research
Centre for Immunosciences, 10115 Berlin, Germany; (4)Department of
Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Charité University Medical School,
Campus Charité Mitte, 10117 Berlin, Germany; (5)Deutsches
Rheumaforschungszentrum, 10117 Berlin, Germany; (6)Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia
Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, Universitá di Milano, 20122 Milan, Italy;
Unitá Operativa di Chirurgia Generale e d'Urgenza, 20122 Milan, Italy; and.
(7)Unitá Operativa di Chirurgia Generale e d'Urgenza, 20122 Milan, Italy; and
Unitá Operativa di Gastroenterologia 2, Fondazione IRCCS Cá Granda, Ospedale
Policlinico di Milano, 20122 Milan, Italy. (8)Istituto Nazionale di Genetica
Molecolare "Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi," 20122 Milan, Italy; geginat@ingm.org.

IL-21 promotes Th17 differentiation, and Th17 cells that upregulate T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3>,
and GM-CSF drive experimental autoimmune diseases in mice. Anti-IL-21 treatment
of autoimmune patients is therefore a therapeutic option, but the role of IL-21
in human T cell differentiation is incompletely understood. IL-21 was produced at
high levels by human CD4(+) central memory T cells, suggesting that it is
associated with early T cell differentiation. Consistently, it was inhibited by
forced expression of T-bet or RORC2, the lineage-defining transcription factors
of Th1 and Th17 effector cells, respectively. Although IL-21 was efficiently
induced by IL-12 in naive CD4(+) T cells, it inhibited the generation of Th1
effector cells in a negative feedback loop. IL-21 was also induced by IL-6 and
promoted Th17 differentiation, but it was not absolutely required. Importantly,
however, IL-21 promoted IL-10 secretion but inhibited IFN-<U+03B3> and GM-CSF production
in developing Th17 cells, and consequently prevented the generation of
polyfunctional Th1/17 effector cells. Moreover, in Th17 memory cells, IL-21
selectively inhibited T-bet upregulation and GM-CSF production. In summary, IL-21
is a central memory T cell-associated cytokine that promotes Th17 differentiation
and IL-10 production, but inhibits the generation of potentially pathogenic
Th1/17 effector cells. These findings shed new light on the role of IL-21 in T
cell differentiation, and have relevant implications for anti-IL-21 therapy of
autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25172491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2014 Nov;113(5):556-564.e4. doi:
10.1016/j.anai.2014.07.021. Epub 2014 Aug 22.

Berberine and limonin suppress IgE production by human B cells and peripheral
blood mononuclear cells from food-allergic patients.

Yang N(1), Wang J(1), Liu C(1), Song Y(1), Zhang S(2), Zi J(2), Zhan J(2),
Masilamani M(1), Cox A(1), Nowak-Wegrzyn A(1), Sampson H(1), Li XM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York. (2)Department of Biological Engineering, Utah State University, Logan, 
Utah. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, New York. Electronic address: xiu-min.li@mssm.edu.

BACKGROUND: Currently, there is no satisfactory treatment for IgE-mediated food
allergy. Food Allergy Herbal Formula 2 (FAHF-2) and butanol-purified FAHF-2
(B-FAHF-2) have been shown to protect against peanut-induced anaphylaxis and
inhibit IgE synthesis in a murine model.
OBJECTIVE: To determine which herbs and compounds in FAHF-2 and B-FAHF-2 suppress
IgE production.
METHODS: The effect of FAHF-2 and B-FAHF-2 on IgE production was determined using
a human B-cell line (U266). Individual compounds were isolated and identified
using column chromatography, liquid chromatographic mass spectrometry, and
nuclear magnetic resonance techniques. The potency of compounds on IgE
suppression were investigated using U266 cells and verified using human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (n = 25) from peanut-allergic patients.
Epsilon germline transcript expression was determined. Phosphorylated I<U+03BA>Ba level 
was analyzed using the In-Cell Western assay. The mRNA expression of signal
transducer and activator of transcription-3, T-box transcription factor TBX21,
interferon-<U+03B3>, forkhead box P3, GATA-binding protein 3, interleukin-10, and
interleukin-5 also were analyzed using real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: FAHF-2 and B-FAHF-2 inhibited IgE production by U266 cells. B-FAHF-2 was
9 times more effective than FAHF-2. Two compounds that inhibited IgE production
were isolated from Philodendron chinensis and identified as berberine and
limonin. Berberine was more potent and inhibited IgE production by peripheral
blood mononuclear cells by 80% at 0.62 µg/mL. Berberine significantly inhibited
e-germline transcript expression by peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
Phosphorylated I<U+03BA>Ba level was significantly suppressed and mRNA expressions of
T-box transcription factor TBX21 and signal transducer and activator of
transcription-3 were significantly increased by berberine.
CONCLUSION: Berberine and limonin mediated IgE suppression. The mechanism by
which berberine modulates e-germline transcript expression might be through
regulating the phosphorylated I<U+03BA>Ba level and the expressions of signal transducer
and activator of transcription-3 and T-box transcription factor TBX21.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov identifier NCT00602160.

Copyright © 2014 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25155085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:914326. doi: 10.1155/2014/914326. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

Myocardial gene expression of T-bet, GATA-3, Ror-<U+03B3>t, FoxP3, and hallmark
cytokines in chronic Chagas disease cardiomyopathy: an essentially unopposed
TH1-type response.

Nogueira LG(1), Santos RH(2), Fiorelli AI(2), Mairena EC(1), Benvenuti LA(3),
Bocchi EA(4), Stolf NA(2), Kalil J(1), Cunha-Neto E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Heart Institute (InCor), University of São Paulo
School of Medicine, 05403-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil ; Division of Clinical
Immunology and Allergy, University of São Paulo School of Medicine, 01246-903 São
Paulo, SP, Brazil ; Institute for Investigation in Immunology (iii), INCT,
University of São Paulo School of Medicine, 05403-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Division of Surgery, Heart Institute (InCor), University of São Paulo School
of Medicine, 05403-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (3)Division of Pathology, Heart
Institute (InCor), University of São Paulo School of Medicine, 05403-000 São
Paulo, SP, Brazil. (4)Transplantation and Heart Failure Unit, Heart Institute
(InCor), University of São Paulo School of Medicine, 05403-000 São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Chronic Chagas disease cardiomyopathy (CCC), a late consequence of
Trypanosoma cruzi infection, is an inflammatory cardiomyopathy with prognosis
worse than those of noninflammatory etiology (NIC). Although the T cell-rich
myocarditis is known to play a pathogenetic role, the relative contribution of
each of the functional T cell subsets has never been thoroughly investigated. We 
therefore assessed gene expression of cytokines and transcription factors
involved in differentiation and effector function of each functional T cell
subset (TH1/TH2/TH17/Treg) in CCC, NIC, and heart donor myocardial samples.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Quantitative PCR showed markedly upregulated expression of
IFN-<U+03B3> and transcription factor T-bet, and minor increases of GATA-3; FoxP3 and
CTLA-4; IL-17 and IL-18 in CCC as compared with NIC samples. Conversely,
cytokines expressed by TH2 cells (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13) or associated with Treg 
(TGF-ß and IL-10) were not upregulated in CCC myocardium. Expression of
TH1-related genes such as T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3>, and IL-18 correlated with ventricular
dilation, FoxP3, and CTLA-4.
CONCLUSIONS: Results are consistent with a strong local TH1-mediated response in 
most samples, possibly associated with pathological myocardial remodeling, and a 
proportionally smaller FoxP3(+)CTLA4(+) Treg cell population, which is unable to 
completely curb IFN-<U+03B3> production in CCC myocardium, therefore fueling
inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4134835
PMID: 25152568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Immunity. 2014 Aug 21;41(2):325-38. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.08.002.

In vivo RNA interference screens identify regulators of antiviral CD4(+) and
CD8(+) T cell differentiation.

Chen R(1), Bélanger S(2), Frederick MA(3), Li B(2), Johnston RJ(2), Xiao N(4),
Liu YC(4), Sharma S(4), Peters B(2), Rao A(5), Crotty S(6), Pipkin ME(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Signaling and Gene Expression, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and 
Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla
Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Department of
Cancer Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA.
(2)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (3)Department of Cancer Biology, The Scripps Research
Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA. (4)Division of Cell Biology, La Jolla
Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (5)Division of
Signaling and Gene Expression, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (6)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for
Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address:
shane@lji.org. (7)Department of Cancer Biology, The Scripps Research Institute,
Jupiter, FL 33458, USA. Electronic address: mpipkin@scripps.edu.

Classical genetic approaches to examine the requirements of genes for T cell
differentiation during infection are time consuming. Here we developed a pooled
approach to screen 30-100+ genes individually in separate antigen-specific T
cells during infection using short hairpin RNAs in a microRNA context (shRNAmir).
Independent screens using T cell receptor (TCR)-transgenic CD4(+) and CD8(+) T
cells responding to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) identified multiple
genes that regulated development of follicular helper (Tfh) and T helper 1 (Th1) 
cells, and short-lived effector and memory precursor cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTLs). Both screens revealed roles for the positive transcription elongation
factor (P-TEFb) component Cyclin T1 (Ccnt1). Inhibiting expression of Cyclin T1, 
or its catalytic partner Cdk9, impaired development of Th1 cells and protective
short-lived effector CTL and enhanced Tfh cell and memory precursor CTL formation
in vivo. This pooled shRNA screening approach should have utility in numerous
immunological studies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4160313
PMID: 25148027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Immunity. 2014 Aug 21;41(2):244-56. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.06.017.

Transcription factor T-bet regulates intraepithelial lymphocyte functional
maturation.

Reis BS(1), Hoytema van Konijnenburg DP(1), Grivennikov SI(2), Mucida D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mucosal Immunology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10065, USA. (2)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Cancer Prevention & Control Program,
Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA. (3)Laboratory of Mucosal Immunology, The Rockefeller
University, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: mucida@rockefeller.edu.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2014 Aug 21;41(2):169-71.

The intestinal epithelium harbors large populations of activated and memory
lymphocytes, yet these cells do not cause tissue damage in the steady state. We
investigated how intestinal T cell effector differentiation is regulated upon
migration to the intestinal epithelium. Using gene loss- and gain-of-function
strategies, as well as reporter approaches, we showed that cooperation between
the transcription factors T-bet and Runx3 resulted in suppression of conventional
CD4(+) T helper functions and induction of an intraepithelial lymphocyte (IEL)
program that included expression of IEL markers such as CD8aa homodimers.
Interferon-<U+03B3> sensing and T-bet expression by CD4(+) T cells were both required
for this program, which was distinct from conventional T helper differentiation
but shared by other IEL populations, including TCRaß(+)CD8aa(+) IELs. We conclude
that the gut environment provides cues for IEL maturation through the interplay
between T-bet and Runx3, allowing tissue-specific adaptation of mature T
lymphocytes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4287410
PMID: 25148025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Immunity. 2014 Aug 21;41(2):230-43. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.06.018.

The transcription factor T-bet is induced by IL-15 and thymic agonist selection
and controls CD8aa(+) intraepithelial lymphocyte development.

Klose CS(1), Blatz K(1), d'Hargues Y(1), Hernandez PP(2), Kofoed-Nielsen M(3),
Ripka JF(1), Ebert K(4), Arnold SJ(5), Diefenbach A(6), Palmer E(7), Tanriver
Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Freiburg Medical 
Center, 79104 Freiburg, Germany; Department of Internal Medicine IV, University
of Freiburg Medical Center, 79106 Freiburg, Germany. (2)Institute of Medical
Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Freiburg Medical Center, 79104 Freiburg, 
Germany; Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Mainz
Medical Center, 55131 Mainz, Germany. (3)Institute of Medical Microbiology and
Hygiene, University of Freiburg Medical Center, 79104 Freiburg, Germany;
Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Mainz Medical
Center, 55131 Mainz, Germany; International Max Planck Research School for
Molecular and Cellular Biology, 79108 Freiburg, Germany. (4)Institute of Medical 
Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Freiburg Medical Center, 79104 Freiburg, 
Germany; Department of Internal Medicine IV, University of Freiburg Medical
Center, 79106 Freiburg, Germany; Faculty of Biology, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine IV, University of Freiburg Medical Center,
79106 Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS Center of Biological Signalling Studies, 79104
Freiburg, Germany. (6)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University
of Mainz Medical Center, 55131 Mainz, Germany. (7)Laboratory of Transplantation
Immunology, Departments of Biomedicine and Nephrology, University Hospital Basel,
4031 Basel, Switzerland. (8)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene,
University of Freiburg Medical Center, 79104 Freiburg, Germany; Department of
Internal Medicine IV, University of Freiburg Medical Center, 79106 Freiburg,
Germany. Electronic address: yakup.tanriver@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

CD8aa(+) intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs) are instrumental in maintaining the
epithelial barrier in the intestine. Similar to natural killer cells and other
innate lymphoid cells, CD8aa(+) IELs constitutively express the T-box
transcription factor T-bet. However, the precise role of T-bet for the
differentiation or function of IELs is unknown. Here we show that mice
genetically deficient for T-bet lacked both TCRaß(+) and TCR<U+03B3>d(+) CD8aa(+) IELs
and thus are more susceptible to chemically induced colitis. Although T-bet was
induced in thymic IEL precursors (IELPs) as a result of agonist selection and
interleukin-15 (IL-15) receptor signaling, it was dispensable for the generation 
of IELPs. Subsequently, T-bet was required for the IL-15-dependent activation,
differentiation, and expansion of IELPs in the periphery. Our study reveals a
function of T-bet as a central transcriptional regulator linking agonist
selection and IL-15 signaling with the emergence of CD8aa(+) IELs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25148024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Immunity. 2014 Aug 21;41(2):169-71. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.08.003.

T-bet orchestrates CD8aa IEL differentiation.

Kwong B(1), Lazarevic V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD20892. (2)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD20892. Electronic address: 
lazarevicv@mail.nih.gov.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2014 Aug 21;41(2):244-56.

Very little is known about the transcription factor network that regulates the
development of intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs). In this issue of
Immunity, Klose et al. (2014b) and Reis et al. (2014) demonstrate an essential
role for T-bet in regulating the CD8aa IEL differentiation program.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25148017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Infect Dis. 2015 Jan 1;211(1):156-65. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu391. Epub 2014 Aug
19.

Dietary pectin-derived acidic oligosaccharides improve the pulmonary bacterial
clearance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection in mice by modulating
intestinal microbiota and immunity.

Bernard H(1), Desseyn JL(1), Bartke N(2), Kleinjans L(3), Stahl B(2), Belzer
C(3), Knol J(4), Gottrand F(1), Husson MO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 995, Faculté de médecine, Université Lille 2, France. (2)Nutricia
Research, Utrecht. (3)Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University, The
Netherlands. (4)Nutricia Research, Utrecht Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen
University, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: A predominantly T-helper type 2 (Th2) immune response is critical in 
the prognosis of pulmonary Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. But the mucosal and 
systemic immune responses can be influenced by the intestinal microbiota.
METHODS: We assessed the effect of microbiota compositional changes induced by a 
diet enriched in 5% acidic oligosaccharides derived from pectin (pAOS) on the
immune response and outcome of chronic pulmonary P. aeruginosa infection in mice.
RESULTS: pAOS promoted Th1 polarization by increasing interferon <U+03B3> release,
upregulating t-bet gene expression, decreasing interleukin 4 secretion, and
downregulating gata3 gene expression. pAOS also sustained the release of
keratinocyte chemoattractant, recruited polynuclear leukocytes and macrophages,
stimulated M1 macrophage activation and interleukin 10 release, and decreased
tumor necrosis factor a release in the lung. These effects led to increased
bacterial clearance after the first and second P. aeruginosa infections. pAOS
modified the intestinal microbiota by stimulating the growth of species involved 
in immunity development, such as Bifidobacterium species, Sutturella wadsworthia,
and Clostridium cluster XIVa organisms, and at the same time increased the
production of butyrate and propionate.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that pAOS may have beneficial effects by
limiting the number and severity of pulmonary exacerbations in patients
chronically infected with P. aeruginosa, such as individuals with cystic
fibrosis.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25139019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Sci Rep. 2014 Jul 18;4:5654. doi: 10.1038/srep05654.

Lactobacillus casei reduces susceptibility to type 2 diabetes via
microbiota-mediated body chloride ion influx.

Zhang Y(1), Guo X(1), Guo J(1), He Q(1), Li H(1), Song Y(1), Zhang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Education Ministry of
P. R. China, Department of Food Science and Engineering, Inner Mongolia
Agricultural University, Hohhot 010018, P. R. China. (2)1] Key Laboratory of
Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Education Ministry of P. R. China,
Department of Food Science and Engineering, Inner Mongolia Agricultural
University, Hohhot 010018, P. R. China [2].

Gut microbiota mediated low-grade inflammation is involved in the onset of type 2
diabetes (T2DM). In this study, we used a high fat sucrose (HFS) diet-induced
pre-insulin resistance and a low dose-STZ HFS rat models to study the effect and 
mechanism of Lactobacillus casei Zhang in protecting against T2DM onset.
Hyperglycemia was favorably suppressed by L. casei Zhang treatment. Moreover, the
hyperglycemia was connected with type 1 immune response, high plasma bile acids
and urine chloride ion loss. This chloride ion loss was significantly prevented
by L. casei via upregulating of chloride ion-dependent genes (ClC1-7, GlyRa1,
SLC26A3, SLC26A6, GABAAa1, Bestrophin-3 and CFTR). A shift in the caecal
microflora, particularly the reduction of bile acid 7a-dehydroxylating bacteria, 
and fecal bile acid profiles also occurred. These change coincided with organ
chloride influx. Thus, we postulate that the prevention of T2DM onset by L. casei
Zhang may be via a microbiota-based bile acid-chloride exchange mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4135721
PMID: 25133590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;22(4):1038-42. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2014.04.028.

[Expressive changes of CD4(+)T cell subset transcription factors in patients with
aplastic anemia, myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia and their
clinical significances].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng XM(1), Xu HZ(2), Zhang JY(1), Yin DM(1), Liu MM(1), Sui XH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan 250021, Shandong Province, China. (2)Department of Hematology, 
Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan 250021,
Shandong Province, China. E-mail: Xuhongzhi1965@sina.com.

This study was aimed to compare the expressions of specific transcription factors
of CD4(+) T cell subset ( T-bet, GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t and FoxP3 mRNA) in peripheral
blood of patients with aplastic anemia(AA), myelodysplastic syndrome(MDS), and
acute myeloid leukemia(AML), and investigate their immune status and
pathogenesis, so as to provide experimental basis for the choice of clinical
treatment. The expression of T-box (T-bet), GATA-3, ROR-<U+03B3>t and Foxp3 mRNA in
PBMNC were examined by RT-PCR in 42 cases of MDS, including 22 refractory
anemia(MDS-RA) and 20 refractory anemia with excess blasts (MDS-RAEB), in 23
cases of AA, 17 cases of AML patients and 16 healthy volunteers respectively. The
results indicated that, compared with normal control group, expressions of T-bet 
and ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA in AA patient group were significantly higher (P < 0.01),
expression levels of GATA3 Foxp3 mRNA were lower (both P < 0.01). There was no
significant difference in expression of T-bet and GATA3 mRNA between MDS group
and normal control group, but the expression levels of Foxp3 and ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA were 
higher than those in normal controls (P < 0.05); T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t in MDS-RA group 
were higher than those in the normal controls(P < 0.01), and GATA3 expression
significantly reduced (P < 0.05), however, there was no significant difference in
expression of Foxp3 between MDS-RA and the controls. Expression levels of T-bet
and ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA in patients with MDS-RAEB and AML were lower than those in normal 
controls (P < 0.05), but the expression levels of GATA3 and Foxp3 mRNA were
significantly higher than those in normal controls (P < 0.01). It is concluded
that the transcription factor expressions are different in PBMNC of patients
among these three diseases. Immune-mediated excessive apoptosis may play an
important role in pathogenesis, bone marrow failure in patients with AA and
MDS-RA, and abnormal clones of immature cells may be one of main reasons for bone
marrow failure in AML and late stage of MDS.

PMID: 25130824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 15;9(8):e105314. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105314.
eCollection 2014.

T cell IFN-<U+03B3> suppression following alcohol and burn injury is independent of
miRNA155.

Li X(1), Rendon JL(2), Choudhry MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Alcohol Research Program, Loyola University Chicago Health Sciences Division, 
Maywood, Illinois, United States of America; Burn & Shock Trauma Research
Institute, Loyola University Chicago Health Sciences Division, Maywood, Illinois,
United States of America; Department of Surgery, Loyola University Chicago Health
Sciences Division, Maywood, Illinois, United States of America. (2)Alcohol
Research Program, Loyola University Chicago Health Sciences Division, Maywood,
Illinois, United States of America; Burn & Shock Trauma Research Institute,
Loyola University Chicago Health Sciences Division, Maywood, Illinois, United
States of America. (3)Alcohol Research Program, Loyola University Chicago Health 
Sciences Division, Maywood, Illinois, United States of America; Burn & Shock
Trauma Research Institute, Loyola University Chicago Health Sciences Division,
Maywood, Illinois, United States of America; Department of Surgery, Loyola
University Chicago Health Sciences Division, Maywood, Illinois, United States of 
America; Deparmtent of Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University Chicago
Health Sciences Division, Maywood, Illinois, United States of America.

miRNA155 has been implicated in normal T cell function and their differentiations
into the Th1 subtype. We have shown that acute alcohol (ethanol) intoxication
combined with burn injury suppresses T cell IFN-<U+03B3> release. Herein, we examined
whether the decrease in IFN-<U+03B3> is resulted from altered expression of miRNA155 and
transcription factors--NFAT, Tbx21, Jun and Fos--in T cells following ethanol and
burn injury. Mice received ethanol (~3 g/Kg) 4 hours prior to ~12.5% total body
surface area sham or burn injury and were sacrificed one day after injury.
Splenic T cells were harvested and cultured with anti-CD3 (2 µg/ml) in the
presence or absence of rIL-12 (10 ng/ml) or PMA (10 ng/ml) plus ionomycin (50
ng/ml) for 48 hours. We observed a significant decrease in miRNA155, NFAT, Tbx21,
Jun and Fos expression as well as IFN-<U+03B3> release in T cells cultured with anti-CD3
following ethanol and burn injury compared with shams. The co-treatment of T
cells with rIL-12 prevented the decrease in IFN-<U+03B3> and NFAT, Tbx21, Jun and Fos,
but not miRNA155. In contrast, the co-treatment with PMA plus ionomycin
normalized the expression of NFAT. It did not prevent the decrease in IFN-<U+03B3>,
Tbx21, Jun, Fos and miRNA155. Finally, results obtained in miRNA155-/- mice did
not show any change in T cell release of IFN-<U+03B3> or expression of nuclear factors
compared to wildtype mice. Together, these findings suggest that while ethanol
and burn injury decreases the expression of miRNA155, it may not be involved in
decreased IFN-<U+03B3> under those conditions.

PMCID: PMC4134308
PMID: 25126745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Dec;96(6):1155-64. doi: 10.1189/jlb.5A0813-463RR. Epub 2014
Aug 5.

Th22 cells are expanded in multiple sclerosis and are resistant to IFN-ß.

Rolla S(1), Bardina V(1), De Mercanti S(2), Quaglino P(3), De Palma R(4), Gned
D(5), Brusa D(6), Durelli L(2), Novelli F(7), Clerico M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Research and Medical Studies, Azienda Ospedaliera
Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Turin, Italy; Department of
Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, Turin, Italy; Department of Clinical
and Biological Sciences. (2)Divisions of Neurology and. (3)Department of Medical 
Sciences, Dermatologic Clinic, University of Turin, Italy. (4)Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Second University of Naples, Italy; and.
(5)Radiology, San Luigi Gonzaga School of Medicine, Orbassano, Italy; (6)Human
Genetics Foundation, Turin, Italy. (7)Center for Experimental Research and
Medical Studies, Azienda Ospedaliera Città della Salute e della Scienza di
Torino, Turin, Italy; Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, 
Turin, Italy; Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences,
franco.novelli@unito.it.

Th1 and Th17 cells have been considered as effectors in mouse EAE and in the
human counterpart, MS. Recently, IL-22, a Th17-related, proinflammatory cytokine,
has been associated with a new Th cell subset, defined as Th22, involved in
chronic inflammatory conditions, such as psoriasis; the role of IL-22 in MS has
not yet been elucidated. Here, we report that similar to Th17 cells, the number
of Th22 cells increased in the PB and the CSF of RR MS patients, especially
during the active phases of the disease. However, as opposed to Th17 cells, the
expansion of Th22 cells occurred before the active phases of the disease. Th22
cells were found to be specific for the autoantigen MBP and also expressed high
levels of CCR6 and T-bet, as for Th17 cells, indicating that Th22 self-reactive
cells could have CNS-homing properties and be pathogenic in active RRMS patients.
Conversely to Th17 cells, Th22 cells displayed lower levels of IFNAR1 and were
insensitive to IFN-ß inhibition. These data suggest that expansion of Th22 cells 
in MS could be one of the factors that critically influence resistance to IFN-ß
therapy.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 25097195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2014 Aug;34(8):623-32. doi: 10.1089/jir.2014.0020.

Is T-bet a potential therapeutic target in multiple sclerosis?

Racke MK(1), Yang Y, Lovett-Racke AE.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Neurology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center ,
Columbus, Ohio.

Treatments for multiple sclerosis (MS) have changed over the past years as our
understanding of immunology and neuroscience has evolved. Experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE) continues to remain the major model for MS and has been a
major vehicle in the development of new therapeutic targets for MS, including new
agents such as natalizumab, fingolimod, and dimethyl fumarate. As progress in the
molecular understanding of immunology continues, many observations in EAE are
pursued with the ultimate goal of defining the pathophysiology of MS and
development of innovative treatments for the disease. Although many consider MS
to be a T cell-mediated autoimmune disease directed against myelin antigens, the 
exact cause of the disease is still unknown. For many years, it was thought that 
myelin-specific T cells that secreted interferon-<U+03B3> and were proinflammatory were 
the major T cell subset that mediated the disease, but recent studies on the
cytokine phenotype of pathogenic T cells in EAE and MS have opened debate on this
issue. Work over the past several years suggests that the transcription factor
T-bet appears to be an important factor in T cell encephalitogenicity; however,
recent data suggest that it is also dispensable in certain situations,
particularly for Th17 cells. Understanding the molecular mechanisms responsible
for T cell encephalitogenicity in MS and other autoimmune diseases will be
essential in the development of specific therapies for these inflammatory
diseases.

PMID: 25084179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Hum Genet. 2014 Aug;59(8):437-43. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2014.52. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

Genetic variation of TBX21 gene increases risk of asthma and its severity in
Indian children.

Sharma N(1), Jaiswal I(2), Mandal RK(3), Phadke SR(4), Awasthi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Translational Medicine Unit, King George's
Medical University, Lucknow, India. (2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, King
George's Medical University, Lucknow, India. (3)Department of Urology, Sanjay
Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India. (4)Department 
of Medical Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences,
Lucknow, India.

T-box transcription factor protein (TBX21) is encoded by the TBX21 gene in human.
It is crucial for naive T lymphocyte development, interferon-<U+03B3> production, airway
hyperresponsiveness and regulation of corticosteroid response in asthmatics.
Polymorphisms rs4794067 and rs16947078 of TBX21 were found to be associated with 
acetylsalicylic acid-induced and allergic asthma, respectively. We examined
whether sequence variants of TBX21 gene are associated with asthma and its
severity in Indian population. In a hospital-based case-control study, 240
asthmatic children and 240 healthy controls were investigated for the association
of TBX21 rs4794067 (C>T) and rs16947078 (G>A) polymorphisms with asthma and its
severity using PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism method. Heterozygous 
(CT) (odds ratio (OR)=2.33; P=0.001) and variant (TT) (OR=6.25; P=0.001)
genotypes of rs4794067 were demonstrated significant risk of asthma. However, in 
asthma severity variant (TT) genotype revealed significant increase risk
(intermittent: OR=5.9, P=0.001; mild: OR=8.0, P=0.001; moderate: OR=3.2, P=0.041;
and severe: OR=43.6, P=0.001) in all subgroups. Furthermore, haplotypes TG
(OR=2.83; P=0.001) and TA (OR=2.54; P=0.001) of TBX21 were associated with an
increased risk of asthma. Conversely, rs16947078 G>A polymorphism was not
associated with any asthma/asthma severity risk. These data suggest that TBX21
gene variation may modify individual's susceptibility to asthma and its severity 
in Indian population. However, further validation in large population-based
studies is needed to confirm the finding.

PMID: 25056814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. MBio. 2014 Jul 22;5(4):e01243-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01243-14.

Systems modeling of the role of interleukin-21 in the maintenance of effector
CD4+ T cell responses during chronic Helicobacter pylori infection.

Carbo A, Olivares-Villagómez D(1), Hontecillas R, Bassaganya-Riera J(2),
Chaturvedi R(3), Piazuelo MB(3), Delgado A(3), Washington MK(1), Wilson KT,
Algood HM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (2)holly.m.algood@vanderbilt.edu
jbassaga@vt.edu. (3)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

The development of gastritis during Helicobacter pylori infection is dependent on
an activated adaptive immune response orchestrated by T helper (Th) cells.
However, the relative contributions of the Th1 and Th17 subsets to gastritis and 
control of infection are still under investigation. To investigate the role of
interleukin-21 (IL-21) in the gastric mucosa during H. pylori infection, we
combined mathematical modeling of CD4(+) T cell differentiation with in vivo
mechanistic studies. We infected IL-21-deficient and wild-type mice with H.
pylori strain SS1 and assessed colonization, gastric inflammation, cellular
infiltration, and cytokine profiles. Chronically H. pylori-infected
IL-21-deficient mice had higher H. pylori colonization, significantly less
gastritis, and reduced expression of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines
compared to these parameters in infected wild-type littermates. These in vivo
data were used to calibrate an H. pylori infection-dependent, CD4(+) T
cell-specific computational model, which then described the mechanism by which
IL-21 activates the production of interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) and IL-17 during
chronic H. pylori infection. The model predicted activated expression of T-bet
and ROR<U+03B3>t and the phosphorylation of STAT3 and STAT1 and suggested a potential
role of IL-21 in the modulation of IL-10. Driven by our modeling-derived
predictions, we found reduced levels of CD4(+) splenocyte-specific tbx21 and rorc
expression, reduced phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT3, and an increase in CD4(+)
T cell-specific IL-10 expression in H. pylori-infected IL-21-deficient mice. Our 
results indicate that IL-21 regulates Th1 and Th17 effector responses during
chronic H. pylori infection in a STAT1- and STAT3-dependent manner, therefore
playing a major role controlling H. pylori infection and gastritis. Importance:
Helicobacter pylori is the dominant member of the gastric microbiota in more than
50% of the world's population. H. pylori colonization has been implicated in
gastritis and gastric cancer, as infection with H. pylori is the single most
common risk factor for gastric cancer. Current data suggest that, in addition to 
bacterial virulence factors, the magnitude and types of immune responses
influence the outcome of colonization and chronic infection. This study uses a
combined computational and experimental approach to investigate how IL-21, a
proinflammatory T cell-derived cytokine, maintains the chronic proinflammatory T 
cell immune response driving chronic gastritis during H. pylori infection. This
research will also provide insight into a myriad of other infectious and immune
disorders in which IL-21 is increasingly recognized to play a central role. The
use of IL-21-related therapies may provide treatment options for individuals
chronically colonized with H. pylori as an alternative to aggressive antibiotics.

Copyright © 2014 Carbo et al.

PMCID: PMC4120195
PMID: 25053783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Inflammation. 2015 Apr;38(2):697-704. doi: 10.1007/s10753-014-9979-x.

The effect of synthetic salidroside on cytokines and airway inflammation of
asthma induced by diisocyanate (TDI) in mice by regulating GATA3/T-bet.

Wang J(1), Xiao L, Zhu L, Hu M, Wang Q, Yan T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, China Pharmaceutical University,
Tongjiaxiang 24, Nanjing, China.

This study was conducted to explore the anti-asthma effects of synthetic
salidroside on cytokines and airway inflammation of asthma induced by
diisocyanate (TDI) in mice. The experiment was carried out 60 female BALB/C mice 
which were randomly assigned to six experimental groups: control, vehicle, model,
dexamethasone (2 mg/kg), and salidroside (24 and 48 mg/kg). After the experiment,
histological studies were evaluated by the hematoxylin and eosin staining, the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and blood were collected from the animals,
and the composition of the induced inflammatory cells, and the concentrations of 
certain cytokines (IL-4, INF-<U+03B3>) were evaluated. GATA3 and T-bet mRNAs were
evaluated by QPCR. Our study demonstrated that salidroside inhibited TDI-induced 
increases in eosinophil count; IL-4 and INF-<U+03B3> were recovered. Histological
studies demonstrated that salidroside substantially inhibited TDI-induced
eosinophilia in lung tissue. Salidroside can improve T-bet mRNA and reduce GATA3 
mRNA in lung. These findings suggest that salidroside may effectively ameliorate 
the progression of asthma and could be used as a therapy for patients with
allergic asthma by regulating GATA3/T-bet balance.

PMID: 25052478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Sep;44(9):2680-91. doi: 10.1002/eji.201344437. Epub 2014 Aug 
20.

T-bet modulates the antibody response and immune protection during murine
malaria.

Oakley MS(1), Sahu BR, Lotspeich-Cole L, Majam V, Thao Pham P, Sengupta Banerjee 
A, Kozakai Y, Morris SL, Kumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bacterial, Parasitic, and Allergenic Products, Center for
Biologics Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, 
MD, USA.

CD4(+) T-cell subtypes govern the synthesis of different Ab isotypes and other
immune functions. The influence of CD4(+) T-cell differentiation programs on
isotype switching and other aspects of host immunological networks during malaria
infection are currently poorly understood. Here, we used Tbx21(-/-) mice
deficient for T-bet, a regulator of Th1 CD4(+) T-cell differentiation, to examine
the effect of Th1 CD4(+) T cells on the immune protection to nonlethal murine
malaria Plasmodium yoelii 17XNL. We found that Tbx21(-/-) mice exhibited
significantly lower parasite burden that correlated with elevated levels of IgG1,
indicating that T-bet-dependent Ab isotype switching may be responsible for lower
parasite burden. Absence of T-bet was also associated with a transient but
significant loss of T cells during the infection, suggesting that T-bet may
suppress malaria-induced apoptosis or induce proliferation of T cells. However,
Tbx21(-/-) mice produced greater numbers of Foxp3(+) CD25(+) regulatory CD4(+) T 
cells, which may contribute to the early contraction of T cells. Lastly,
Tbx21(-/-) mice exhibited unimpaired production of IFN-<U+03B3> by a diverse repertoire 
of immune cell subsets and a selective expansion of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing T cells.
These observations may have implications in malaria vaccine design.

Published 2014. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMID: 25047384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jul 17;10(7):e1004251. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004251.
eCollection 2014.

T-bet and Eomes are differentially linked to the exhausted phenotype of CD8+ T
cells in HIV infection.

Buggert M(1), Tauriainen J(1), Yamamoto T(2), Frederiksen J(3), Ivarsson MA(4),
Michaëlsson J(4), Lund O(3), Hejdeman B(5), Jansson M(6), Sönnerborg A(7), Koup
RA(2), Betts MR(8), Karlsson AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Immunology Laboratory, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America. (3)Center for
Biological Sequence Analysis, Department of Systems Biology, Technical University
of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark. (4)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of
Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Department of
Infectious Diseases Venhälsan, Stockholm South General Hospital (Södersjukhuset),
Stockholm, Sweden. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden; Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (7)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department
of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Unit of
Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden. (8)Department of
Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America.

CD8(+) T cell exhaustion represents a major hallmark of chronic HIV infection.
Two key transcription factors governing CD8(+) T cell differentiation, T-bet and 
Eomesodermin (Eomes), have previously been shown in mice to differentially
regulate T cell exhaustion in part through direct modulation of PD-1. Here, we
examined the relationship between these transcription factors and the expression 
of several inhibitory receptors (PD-1, CD160, and 2B4), functional
characteristics and memory differentiation of CD8(+) T cells in chronic and
treated HIV infection. The expression of PD-1, CD160, and 2B4 on total CD8(+) T
cells was elevated in chronically infected individuals and highly associated with
a T-bet(dim)Eomes(hi) expressional profile. Interestingly, both resting and
activated HIV-specific CD8(+) T cells in chronic infection were almost
exclusively T-bet(dim)Eomes(hi) cells, while CMV-specific CD8(+) T cells
displayed a balanced expression pattern of T-bet and Eomes. The
T-bet(dim)Eomes(hi) virus-specific CD8(+) T cells did not show features of
terminal differentiation, but rather a transitional memory phenotype with poor
polyfunctional (effector) characteristics. The transitional and exhausted
phenotype of HIV-specific CD8(+) T cells was longitudinally related to persistent
Eomes expression after antiretroviral therapy (ART) initiation. Strikingly, these
characteristics remained stable up to 10 years after ART initiation. This study
supports the concept that poor human viral-specific CD8(+) T cell functionality
is due to an inverse expression balance between T-bet and Eomes, which is not
reversed despite long-term viral control through ART. These results aid to
explain the inability of HIV-specific CD8(+) T cells to control the viral
replication post-ART cessation.

PMCID: PMC4102564
PMID: 25032686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Immunol. 2014 Aug 15;193(4):1873-85. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400348. Epub 2014
Jul 11.

Antigen-specific naive CD8+ T cells produce a single pulse of IFN-<U+03B3> in vivo
within hours of infection, but without antiviral effect.

Hosking MP(1), Flynn CT(2), Whitton JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037 mhosking@scripps.edu. (2)Department of Immunology
and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037.

In vitro studies have shown that naive CD8(+) T cells are unable to express most 
of their effector proteins until after at least one round of cell division has
taken place. We have reassessed this issue in vivo and find that naive CD8(+) T
cells mount Ag-specific responses within hours of infection, before proliferation
has commenced. Newly activated naive Ag-specific CD8(+) T cells produce a rapid
pulse of IFN-<U+03B3> in vivo and begin to accumulate granzyme B and perforin. Later, in
vivo cytolytic activity is detectable, coincident with the initiation of cell
division. Despite the rapid development of these functional attributes, no
antiviral effect was observed early during infection, even when the cells are
present in numbers similar to those of virus-specific memory cells. The
evolutionary reason for the pulse of IFN-<U+03B3> synthesis by naive T cells is
uncertain, but the lack of antiviral impact suggests that it may be regulatory.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4119517
PMID: 25015828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Exp Ther Med. 2014 Aug;8(2):557-562. Epub 2014 Jun 3.

GTS-21, an a7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonist, modulates Th1
differentiation in CD4(+) T cells from patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Wu S(1), Zhao H(1), Luo H(1), Xiao X(2), Zhang H(2), Li T(1), Zuo X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan 410008, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya
School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, P.R. China.

GTS-21 (also known as DMBX-anabaseine), a selective a7 nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor (a7nAChR) agonist, has previously been found to inhibit the inflammation
associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). RA is an autoimmune disease, where an 
abnormal immune system plays a critical role in the occurrence and development of
synovium inflammation and bone damage. However, prior to this study, the
immunological mechanism by which GTS-21 protects against RA had not been
elucidated. In the present study, the effects of GTS-21 on T helper 1 (Th1)
cells, which have an important role in the inflammation associated with RA, were 
investigated. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and cluster of
differentiation (CD)4(+) T cells were separated from patients with RA, and the
effects of GTS-21 on PBMCs stimulated with anti-CD3/-CD28 antibodies and CD4(+) T
cells were investigated in the context of Th1-cell differentiation. ELISA was
used to analyze interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> expression and flow cytometric analysis was
used to detect the percentage of IFN-<U+03B3>(+) CD3(+)CD8(-) T cells. In addition,
western blotting was employed to detect the levels of the T-box transcription
factor TBX21, which is a Th1 cell-specific transcription factor. The present
study showed that GTS-21 reduced IFN-<U+03B3> production in PBMCs from patients with RA.
Under conditions of Th1-cell differentiation, GTS-21 reduced the percentage of
IFN<U+03B3>(+)CD3(+)CD8(-) T cells and IFN-<U+03B3> production in the culture supernatant and
also inhibited the expression of the Th1 cell-specific transcription factor
TBX21. The effects of GTS-21 were blocked by the a7nAchR antagonist
a-bungarotoxin, which increased the expression of IFN-<U+03B3> and TBX21. This study
demonstrated that GTS-21 is able to inhibit RA Th1-cell differentiation through
activation of the a7nAchR.

PMCID: PMC4079428
PMID: 25009619  [PubMed]


152. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Jul;30(7):704-7, 712.

[Imbalance in the expression of Foxp3, T-bet and GATA-3 is correlated with
inflammation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang C(1), Liu X(2), Peng Q(2), Li D(2), Ji Q(2), Wang C(3), Li Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School, Hubei University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Wuhan
430065; Clinical College of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, Anhui
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hefei 230038, China. (2)Clinical
College of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, Anhui University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hefei 230038, China. (3)Department of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei
230601, China. (4)Department of Respiration, First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hefei 230031, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the change of regulatory T cells(Tregs), fork head-like
transcription factor 3 (Foxp3), T box expressed in T cells (T-bet) and GATA
binding protein 3 (GATA3) in rat models of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD).
METHODS: Thirty rats were randomly divided into control group and model group
(n=15 each). The rats of model group were developed by lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
and smoking. Interleukin-4 (IL-4) and <U+03B3>-interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>) in serum and
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were detected 28 days after modeling by
ELISA. Peripheral Tregs were detected by flow cytometry. The expressions of
Foxp3, T-bet, GATA gene and protein in lung tissue were observed by reverse
transcription PCR and Western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, the model group had more serious
inflammation in lung tissues, expressed the higher levels of IFN-<U+03B3> in serum and
BALF (P<0.01), T-bet mRNA and protein in lung tissue, and the lower levels of
IL-4, CD4<U+207A> CD25<U+207A> Treg, CD4<U+207A> CD25<U+207A> Foxp3<U+207A> Treg (P<0.05), Foxp3, GATA-3 mRNA and
protein (P<0.01). Correlation analysis showed that there were correlations
between T-bet, GATA-3, Foxp3 expressions and IL-4, IFN-<U+03B3> levels (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: There is a relationship between inflammation and imbalance of in the 
expression of T-bet, GATA-3, Foxp3 in COPD.

PMID: 25001933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Nat Immunol. 2014 Aug;15(8):777-88. doi: 10.1038/ni.2937. Epub 2014 Jul 6.

Epigenomic analysis of primary human T cells reveals enhancers associated with
TH2 memory cell differentiation and asthma susceptibility.

Seumois G(1), Chavez L(2), Gerasimova A(2), Lienhard M(3), Omran N(4), Kalinke
L(4), Vedanayagam M(4), Ganesan AP(4), Chawla A(3), Djukanovic R(4), Ansel KM(5),
Peters B(3), Rao A(6), Vijayanand P(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] La Jolla Institute for Allergy & Immunology, La Jolla, California, USA. [2]
Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Southampton National Institute for Health
Research Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, University of Southampton, Faculty
of Medicine, Southampton, UK. [3] University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA. [4]. (2)1] La Jolla Institute for Allergy &
Immunology, La Jolla, California, USA. [2]. (3)La Jolla Institute for Allergy &
Immunology, La Jolla, California, USA. (4)Clinical and Experimental Sciences,
Southampton National Institute for Health Research Respiratory Biomedical
Research Unit, University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Southampton, UK.
(5)University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA. (6)1] 
La Jolla Institute for Allergy & Immunology, La Jolla, California, USA. [2]
Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, California, USA. [3]
Department of Pharmacology, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
California, USA. [4] University of California San Diego Moores Cancer Center, San
Diego, California, USA. (7)1] La Jolla Institute for Allergy & Immunology, La
Jolla, California, USA. [2] Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Southampton
National Institute for Health Research Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit,
University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Southampton, UK. [3] University
of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Aug;15(8):701-3.

A characteristic feature of asthma is the aberrant accumulation, differentiation 
or function of memory CD4(+) T cells that produce type 2 cytokines (TH2 cells).
By mapping genome-wide histone modification profiles for subsets of T cells
isolated from peripheral blood of healthy and asthmatic individuals, we
identified enhancers with known and potential roles in the normal differentiation
of human TH1 cells and TH2 cells. We discovered disease-specific enhancers in T
cells that differ between healthy and asthmatic individuals. Enhancers that
gained the histone H3 Lys4 dimethyl (H3K4me2) mark during TH2 cell development
showed the highest enrichment for asthma-associated single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), which supported a pathogenic role for TH2 cells in asthma. 
In silico analysis of cell-specific enhancers revealed transcription factors,
microRNAs and genes potentially linked to human TH2 cell differentiation. Our
results establish the feasibility and utility of enhancer profiling in
well-defined populations of specialized cell types involved in disease
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4140783
PMID: 24997565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jun 26;10(6):e1004190. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004190.
eCollection 2014.

Adequate Th2-type response associates with restricted bacterial growth in latent 
mycobacterial infection of zebrafish.

Hammarén MM(1), Oksanen KE(1), Nisula HM(1), Luukinen BV(1), Pesu M(2), Rämet
M(3), Parikka M(1).

Author information: 
(1)BioMediTech, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland. (2)BioMediTech,
University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland; Fimlab Laboratories, Pirkanmaa Hospital 
District, Tampere, Finland. (3)BioMediTech, University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland; Department of Pediatrics, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

Tuberculosis is still a major health problem worldwide. Currently it is not known
what kind of immune responses lead to successful control and clearance of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. This gap in knowledge is reflected by the inability
to develop sufficient diagnostic and therapeutic tools to fight tuberculosis. We 
have used the Mycobacterium marinum infection model in the adult zebrafish and
taken advantage of heterogeneity of zebrafish population to dissect the
characteristics of adaptive immune responses, some of which are associated with
well-controlled latency or bacterial clearance while others with progressive
infection. Differences in T cell responses between subpopulations were measured
at the transcriptional level. It was discovered that a high total T cell level
was usually associated with lower bacterial loads alongside with a T helper 2
(Th2)-type gene expression signature. At late time points, spontaneous
reactivation with apparent symptoms was characterized by a low Th2/Th1 marker
ratio and a substantial induction of foxp3 reflecting the level of regulatory T
cells. Characteristic gata3/tbx21 has potential as a biomarker for the status of 
mycobacterial disease.

PMCID: PMC4072801
PMID: 24968056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Clin Invest. 2014 Aug;124(8):3431-42. doi: 10.1172/JCI75250. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

HTLV-1 induces a Th1-like state in CD4+CCR4+ T cells.

Araya N, Sato T, Ando H, Tomaru U, Yoshida M, Coler-Reilly A, Yagishita N,
Yamauchi J, Hasegawa A, Kannagi M, Hasegawa Y, Takahashi K, Kunitomo Y, Tanaka Y,
Nakajima T, Nishioka K, Utsunomiya A, Jacobson S, Yamano Y.

Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is linked to multiple diseases,
including the neuroinflammatory disease HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical
spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) and adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma. Evidence
suggests that HTLV-1, via the viral protein Tax, exploits CD4+ T cell plasticity 
and induces transcriptional changes in infected T cells that cause suppressive
CD4+CD25+CCR4+ Tregs to lose expression of the transcription factor FOXP3 and
produce IFN-<U+03B3>, thus promoting inflammation. We hypothesized that transformation
of HTLV-1-infected CCR4+ T cells into Th1-like cells plays a key role in the
pathogenesis of HAM/TSP. Here, using patient cells and cell lines, we
demonstrated that Tax, in cooperation with specificity protein 1 (Sp1), boosts
expression of the Th1 master regulator T box transcription factor (T-bet) and
consequently promotes production of IFN-<U+03B3>. Evaluation of CSF and spinal cord
lesions of HAM/TSP patients revealed the presence of abundant CD4+CCR4+ T cells
that coexpressed the Th1 marker CXCR3 and produced T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3>. Finally,
treatment of isolated PBMCs and CNS cells from HAM/TSP patients with an antibody 
that targets CCR4+ T cells and induces cytotoxicity in these cells reduced both
viral load and IFN-<U+03B3> production, which suggests that targeting CCR4+ T cells may 
be a viable treatment option for HAM/TSP.

PMCID: PMC4109535
PMID: 24960164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cell Rep. 2014 Jul 10;8(1):150-62. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.05.042. Epub 2014
Jun 19.

The transcription Factor AHR prevents the differentiation of a stage 3 innate
lymphoid cell subset to natural killer cells.

Hughes T(1), Briercheck EL(2), Freud AG(3), Trotta R(1), McClory S(2), Scoville
SD(2), Keller K(1), Deng Y(1), Cole J(1), Harrison N(1), Mao C(1), Zhang J(4),
Benson DM(5), Yu J(5), Caligiuri MA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (2)Integrated Biomedical Graduate Program,
Medical Scientist Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA;
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; 
The James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (4)Center for Biostatistics, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (5)Division of Hematology, Department of
Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA;
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; 
The James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (6)Division of Hematology, Department of
Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Integrated
Biomedical Graduate Program, Medical Scientist Program, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; The James Cancer Hospital and Solove
Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
Electronic address: michael.caligiuri@osumc.edu.

Accumulating evidence indicates that human natural killer (NK) cells develop in
secondary lymphoid tissue (SLT) through a so-called "stage 3" developmental
intermediate minimally characterized by a CD34(-)CD117(+)CD94(-) immunophenotype 
that lacks mature NK cell function. This stage 3 population is heterogeneous,
potentially composed of functionally distinct innate lymphoid cell (ILC) types
that include interleukin-1 receptor (IL-1R1)-positive, IL-22-producing ILC3s.
Whether human ILC3s are developmentally related to NK cells is a subject of
ongoing investigation. Here, we show that antagonism of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) or silencing of AHR gene expression promotes the differentiation
of tonsillar IL-22-producing IL-1R1(hi) human ILC3s to CD56(bright)CD94(+)
interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>-producing cytolytic mature NK cells expressing eomesodermin
(EOMES) and T-Box Protein 21 (TBX21 or TBET). Hence, we demonstrate the lineage
plasticity of human ILCs by identifying AHR as a transcription factor that
prevents IL-1R1(hi) ILC3s from differentiating into NK cells.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4133146
PMID: 24953655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Autoimmun. 2014 Sep;53:95-104. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.05.006. Epub 2014 Jun
14.

MBD2 regulates TH17 differentiation and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
by controlling the homeostasis of T-bet/Hlx axis.

Zhong J(1), Yu Q(1), Yang P(1), Rao X(2), He L(1), Fang J(1), Tu Y(1), Zhang
Z(1), Lai Q(1), Zhang S(1), Kuczma M(2), Kraj P(2), Xu JF(3), Gong F(4), Zhou
J(5), Wen L(6), Eizirik DL(7), Du J(8), Wang W(9), Wang CY(10).

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Biomedical Research, Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Ave., Wuhan 430030, China. (2)The Center for
Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Georgia Regents University, 1120 15th Street,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA. (3)Department of Clinical Immunology, Institute of
Laboratory Medicine, Guangdong Medical College, Dongguan 523808, China.
(4)Department of Immunology, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. (5)Department of Hematology, Tongji 
Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Ave., Wuhan
430030, China. (6)Section of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (7)Laboratory of
Experimental Medicine, Universite Libre de Bruxelles, Route de Lennik 808, CP
618, B-1070 Brussels, Belgium. (8)Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing Institute of Heart, Lung and Blood Vessel Diseases, The Key
Laboratory of Remodeling-Related Cardiovascular Diseases, Ministry of Education, 
Beijing, China. (9)Department of Neurology, Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University 
of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Ave., Wuhan 430030, China. Electronic
address: wwang@tjh.tjmu.edu.cn. (10)The Center for Biomedical Research, Tongji
Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Ave., Wuhan
430030, China. Electronic address: wangcy@tjh.tjmu.edu.cn.

Unlike genetic alterations, epigenetic modifications are reversible and amenable 
to pharmacological interventions, which make them appealing targets for clinical 
therapy. However, little is known about epigenetic regulation in experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Here we demonstrated that methyl-CpG-binding 
domain protein 2 (MBD2), an epigenetic regulator, controls autoimmunity and EAE
through T-bet/Hlx. Tbx21 and Hlx underwent a DNA methylation turnover upon
polarizations and a unique methylation pattern was essential for TH17
development. Loss of Mbd2 resulted in a defect for reading the information
encoded by this methylation turnover, which disrupted the homeostasis of
T-bet/Hlx axis and suppressed TH17 differentiation. DNA demethylation induced
similar effect on helper T cell differentiation. Therefore, Mbd2(-/-) mice were
completely protected from EAE. Pathogenic splenocytes isolated from wild-type
mice challenged with MOG35-55 could adoptively transfer disease to Mbd2(-/-)
mice. In addition, Mbd2(-/-) mice reconstituted with unstimulated wild-type
splenocytes developed EAE as wild-type mice did. These data would provide novel
insights into epigenetic regulation of EAE.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24934598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jun 24;111(25):E2559-66. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1408540111. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

Nod/Ripk2 signaling in dendritic cells activates IL-17A-secreting innate lymphoid
cells and drives colitis in T-bet-/-.Rag2-/- (TRUC) mice.

Ermann J(1), Staton T(2), Glickman JN(3), de Waal Malefyt R(4), Glimcher LH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115;Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115;
(2)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115; (3)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115;Miraca Life Sciences, Newton, MA 02464; (4)Biologics Discovery, 
Merck Research Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA 94304; and. (5)Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065 lglimche@med.cornell.edu.

T-bet(-/-).Rag2(-/-) (TRUC) mice spontaneously develop microbiota-driven,
TNF-mediated large bowel inflammation that resembles human ulcerative colitis. We
show here that IL-23 and IL-1-dependent secretion of IL-17A by innate lymphoid
cells (ILCs; defined as CD45(+)lin(-)Thy1(hi)NKp46(-)) is a second critical
pathway in this model. Using an in vitro coculture system of bone marrow-derived 
dendritic cells (DCs) and freshly isolated FACS-purified ILCs, we demonstrate
that IL-23 and IL-1 secreted by DCs in response to microbial stimulation work
together to induce IL-17A production by ILCs. TNF is not required for IL-17A
secretion by ILCs in vitro but synergizes with IL-17A to induce the expression of
neutrophil-attracting chemokines. Upstream, activation of the IL-23/IL-17A axis
is regulated by nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing
(Nod)/receptor-interacting serine-threonine kinase 2 (Ripk2) signals in DCs.
Genetic ablation of the Nod/Ripk2 signaling pathway protects TRUC mice from
developing colitis without affecting the colitogenicity of the intestinal
microbiota. Our data provide insight into the complex network of interactions
between IL-17A-secreting ILCs and other components of the innate immune system in
the development of colitis.

PMCID: PMC4078823
PMID: 24927559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Scand J Immunol. 2014 Oct;80(4):276-82. doi: 10.1111/sji.12197.

Increased interleukin-27 promotes Th1 differentiation in patients with chronic
immune thrombocytopenia.

Li Q(1), Zhang L, Yang M, Xia R, Xia L, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The first affiliated hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui Province, China.

Chronic immune thrombocytopenia (cITP) is an autoimmune disease with disturbed
cytokine profile. Although plasma levels of IL-27 are shown to be associated with
cITP, its association with T cell subsets has not been studied. The objective of 
this study was to study the association between IL-27 and different T cell
subsets in patients with cITP. Heparinized blood was collected from 31 patients
with cITP and 36 healthy controls (platelet count <100 × 10(9)/l and 103-280 ×
10(9)/l, respectively). The percentage of Th1, Th2 and Th17 cells in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were enumerated by flow cytometry, and the mRNA
levels of IL-27, T-bet, GATA-3 and retinoid-related orphan receptor gamma (ROR<U+03B3>t)
by real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain (RT-PCR). Plasma cytokine
levels of IL-27, interferon-gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>), IL-4 and IL-17A were estimated by flow
cytometrix. The effect of exogenous recombinant IL-27(rhIL-27) on the
differentiation of T cells into Th1, Th2 and Th17 cells was investigated by cell 
culture. The percentage of Th1 and Th17 cells and the plasma concentration and
mRNA levels of IL-27 were significantly higher in cITP patients compared with
healthy controls. Plasma levels of IL-27 correlated positively with percentage of
Th1 cells in patients with cITP. Exogenous (rhIL-27) could significantly
up-regulate the percentage of Th1 cells and down-regulate Th2 cells in vitro.
Th17 cells were reduced in the presence of (rhIL-27) in controls but had no
effect in patients with cITP. The up-regulation of IL-27 might cause Th1
differentiation and might be involved in the pathophysiology of cITP.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24909905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Oral Microbiol. 2014 Oct;29(5):233-43. doi: 10.1111/omi.12061. Epub 2014 Jul 
15.

TBX21 participates in innate immune response by regulating Toll-like receptor 2
expression in Streptococcus pneumoniae infections.

Woo CH(1), Shin SG, Koh SH, Lim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yeungnam University College of Medicine, Daegu,
Korea.

Nasopharyngeal carriage of Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus) plays an
important role in the development of invasive diseases, and is also critically
involved in setting up respiratory bacterial and viral infections. We previously 
reported that pneumococcus, one of the commonly carried bacteria in the
nasopharynx, regulates non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae-induced inflammation
by upregulating the expression of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2). However, the
underlying molecular mechanisms by which TLR2 expression is regulated during
pneumococcal infections have not yet been well characterized. TBX21 is an
important transcription factor of adaptive immunity, but there is an increasing
body of evidence pointing to a role in regulating innate immunity. The expression
of TBX21 was reported in epithelial cells, but the expression and role of TBX21
in respiratory epithelium, especially for regulating TLR2, has not yet been
studied. In this study, we found that pneumococcus upregulates TBX21 expression
in the respiratory epithelium. The effect of pneumococcus on TBX21 expression was
dependent on its cytoplasmic toxin, pneumolysin. In addition, epithelial TBX21
expression was not regulated by the gram-negative bacterium non-typeable
Haemophilus influenzae, peptidoglycan or endotoxin. Deficiency of TBX21 in mice
or knocking down TBX21 in epithelial cells suppressed pneumococcus-induced TLR2
expression, but not that of TLR4 or TLR9. These results indicate that the
adaptive immune regulator TBX21 participates in regulating innate immune
responses, through regulation of TLR2 expression during pneumococcal infections.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24903905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:589672. doi: 10.1155/2014/589672. Epub 2014 May 13.

The role of protein modifications of T-bet in cytokine production and
differentiation of T helper cells.

Oh S(1), Hwang ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Global Top 5
Research Program, Ewha Womans University, 52 Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, C206
Science Building, Seoul 120-750, Republic of Korea.

T-Bet (T-box protein expressed in T cells, also called as TBX21) was originally
cloned as a key transcription factor involved in the commitment of T helper (Th) 
cells to the Th1 lineage. T-Bet directly activates IFN-<U+03B3> gene transcription and
enhances development of Th1 cells. T-Bet simultaneously modulates IL-2 and Th2
cytokines in an IFN-<U+03B3>-independent manner, resulting in an attenuation of Th2 cell
development. Numerous studies have demonstrated that T-bet plays multiple roles
in many subtypes of immune cells, including B cell, dendritic cells, natural
killer (NK) cells, NK T cells, and innate lymphoid cells. Therefore, T-bet is
crucial for the development and coordination of both innate and adaptive immune
responses. To fulfill these multiple roles, T-bet undergoes several
posttranslational protein modifications, such as phosphorylation at tyrosine,
serine, and threonine residues, and ubiquitination at lysine residues, which
affect lineage commitment during Th cell differentiation. This review presents a 
current overview of the progress made in understanding the roles of various types
of T-bet protein modifications in the regulation of cytokine production during Th
cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4036734
PMID: 24901011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Genes Immun. 2014 Sep;15(6):413-23. doi: 10.1038/gene.2014.33. Epub 2014 Jun 5.

IL-12 is required for mTOR regulation of memory CTLs during viral infection.

Garcia K(1), Sun Z(1), Mattson E(1), Li L(1), Smyth K(1), Xiao Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD, USA.

The induction of functional memory cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) is a major goal
of vaccination against intracellular pathogens. Interleukin (IL)-12 is critical
for the generation of memory CTLs, and inhibition of mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) by rapamycin can effectively enhance the memory CTL response.
Yet, the role of IL-12 in mTOR's regulation of memory CTL is unknown. Here we
hypothesized that the immunostimulatory effects of mTOR on memory CTLs requires
IL-12 signaling. Our results revealed that rapamycin increased the generation of 
memory CTLs in vaccinia virus infection, and this enhancement was dependent upon 
the IL-12 signal. Furthermore, IL-12 receptor deficiency diminished the secondary
expansion of rapamycin-regulated memory and resultant secondary memory CTLs were 
abolished. Rapamycin enhanced IL-12 signaling by upregulating IL-12 receptor ß2
expression and signal transducer and activator of transcription factor 4
phosphorylation in CTLs during early infection. In addition, rapamycin
continually suppressed T-bet expression in both wild-type and IL-12 receptor
knockout CTLs. These results indicate an essential role for IL-12 in the
regulation of memory CTLs by mTOR and highlight the importance of considering the
interplay between cytokines and adjuvants during vaccine design.

PMCID: PMC4156562
PMID: 24898389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Blood. 2014 Aug 7;124(6):851-60. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-03-564286. Epub 2014 Jun
3.

Abnormally differentiated CD4+ or CD8+ T cells with phenotypic and genetic
features of double negative T cells in human Fas deficiency.

Rensing-Ehl A(1), Völkl S(2), Speckmann C(3), Lorenz MR(4), Ritter J(5), Janda
A(3), Abinun M(6), Pircher H(7), Bengsch B(8), Thimme R(8), Fuchs I(1), Ammann
S(1), Allgäuer A(2), Kentouche K(9), Cant A(6), Hambleton S(6), Bettoni da Cunha 
C(10), Huetker S(11), Kühnle I(11), Pekrun A(12), Seidel MG(13), Hummel M(5),
Mackensen A(2), Schwarz K(14), Ehl S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center Freiburg and
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; (2)Department of Internal Medicine 5, 
Haematology and Oncology, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany;
(3)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center Freiburg and
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; Center for Paediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine, University Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany;
(4)Institute for Transfusion Medicine, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany;
(5)Institute of Pathology, Charité - University Medicine Berlin, Campus Benjamin 
Franklin, Berlin, Germany; (6)Department of Paediatric Immunology, Great North
Children's Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; Institute of Cellular
Immunology, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom;
(7)Institute of Immunology, Department of Medicine Microbiology and Hygiene, and.
(8)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center Freiburg and
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; Department of Internal Medicine II,
University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; (9)Department of
Paediatrics, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany; (10)Department of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hanover Hannover, Germany;
(11)Division of Pediatric Haematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatric and
Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany;
(12)Department of Paediatric Haematology/Oncology, University Medical Center
Bremen, Bremen, Germany. (13)Paediatric Haematology-Oncology, Medical University 
of Graz, Graz, Austria; and. (14)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University 
Medical Center Freiburg and University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; Institute 
for Transfusion Medicine, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany; Institute for Clinical
Transfusion Medicine and Immunogenetics Ulm, German Red Cross Blood Service, Ulm,
Germany.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Aug 7;124(6):828-30.

Accumulation of CD3(+) T-cell receptor (TCR)aß(+)CD4(-)CD8(-) double-negative T
cells (DNT) is a hallmark of autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS). DNT 
origin and differentiation pathways remain controversial. Here we show that human
ALPS DNT have features of terminally differentiated effector memory T cells
reexpressing CD45RA(+) (TEMRA), but are CD27(+)CD28(+)KLRG1(-) and do not express
the transcription factor T-bet. This unique phenotype was also detected among
CD4(+) or CD8(+) ALPS TEMRA cells. T-cell receptor ß deep sequencing revealed a
significant fraction of shared CDR3 sequences between ALPS DNT and both CD4(+)
and CD8(+)TEMRA cells. Moreover, in ALPS patients with a germ line FAS mutation
and somatic loss of heterozygosity, in whom biallelic mutant cells can be tracked
by absent Fas expression, Fas-negative T cells accumulated not only among DNT,
but also among CD4(+) and CD8(+)TEMRA cells. These data indicate that in human
Fas deficiency DNT cannot only derive from CD8(+), but also from CD4(+) T cells. 
Furthermore, defective Fas signaling leads to aberrant transcriptional programs
and differentiation of subsets of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells. Accumulation of
these cells before their double-negative state appears to be an important early
event in the pathogenesis of lymphoproliferation in ALPS patients.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 24894771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Immunol. 2014 Jul 1;193(1):150-60. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302923. Epub 2014 May
28.

Nuclear role of WASp in gene transcription is uncoupled from its ARP2/3-dependent
cytoplasmic role in actin polymerization.

Sadhukhan S(1), Sarkar K(2), Taylor M(1), Candotti F(3), Vyas YM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; (2)Division of
Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; Division of Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology, University of Iowa Children's Hospital, Iowa City, IA 52242;
and. (3)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892. (4)Division of
Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; Division of Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology, University of Iowa Children's Hospital, Iowa City, IA 52242;
and yatin-vyas@uiowa.edu.

Defects in Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome protein (WASp) underlie development of WAS,
an X-linked immunodeficiency and autoimmunity disorder of childhood.
Nucleation-promoting factors (NPFs) of the WASp family generate F-actin in the
cytosol via the VCA (verprolin-homology, cofilin-homology, and acidic) domain and
support RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription in the nucleus. Whether
nuclear-WASp requires the integration of its actin-related protein
(ARP)2/3-dependent cytoplasmic function to reprogram gene transcription, however,
remains unresolved. Using the model of human TH cell differentiation, we find
that WASp has a functional nuclear localizing and nuclear exit sequences, and
accordingly, its effects on transcription are controlled mainly at the level of
its nuclear entry and exit via the nuclear pore. Human WASp does not use its
VCA-dependent, ARP2/3-driven, cytoplasmic effector mechanisms to support histone 
H3K4 methyltransferase activity in the nucleus of TH1-skewed cells. Accordingly, 
an isolated deficiency of nuclear-WASp is sufficient to impair the
transcriptional reprogramming of TBX21 and IFNG promoters in TH1-skewed cells,
whereas an isolated deficiency of cytosolic-WASp does not impair this process. In
contrast, nuclear presence of WASp in TH2-skewed cells is small, and its loss
does not impair transcriptional reprogramming of GATA3 and IL4 promoters. Our
study unveils an ARP2/3:VCA-independent function of nuclear-WASp in TH1 gene
activation that is uncoupled from its cytoplasmic role in actin polymerization.

PMCID: PMC4137324
PMID: 24872192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Dev Comp Immunol. 2014 Oct;46(2):333-40. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.05.005. Epub
2014 May 21.

A novel lineage transcription factor based analysis reveals differences in T
helper cell subpopulation development in infected and intrauterine growth
restricted (IUGR) piglets.

Ebner F(1), Rausch S(1), Scharek-Tedin L(2), Pieper R(2), Burwinkel M(3), Zentek 
J(2), Hartmann S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität 
Berlin, Robert-von-Ostertag-Straße 7-13, 14163 Berlin, Germany. (2)Institute of
Animal Nutrition, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität Berlin,
Königin-Luise-Straße 49, 14195 Berlin, Germany. (3)Institute of Virology,
Department of Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität Berlin,
Robert-von-Ostertag-Straße 7-13, 14163 Berlin, Germany. (4)Institute of
Immunology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität Berlin,
Robert-von-Ostertag-Straße 7-13, 14163 Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
Susanne.Hartmann@fu-berlin.de.

Research in mouse and human clearly identified subsets of T helper (Th) cells
based on nuclear expression of specific lineage transcription factors. In swine, 
however, transcription factor based detection of functional subpopulations of
porcine Th cells by flow cytometry is so far limited to regulatory T cells via
Foxp3. T-bet and GATA-3 are the transcription factors that regulate commitment to
Th1 or Th2 cells, respectively. In this study we prove GATA-3 and T-bet
expression in porcine CD4(+) cells polarized in vitro. Importantly, GATA-3 and
T-bet expressing cells were detectable in pigs infected with pathogens associated
with Th2 and Th1 immune responses. Increased frequencies of GATA-3 positive
CD4(+) cells are found in vivo in pigs experimentally infected with the nematode 
Trichuris suis, whereas porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus
(PRRSV) infection elicited T-bet positive CD4(+) T cells. Analysing the immune
status of pre-weaning piglets with intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) we
found an increased expression of Foxp3, T-bet and GATA-3 in CD4(+) and
CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive T cells in systemic and intestinal compartments of
IUGR piglets. Hence, we established the detection of porcine Th1 and Th2 cells
via T-bet and GATA-3 and show that the porcine lineage transcription factors are 
differentially regulated very early in life depending on the developmental
status.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24858028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Immunol. 2014 Aug;60(2):129-34. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2014.03.004. Epub 2014 
May 20.

Effects of strenuous exercise on Th1/Th2 gene expression from human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells of marathon participants.

Xiang L(1), Rehm KE(2), Marshall GD Jr(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Behavioral Immunology Research, Division of Clinical Immunology 
and Allergy, Department of Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center,
Jackson, MS, USA. Electronic address: lxiang@umc.edu. (2)Laboratory of Behavioral
Immunology Research, Division of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Department of
Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS, USA.

Physical stressors, such as strenuous exercise, can have numerous effects on the 
human body including the immune system. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
gene expression profile of Th1/Th2 cytokines and related transcription factor
genes in order to investigate possible immune imbalances before and after a
marathon. Blood samples were collected from 16 normal volunteers 24-48 h before
and one week after completing a marathon race. Gene expression of Th1 and Th2
related cytokines from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) was
analyzed using Human Th1-Th2-Th3 RT(2) Profiler PCR Array and qRT-PCR that
measured the transcript levels of 84 genes related to T cell activation. We found
that PBMC express a characteristic Th2-like gene profile one week post-marathon
compared to pre-marathon. The majority of genes up-regulated one week
post-marathon such as IL-4, GATA3, and CCR4 were Th2 associated. For Th1-related 
genes, CXCR3 and IRF1 were up-regulated one week post-marathon. There was a trend
of down-regulation of two Th1 related genes, T-bet and STAT1. Th3-related gene
expression patterns did not change in the study. The ratios of both IFN-<U+03B3>/IL-4
and T-bet/GATA3 gene expressions were significantly lower one week after
marathon. These findings suggest that a Th1/Th2 immune imbalance persisted at
least 1 week after completion of a marathon which offers a mechanistic rationale 
for the increased risk of upper respiratory tract infections often reported after
strenuous exercise.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24853398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Scand J Immunol. 2014 Aug;80(2):95-100. doi: 10.1111/sji.12189.

Carbon monoxide-releasing molecule-A1 inhibits Th1/Th17 and stimulates Th2
differentiation in vitro.

Nikolic I(1), Vujicic M, Stojanovic I, Stosic-Grujicic S, Saksida T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biological Research 'Sinisa Stankovic', University of Belgrade, 
Belgrade, Serbia.

Carbon monoxide (CO) is endogenously produced by haeme oxygenase-1 and has
profound effects on intracellular signalling processes, generating
anti-inflammatory, antiproliferative and antiapoptotic effects. A
boron-containing compound CORM-A1 is capable of releasing CO in such a way to
mimic physiological functions of haeme oxygenase-1. Considering the importance of
Th1/Th17 versus Th2 balance in the final outcome of immune and inflammatory
responses in this study we focused on immune-modulatory effects of CORM-A1 on
murine lymph node-derived T cells in vitro and its influence on T-cell
proliferation, activation and differentiation. Anti-CD3/CD28 antibody-triggered
lymph node cells proliferation remained unaffected after 24-hour CORM-A1
treatment, as well as the expression of the early activation marker CD25.
However, CORM-A1 successfully reduced the secretion of the two representative
pro-inflammatory cytokines, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17, while the secretion of
anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-4 remained unchanged. Furthermore, CORM-A1
efficiently reduced the percentage of CD4(+) IFN-<U+03B3>(+) and CD4(+) IL-17(+) cells, 
whereas CD4(+) IL-4(+) cell population increased after treatment. Also, CORM-A1
significantly reduced expression of transcription factor ROR<U+03B3>T, necessary for
Th17 development, but the expression of Th1-related and Th2-related transcription
factors (T-bet and GATA-3, respectively) remained unchanged. In conclusion, our
findings indicate that CO has anti-inflammatory role through the regulation of
balance between pro-inflammatory Th1/Th17 and anti-inflammatory Th2 cells.
Observed immunomodulatory effects of CORM-A1 could be useful for developing novel
therapeutic approaches in managing Th1/Th17-mediated immune disorders.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24845722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 4;449(3):289-94. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.037. Epub 2014 May 17.

Deubiquitination and stabilization of T-bet by USP10.

Pan L(1), Chen Z(2), Wang L(1), Chen C(2), Li D(2), Wan H(1), Li B(3), Shi G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Rui Jin Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200025, PR China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Molecular Virology and Immunology, Unit of Molecular Immunology, Institut Pasteur
of Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences (CAS), Shanghai 200031, PR China. (3)Key Laboratory of Molecular
Virology and Immunology, Unit of Molecular Immunology, Institut Pasteur of
Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences (CAS), Shanghai 200031, PR China. Electronic address: binli@sibs.ac.cn. 
(4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Rui Jin Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200025, PR China. Electronic address:
shiguochao@hotmail.com.

The T-box transcriptional factor T-bet is crucial in the development,
differentiation and function of Th1 cells. It drives Th1 immune response
primarily through promoting expression of Th1 hallmark cytokine IFN-<U+03B3>. Although
T-bet was found associated with many immune-mediated diseases such as asthma and 
systemic sclerosis, little is known about the regulation of T-bet stability and
function. Here we identified USP10, a carboxyl-terminal ubiquitin-processing
protease, could interact with T-bet in the nucleus. Overexpression of USP10
directly inhibited T-bet ubiquitination and increased the expression of T-bet. We
further confirmed Quercetin, a reported inhibitor of T-bet, could target USP10.
Quercetin treatment downregulated USP10 and promoted T-bet degradation in a
proteasome dependent way. Moreover, we found USP10 expression was upregulated in 
asthmatic patient PBMC, suggesting USP10 may maintain high level of T-bet and
IFN-<U+03B3> to fight against Th2-dominated inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24845384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Sep;44(9):2771-84. doi: 10.1002/eji.201344183. Epub 2014 Jun 
11.

Molecular signatures and transcriptional regulatory networks of human immature
decidual NK and mature peripheral NK cells.

Wang F(1), Zhou Y, Fu B, Wu Y, Zhang R, Sun R, Tian Z, Wei H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, School of Life Sciences and Hefei National Laboratory
for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University of Science and Technology of 
China, Hefei, China.

Many differences exist between human immature and mature natural killer (NK)
cells, but their respective molecular signatures and transcriptional regulators
are relatively unknown. To gain new insights into the diversity and developmental
regulation of human NK cells, we used data from high-resolution microarrays with 
independent verification to describe a comprehensive comparative analysis between
immature decidual NK (idNK) cells with a CD56(bright) CD16(-) T-bet(-) phenotype 
and mature peripheral NK (mpNK) cells with a CD56(dim) CD16(+) T-bet(+)
phenotype. This study shows that many novel growth factors, cytokines, and
chemokines are expressed by NK cells, and they may regulate NK-cell development
or function in an autocrine manner. Notably, we present that idNK and mpNK cells 
are enriched for homeobox and zinc-finger transcription factors (TFs),
respectively. Additionally, many novel candidate transcriptional regulators are
common to both idNK and mpNK cells. We further describe the transcriptional
regulatory networks of NK cells and show that the endogenous growth factors,
cytokines, and TFs enriched in idNK cells regulate each other and may contribute 
to idNK-cell immaturity. Together, these findings provide novel molecular
signatures for immature and mature NK cells, and the novel candidate regulators
identified here can be used to describe and further understand NK-cell
differentiation and function.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24838931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Immunity. 2014 May 15;40(5):801-13. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.04.010.

Bystander chronic infection negatively impacts development of CD8(+) T cell
memory.

Stelekati E(1), Shin H(1), Doering TA(1), Dolfi DV(1), Ziegler CG(1), Beiting
DP(2), Dawson L(1), Liboon J(3), Wolski D(4), Ali MA(1), Katsikis PD(5), Shen
H(3), Roos DS(2), Haining WN(6), Lauer GM(4), Wherry EJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Institute for Immunology, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Department
of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (4)Gastrointestinal Unit, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (5)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia,
PA 19129, USA. (6)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute 
and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (7)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Institute for Immunology, 
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
Electronic address: wherry@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Epidemiological evidence suggests that chronic infections impair immune responses
to unrelated pathogens and vaccines. The underlying mechanisms, however, are
unclear and distinguishing effects on priming versus development of immunological
memory has been challenging. We investigated whether bystander chronic infections
impact differentiation of memory CD8(+) T cells, the hallmark of protective
immunity against intracellular pathogens. Chronic bystander infections impaired
development of memory CD8(+) T cells in several mouse models and humans. These
effects were independent of initial priming and were associated with chronic
inflammatory signatures. Chronic inflammation negatively impacted the number of
bystander CD8(+) T cells and their memory development. Distinct underlying
mechanisms of altered survival and differentiation were revealed with the latter 
regulated by the transcription factors T-bet and Blimp-1. Thus, exposure to
prolonged bystander inflammation impairs the effector to memory transition. These
data have relevance for immunity and vaccination during persisting infections and
chronic inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4114317
PMID: 24837104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Sep;96(3):397-410. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1A0913-500RR. Epub 2014
May 13.

Inflammation programs self-reactive CD8+ T cells to acquire T-box-mediated
effector function but does not prevent deletional tolerance.

Jackson SR(1), Yuan J(1), Berrien-Elliott MM(1), Chen CL(1), Meyer JM(1), Donlin 
MJ(2), Teague RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology and. (2)Departments of
Molecular Microbiology and Immunology and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, St.
Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA; and.
(3)Departments of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology and St. Louis University 
Cancer Center, St. Louis, Missouri, USA rteague@slu.edu.

CD8(+) T cells must detect foreign antigens and differentiate into effector cells
to eliminate infections. But, when self-antigen is recognized instead, mechanisms
of peripheral tolerance prevent acquisition of effector function to avoid
autoimmunity. These distinct responses are influenced by inflammatory and
regulatory clues from the tissue environment, but the mechanism(s) by which naive
T cells interpret these signals to generate the appropriate immune response are
unclear. The identification of the molecules operative in these cell-fate
decisions is crucial for developing new treatment options for patients with
cancer or autoimmunity, where manipulation of T cell activity is desired to alter
the course of disease. With the use of an in vivo murine model to examine CD8(+) 
T cell responses to healthy self-tissue, we correlated self-tolerance with a
failure to induce the T-box transcription factors T-bet and Eomes. However,
inflammation associated with acute microbial infection induced T-bet and Eomes
expression and promoted effector differentiation of self-reactive T cells under
conditions that normally favor tolerance. In the context of a Listeria infection,
these functional responses relied on elevated T-bet expression, independent of
Eomes. Alternatively, infection with LCMV induced higher Eomes expression, which 
was sufficient in the absence of T-bet to promote effector cytokine production.
Our results place T-box transcription factors at a molecular crossroads between
CD8(+) T cell anergy and effector function upon recognition of peripheral
self-antigen, and suggest that inflammation during T cell priming directs these
distinct cellular responses.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMCID: PMC4138202
PMID: 24823810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2013 Dec;38(23):4084-7.

[Difference in effect between asthma-based mouse model and Stemona tuberosa
extracts].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen XX, Zhang XD, Li HY, Jia TZ, Yang JX.

In this study, OVA-induced asthma mice was taken as the model, and orally
administered with different concentration of ethanol extracts of crude and
processed Stemona tuberosa, in order to determine the cytokine level released
from Th1 and Th2 in splenocytes. RT-PCR was carried out to determine the genetic 
expression of T-bet/GATA-3 in lung, and compare the differentiation between
ethanol extracts of crude and processed S. tuberosa in therapeutic effect on
asthma in mice. According to the results, compared with the crude samples,
processed samples significantly increased the levels of inflammatory factor
INF-gamma (P < 0.05) and decreased IL-5 (P < 0.05) in splenocytes. According to
the RT-PCR results, the administration of processed samples could increase the
ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 (P < 0.05). The experiment showed that ethanol extracts of 
both crude and processed S. tuberosa could treat asthma by regulating Th1/Th2
ratio, but processed samples showed more notable effect. This indicated that
crude and processed S. tuberosa had significant pharmacological difference.
Therefore, it was more rational to apply processed S. tuberosa in clinical
treatment of asthma and chronic cough, which layed a foundation for further
revealing the processing mechanism of S. tuberosa.

PMID: 24791494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Oncoimmunology. 2014 Jan 1;3(1):e27680. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Eomesodermin is required for antitumor immunity mediated by 4-1BB-agonist
immunotherapy.

Song C(1), Sadashivaiah K(1), Furusawa A(1), Davila E(2), Tamada K(3), Banerjee
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Oncology; Greenebaum Cancer Center; Center for Stem Cell Research
and Regenerative Medicine; Department of Medicine; University of Maryland School 
of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA. (2)Department of Otolaryngology; University of
Maryland School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA. (3)Department of Immunology and
Cellular Signal Analysis; Yamaguchi University School of Medicine; Ube, Japan.

CD8(+) T cells in progressing tumors frequently fail to mount an effective
antitumor response often in association with the expression of inhibitory
receptors, including programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) and lymphocyte-activation
gene 3 (Lag3). Using a lymphoma tumor model, we demonstrate that
tumor-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells from growing tumors co-express inhibitory
receptors and co-stimulatory receptors, including 4-1BB (TNFRSF9) as well as high
levels of 2 transcription factors, Eomesodermin (Eomes) and T-bet (Tbx21),
critical determinants of CD8(+) T cell fate. Immunotherapy with an agonistic
anti-4-1-BB antibody altered the ratio of Eomes to T-bet expression in
tumor-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells by increasing Eomes and decreasing T-bet
expression. 4-1BB-agonist immunotherapy was also associated with downregulated
expression of the inhibitory receptors PD-1 and Lag3 on tumor-infiltrating CD8(+)
T cells, a molecular phenotype associated with subsequent attenuation of tumor
growth. Furthermore, 4-1BB-agonist immunotherapy failed to effect tumor
progression in mice with Eomes deficient T cells. However, upon resumption of
tumor growth, tumor-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells from treated animals continued to
express high levels of Eomes as well as elevated levels of the inhibitory
receptors PD-1 and Lag3. Our data suggest that tumor-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells 
are poised between activation and inhibition as dictated by expression of both
co-stimulatory receptors and inhibitory receptors and demonstrate that T cell
expression of Eomes is necessary, but not sufficient, for efficacious
4-1BB-agonist-mediated immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4002624
PMID: 24790793  [PubMed]


174. PLoS One. 2014 May 2;9(5):e96401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096401. eCollection 
2014.

Protein kinase C <U+03B8> regulates the phenotype of murine CD4+ Th17 cells.

Wachowicz K(1), Hermann-Kleiter N(1), Meisel M(1), Siegmund K(1), Thuille N(1),
Baier G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Cell Genetics, Department of Pharmacology and Genetics, Medical 
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

Protein kinase C <U+03B8> (PKC<U+03B8>) is involved in signaling downstream of the T cell
antigen receptor (TCR) and is important for shaping effector T cell functions and
inflammatory disease development. Acquisition of Th1-like effector features by
Th17 cells has been linked to increased pathogenic potential. However, the
molecular mechanisms underlying Th17/Th1 phenotypic instability remain largely
unknown. In the current study, we address the role of PKC<U+03B8> in differentiation and
function of Th17 cells by using genetic knock-out mice. Implementing in vitro
(polarizing T cell cultures) and in vivo (experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis model, EAE) techniques, we demonstrated that PKC<U+03B8>-deficient
CD4+ T cells show normal Th17 marker gene expression (interleukin 17A/F, ROR<U+03B3>t), 
accompanied by enhanced production of the Th1-typical markers such as interferon 
gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) and transcription factor T-bet. Mechanistically, this phenotype was
linked to aberrantly elevated Stat4 mRNA levels in PKC<U+03B8>-/- CD4+ T cells during
the priming phase of Th17 differentiation. In contrast, transcription of the
Stat4 gene was suppressed in Th17-primed wild-type cells. This change in cellular
effector phenotype was reflected in vivo by prolonged neurological impairment of 
PKC<U+03B8>-deficient mice during the course of EAE. Taken together, our data provide
genetic evidence that PKC<U+03B8> is critical for stabilizing Th17 cell phenotype by
selective suppression of the STAT4/IFN-<U+03B3>/T-bet axis at the onset of
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4008503
PMID: 24788550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Cancer Immunol Res. 2014 Feb;2(2):167-76. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-13-0155.
Epub 2013 Nov 19.

CD4 T cells require ICOS-mediated PI3K signaling to increase T-Bet expression in 
the setting of anti-CTLA-4 therapy.

Chen H(1), Fu T, Suh WK, Tsavachidou D, Wen S, Gao J, Ng Tang D, He Q, Sun J,
Sharma P.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: IRCM (Institut de recherches cliniques de Montreal) and
Department of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The transcription factor T-bet controls the Th1 genetic program in T cells for
effective antitumor responses. Anti-CTLA-4 immunotherapy elicits dramatic
antitumor responses in mice and in human patients; however, factors that regulate
T-bet expression during an antitumor response mediated by anti-CTLA-4 remain to
be elucidated. We were the first to report that treatment with anti-CTLA-4 led to
an increase in the frequency of T cells expressing inducible costimulator (ICOS).
In both treated patients and mice, our data revealed that CD4(+)ICOS(hi) T cells 
can act as effector T cells, which produce the Th1 cytokine IFN-<U+03B3>. We also showed
in a small retrospective analysis that an increased frequency of CD4(+)ICOS(hi) T
cells correlated with better clinical outcome and the absence of ICOS or its
ligand (ICOSL) in mouse models led to impaired tumor rejection. Here, we show
that CD4(+)ICOS(hi) T cells from anti-CTLA-4-treated patients had an increase in 
signaling via the phospoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) pathway and an increase in
expression of T-bet. An ICOS-specific siRNA transfected into human T cells led to
diminished PI3K signaling and T-bet expression. Therefore, we hypothesized that
ICOS, and specifically ICOS-mediated PI3K signaling, was required for T-bet
expression. We conducted studies in ICOS-deficient and ICOS-YF mice, which have a
single amino acid change that abrogates PI3K signaling by ICOS. We found that
ICOS-mediated PI3K signaling is required for T-bet expression during an antitumor
response elicited by anti-CTLA-4 therapy. Our data provide new insight into the
regulation of T-bet expression and suggest that ICOS can be targeted to improve
Th1 antitumor responses.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4004958
PMID: 24778280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Immunology. 2014 Oct;143(2):202-18. doi: 10.1111/imm.12304.

Insufficient interleukin-12 signalling favours differentiation of human CD4(+)
and CD8(+) T cells into GATA-3(+) and GATA-3(+) T-bet(+) subsets in humanized
mice.

Billerbeck E(1), Labitt RN, Vega K, Frias-Staheli N, Dorner M, Xiao JW, Rice CM, 
Ploss A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Disease, Center for the Study of
Hepatitis C, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.

Differentiation of CD4(+) T cells into type 1 or type 2 subsets is mediated by
the expression of the opposing lineage defining transcription factors T-bet and
GATA-3. However, the existence of GATA-3(+) T-bet(+) CD4(+) T cells in mice
suggests functional plasticity of these subsets. Little is known about type 1 and
type 2 plasticity of human T-cell subsets in vivo. Here, we show that in the
xenogeneic environment of humanized mice, which lacks a functional
immune-regulatory network, human CD4(+) and, notably, CD8(+) T cells
preferentially differentiate into interleukin (IL)-4(+) GATA-3(+) and IL-4(+)
interferon-<U+03B3>(+) GATA-3(+) T-bet(+) subsets. Treatment with recombinant human
IL-12 or expansion of IL-12-producing human dendritic cells in vivo reverted this
phenotype and led to the down-regulation of GATA-3 expression. These changes also
correlated with improved antiviral immune responses in humanized mice. In
conclusion, our study shows the capacity of human CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells for
stable co-expression of GATA-3 and T-bet in humanized mice and reveals a critical
role for IL-12 in regulating this phenotype.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4172137
PMID: 24766459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Immunol. 2014 Jun 1;192(11):5012-22. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302943. Epub 2014
Apr 23.

Ezh2 regulates transcriptional and posttranslational expression of T-bet and
promotes Th1 cell responses mediating aplastic anemia in mice.

Tong Q(1), He S(2), Xie F(3), Mochizuki K(3), Liu Y(2), Mochizuki I(3), Meng
L(4), Sun H(5), Zhang Y(5), Guo Y(6), Hexner E(7), Zhang Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)International Joint Cancer Institute, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai 200433, China; Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109; (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109; Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular
Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19140; (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109;
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Fels Institute for Cancer Research 
and Molecular Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19140; Institute of
Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200433, China; and. (5)Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai 
Institutes for Biological Sciences Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200433, 
China; and. (6)International Joint Cancer Institute, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, China; (7)Department of Medicine and Abramson Cancer
Center, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 
19104. (8)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, MI, 48109; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Fels Institute
for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA
19140; yi.zhang@temple.edu.

Acquired aplastic anemia (AA) is a potentially fatal bone marrow (BM) failure
syndrome. IFN-<U+03B3>-producing Th1 CD4(+) T cells mediate the immune destruction of
hematopoietic cells, and they are central to the pathogenesis. However, the
molecular events that control the development of BM-destructive Th1 cells remain 
largely unknown. Ezh2 is a chromatin-modifying enzyme that regulates multiple
cellular processes primarily by silencing gene expression. We recently reported
that Ezh2 is crucial for inflammatory T cell responses after allogeneic BM
transplantation. To elucidate whether Ezh2 mediates pathogenic Th1 responses in
AA and the mechanism of Ezh2 action in regulating Th1 cells, we studied the
effects of Ezh2 inhibition in CD4(+) T cells using a mouse model of human AA.
Conditionally deleting Ezh2 in mature T cells dramatically reduced the production
of BM-destructive Th1 cells in vivo, decreased BM-infiltrating Th1 cells, and
rescued mice from BM failure. Ezh2 inhibition resulted in significant decrease in
the expression of Tbx21 and Stat4, which encode transcription factors T-bet and
STAT4, respectively. Introduction of T-bet but not STAT4 into Ezh2-deficient T
cells fully rescued their differentiation into Th1 cells mediating AA. Ezh2 bound
to the Tbx21 promoter in Th1 cells and directly activated Tbx21 transcription.
Unexpectedly, Ezh2 was also required to prevent proteasome-mediated degradation
of T-bet protein in Th1 cells. Our results demonstrate that Ezh2 promotes the
generation of BM-destructive Th1 cells through a mechanism of transcriptional and
posttranscriptional regulation of T-bet. These results also highlight the
therapeutic potential of Ezh2 inhibition in reducing AA and other autoimmune
diseases.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4075972
PMID: 24760151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Jul 15;735:97-104. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.04.019. Epub 
2014 Apr 19.

Attenuation of collagen induced arthritis via suppression on Th17 response by
activating cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway with nicotine.

Wu S(1), Luo H(1), Xiao X(2), Zhang H(2), Li T(3), Zuo X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87
Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan 410008, People<U+05F3>s Republic of China. (2)Department
of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, People<U+05F3>s Republic of China. (3)Department of Rheumatology,
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87 Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan
410008, People<U+05F3>s Republic of China. Electronic address: litonglltt@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87
Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan 410008, People<U+05F3>s Republic of China. Electronic
address: susanzuo@hotmail.com.

The cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway can inhibit the inflammation of
collagen induced arthritis (CIA), a mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
However, the immunologic mechanisms that provide a therapeutic effect against the
auto-inflammatory disease are not yet elucidated. The present study explores the 
effect of cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway on CD4+ T cell responses in CIA. 
Forty DBA/1 mice were divided into 4 groups: a control group, a CIA group, a
vagotomy group, and a nicotine group. The degree of arthritis was measured by
arthritis score and hematoxylin and eosin. ELISA was used to detect the serum
concentration of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4 and IL-17A. Flow cytometry was used to detect the
cytokines and transcription factors (TFs) (the TFs of Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells
are T-bet, ROR<U+03B3>t and GATA3 respectively) in the spleen. Immunohistochemistry was 
used to analyze ROR<U+03B3>t expression in the joint synovium. Arthritis in the nicotine
group was significantly lightened compared with that in the CIA group and in the 
vagotomy group. Nicotine attenuated Th17 lineage by reducing IL-17A production
and ROR<U+03B3>t expression. The expressions of IL-4 and GATA3 were increased in the
same setting. However, the expressions of IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet had no difference
between the nicotine and the CIA group. Nicotine may induce a shift to the Th2
lineage and improve the Th1/Th2 imbalance. Activating the cholinergic
anti-inflammatory pathway with nicotine can inhibit Th17 cell responses and may
improve the Th1/Th2 imbalance in CIA, providing a new justification for its
application in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24755145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Jul;44(7):2074-84. doi: 10.1002/eji.201344072. Epub 2014 May 
19.

NK cells gain higher IFN-<U+03B3> competence during terminal differentiation.

Luetke-Eversloh M(1), Cicek BB, Siracusa F, Thom JT, Hamann A, Frischbutter S,
Baumgrass R, Chang HD, Thiel A, Dong J, Romagnani C.

Author information: 
(1)Innate Immunity, Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum, A Leibniz Institute,
Berlin, Germany.

NK cells are the main cells of the innate immune system that produce IFN-<U+03B3>, and
they express this cytokine at early stages of maturation in response to cytokine 
stimulation. Conversely, acquisition of IFN-<U+03B3>-competence in CD4(+) T helper cells
requires a differentiation process from naïve toward type 1 (Th1) cells, which is
associated with epigenetic remodeling at the IFNG locus. In the present study, we
show that the ability of NK cells to produce IFN-<U+03B3> in response to activating
receptor (actR) engagement is gradually acquired during terminal differentiation 
and is accompanied by progressively higher NF-<U+03BA>B activation in response to actR
triggering. Moreover, during the differentiation process NK cells gradually
display increasing expression of IFNG and TBX21 (encoding T-bet) transcripts and 
demethylation at the IFNG promoter. This study provides new insights in the
molecular mechanisms underlying NK-cell ability to express IFN-<U+03B3> upon actR
engagement. Thus, we propose that in order to efficiently produce IFN-<U+03B3> in
response to infected or transformed cells, NK cells gain Th1-like features, such 
as higher IFN-<U+03B3> competence and epigenetic remodeling of the IFNG promoter, during
their terminal differentiation.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24752800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:582902. doi: 10.1155/2014/582902. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

Capillary dilation and rarefaction are correlated with intracapillary
inflammation in antibody-mediated rejection.

Li X(1), Sun Q(2), Zhang M(1), Xie K(1), Chen J(1), Liu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Clinical Research Center of Kidney Diseases, Jinling Hospital,
Nanjing University Clinical School of Medicine, 305 East Zhong Shan Road, Nanjing
210002, China. (2)Department of Renal Transplantation, The Third Affiliated
Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510760, China.

Antibody-mediated rejection (ABMR) remains one of the major causes of graft loss 
after renal transplantation. It is dominated by endothelial damage in
microcirculation. Clarifying the mechanism of microcirculating damage is
obviously a key step to understand the pathogenesis of ABMR. Here we
characterized capillary variation in ABMR and its possible mechanisms. Compared
with T cell-mediated rejection and stable grafts, there was a significant
dilation and rarefaction in peritubular capillaries (PTCs) of the ABMR group;
Image-Pro Plus revealed a significantly larger intra-PTC area. Interestingly, the
dilation of PTCs was strongly correlated with the intra-PTC cell counting.
Moreover, peritubular capillary inflammation is correlated with in situ T-bet
expression, and there was a good correlation between the intra-PTC expression of 
T-bet and the PTC diameter. HIF-1a up-regulation could be observed in ABMR but it
was not necessary for capillary dilation. In general, ABMR is characterized with 
early capillary dilation and rarefaction; our data confirmed that the dilation is
strongly correlated with intracapillary inflammation, which in turn is correlated
with in situ T-bet expression. T-bet plays an important role in the development
of microcirculating injury, and thus it is a potential target for the treatment
of ABMR.

PMCID: PMC3987932
PMID: 24741607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Aug;96(2):245-54. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1A0114-066R. Epub 2014 Apr
8.

Early-onset age-related changes in dendritic cell subsets can impair
antigen-specific T helper 1 (Th1) CD4 T cell priming.

Farazi M(1), Cohn Z(2), Nguyen J(3), Weinberg AD(4), Ruby CE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Immunology/Microbiology and. (2)General Surgery, Rush
University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA; (3)Rush University Cancer
Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA; and. (4)Providence Portland Medical Center, Earle
A. Chiles Research Institute, Portland, Oregon, USA. (5)Departments of
Immunology/Microbiology and General Surgery, Rush University Medical Center,
Chicago, Illinois, USA; Rush University Cancer Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA;
and carl_ruby@rush.edu.

Decline in CD4 T cell immune responses is associated with aging. Although a
number of immunological defects have been identified in elderly mice (>18 months 
old), a key early-onset immune defect at middle age could be a driver or
contributor to defective CD4 T cell responses. Our studies demonstrate that
age-related alterations in DC subsets within the priming environment of
middle-aged mice (12 months old) correlate with and can directly contribute to
decreases in antigen-specific CD4 T cell Th1 differentiation, which measured by
T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> expression, was decreased significantly in T cells following VSV 
infection or s.c. immunization with a protein antigen in the context of immune
stimulation via OX40. The deficient Th1 phenotype, observed following protein
antigen challenge, was found to be the result of an age-related decrease in an
inflammatory DC subset (CD11b+ Gr-1/Ly6C+) in the dLN that corresponded with T
cell dysfunction. In the virus model, we observed significant changes in two DC
subsets: mDCs and pDCs. Thus, different, early age-related changes in the DC
profile in the priming environment can significantly contribute to impaired Th1
differentiation, depending on the type of immunological challenge.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 24714553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2014 May;71(5):472-84. doi: 10.1111/aji.12241. Epub 2014 Apr
4.

Polymorphisms in inflammatory genes are associated with term small for
gestational age and preeclampsia.

Harmon QE(1), Engel SM, Wu MC, Moran TM, Luo J, Stuebe AM, Avery CL, Olshan AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

PROBLEM: Inflammatory biomarkers are associated with preeclampsia (PE) and poor
fetal growth; however, genetic epidemiologic studies have been limited by reduced
gene coverage and the exclusion of African American mothers.
METHOD OF STUDY: Cases and controls (N = 1646) from a pregnancy cohort were
genotyped for 503 tagSNPs in 40 genes related to inflammation. Gene-set analyses 
were stratified by race and were followed by a single SNP analysis within
significant gene sets.
RESULTS: Gene-level associations were found for IL6 and KLRD1 for term small for 
gestational age (SGA) among African Americans. LTA/TNF and TBX21 were associated 
with PE among European Americans. The strongest association was for PE among
European Americans for an upstream regulator of TNF with RR = 1.8 (95% CI
1.1-2.7).
CONCLUSION: Although previous studies have suggested null associations, increased
tagging and stratification by genetic ancestry suggests important associations
between IL6 and term SGA for African Americans, and a TNF regulator and PE among 
European Americans (N = 149).

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4040534
PMID: 24702779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Hepatology. 2014 Jul;60(1):224-36. doi: 10.1002/hep.27087. Epub 2014 May 28.

Progression of autoimmune hepatitis is mediated by IL-18-producing dendritic
cells and hepatic CXCL9 expression in mice.

Ikeda A(1), Aoki N, Kido M, Iwamoto S, Nishiura H, Maruoka R, Chiba T, Watanabe
N.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Innovation in Immunoregulative Technology and Therapeutics, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan; Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Clinical manifestations of autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) range from mild chronic to 
acute, sometimes fulminant hepatitis. However, it is unknown how the progression 
to fatal hepatitis occurs. We developed a mouse model of fatal AIH by inducing a 
concurrent loss of forkhead box P3(+) regulatory T cells and programmed cell
death-1 (PD-1)-mediated signaling. In this model, dysregulated follicular helper 
T cells in the spleen are responsible for the induction, and the C-C chemokine
receptor 6/C-C chemokine ligand 20 axis is crucial for the migration of these T
cells into the liver. Using this fatal AIH model, we aimed to clarify key
molecules triggering fatal AIH progression. During progression, T-bet together
with interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and C-X-C chemokine receptor (CXCR)3 were highly
expressed in the inflamed liver, suggesting helper T (Th)1-type inflammation. T
cells that dominantly expanded in the spleen and the inflamed liver were
CXCR3-expressing CD8(+) T cells; depletion of these CD8(+) T cells suppressed AIH
progression. Expression of one CXCR3 ligand, chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand
(CXCL)9, was elevated in the liver. CXCL9-expressing macrophages/Kupffer cells
were colocalized with infiltrating T cells, and in vivo administration of
anti-CXCL9 suppressed AIH progression. In addition, serum levels of interleukin
(IL)-18, but not IL-1ß, were elevated during progression, and dendritic cells in 
the spleen and liver highly produced IL-18. In vivo administration of anti-IL-18R
suppressed the increase of splenic CXCR3(+) T cells and the progression to fatal 
AIH. Moreover, tumor necrosis factor alpha, but not IFN-<U+03B3>, was involved in
up-regulating CXCL9 in the liver and for increased serum levels of
IL-18.CONCLUSION: These data suggest that, in our mouse model, fatal progression 
of AIH is mediated by IL-18-dependent differentiation of T cells into Th1 cells
and effector T cells, respectively, and that CXCR3-CXCL9 axis-dependent migration
of those T cells is crucial for fatal progression.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 24700550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Exp Med. 2014 Apr 7;211(4):635-42. doi: 10.1084/jem.20132398. Epub 2014 Mar 24.

The transcription factor E4bp4/Nfil3 controls commitment to the NK lineage and
directly regulates Eomes and Id2 expression.

Male V(1), Nisoli I, Kostrzewski T, Allan DS, Carlyle JR, Lord GM, Wack A, Brady 
HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, England,
UK.

The transcription factor E4bp4 (Nfil3) is essential for natural killer (NK) cell 
production. Here, we show that E4bp4 is required at the NK lineage commitment
point when NK progenitors develop from common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs) and
that E4bp4 must be expressed at the CLP stage for differentiation toward the NK
lineage to occur. To elucidate the mechanism by which E4bp4 promotes NK
development, we identified a central core of transcription factors that can
rescue NK production from E4bp4(-/-) progenitors, suggesting that they act
downstream of E4bp4. Among these were Eomes and Id2, which are expressed later in
development than E4bp4. E4bp4 binds directly to the regulatory regions of both
Eomes and Id2, promoting their transcription. We propose that E4bp4 is required
for commitment to the NK lineage and promotes NK development by directly
regulating the expression of the downstream transcription factors Eomes and Id2.

PMCID: PMC3978281
PMID: 24663216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Clin Lab. 2014;60(2):291-5.

Research on the roles of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in aplastic
anemia.

Chen H, Luo Z, Shen H, Ren C, Li Z, Tang J, Wang J, Wu T.

BACKGROUND: Aplastic anemia (AA) is a type of bone marrow hematopoietic system
disease. The immune mediated hematopoietic inhibition is recognized as the most
common pathogenesis of AA. However, the roles of the T-bet/GATA-3-mediated cell
immune disorder in aplastic anemia (AA) is still unknown.
METHODS: Experimental samples were obtained from 27 patients with AA, including
15 cases of severe AA (SAA) and 12 cases of immune mediated AA (MAA), and 25
healthy volunteers (control group). The secretory levels of IFN-gamma and IL-4
cytokines were determined by ELISA. The mRNA expression levels of transcription
factors T-bet, GATA-3, and FoxP3 were measured in PBMCs by RT-PCR. Th1, Th2, and 
T lymphocyte subsets were detected in peripheral blood by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Compared to the healthy control group, the expression of T-bet mRNA and 
the percentage of Th1-type cells in the AA group significantly increased (p <
0.01), while the expression of GATA-3 and FoxP3 mRNA and the percentage of
Th2-type cells decreased sharply (p < 0.05, p < 0.01). Compared with MAA, the
expression of T-bet mRNA and the percentage of Th1-type cells increased
significantly in SAA (p < 0.01); meanwhile, the expression of GATA-3 mRNA and the
proportion of Th2-type cells decreased noticeably (p < 0.05, p < 0.01).
Particularly, the percentage of CD3+ and CD3+CD8+ T cells in the AA group
increased (p < 0.05), while the percentage of CD3+CD4+, CD4+CD25+, and CD4+CD8+
cells decreased (p < 0.05, p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal expression of the transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3
contributes to the imbalance of Thl/Th2 lymphocytes associated with immune
dysfunction, leading to the development and progression of AA.

PMID: 24660543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Aug;25(8):1856-68. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013080848. Epub 2014 
Mar 20.

Expansion of highly differentiated cytotoxic terminally differentiated effector
memory CD8+ T cells in a subset of clinically stable kidney transplant
recipients: a potential marker for late graft dysfunction.

Yap M(1), Boeffard F(1), Clave E(2), Pallier A(1), Danger R(1), Giral M(1),
Dantal J(1), Foucher Y(3), Guillot-Gueguen C(4), Toubert A(2), Soulillou JP(5),
Brouard S(1), Degauque N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité Mixte de
Recherche 1064, Nantes, France; Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes,
Institut de Transplantation Urologie-Néphrologie, Nantes, France; Faculté de
Médecine, Université de Nantes, Nantes, France; (2)Institut National de la Santé 
et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité Mixte de Recherche 940, Paris, France; and.
(3)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes, Institut de Transplantation
Urologie-Néphrologie, Nantes, France; Université de Nantes, Equipe d'Accueil 4275
and Labex Transplantex, Nantes, France. (4)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Nantes, Institut de Transplantation Urologie-Néphrologie, Nantes, France;
(5)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité Mixte de
Recherche 1064, Nantes, France; Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes,
Institut de Transplantation Urologie-Néphrologie, Nantes, France; Faculté de
Médecine, Université de Nantes, Nantes, France;
jean-paul.soulillou@univ-nantes.fr.

Despite the effectiveness of immunosuppressive drugs, kidney transplant
recipients still face late graft dysfunction. Thus, it is necessary to identify
biomarkers to detect the first pathologic events and guide therapeutic target
development. Previously, we identified differences in the T-cell receptor Vß
repertoire in patients with stable graft function. In this prospective study, we 
assessed the long-term effect of CD8(+) T-cell differentiation and function in
131 patients who had stable graft function. In 45 of 131 patients, a restriction 
of TCR Vß diversity was detected and associated with the expansion of terminally 
differentiated effector memory (TEMRA; CD45RA(+)CCR7(-)CD27(-)CD28(-)) CD8(+) T
cells expressing high levels of perforin, granzyme B, and T-bet. This phenotype
positively correlated with the level of CD57 and the ability of CD8(+) T cells to
secrete TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3>. Finally, 47 of 131 patients experienced kidney
dysfunction during the median 15-year follow-up period. Using a Cox regression
model, we found a 2-fold higher risk (P=0.06) of long-term graft dysfunction in
patients who had increased levels of differentiated TEMRA CD8(+) T cells at
inclusion. Collectively, these results suggest that monitoring the phenotype and 
function of circulating CD8(+) T cells may improve the early identification of
at-risk patients.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4116064
PMID: 24652799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biomedica. 2013 Apr-Jun;33(2):259-67.

Variants in the IFN<U+03B3> transcription factor genes TBET, STAT1, STAT4, and HLX and
the risk of pulmonary tuberculosis in a Colombian population: a case-control
study.

Sánchez D(1), Lefebvre C(2), García LF(3), Barrera LF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, Health Science Center, Louisiana State
University. (2)ECOGENE-21 Clinical Trial Center, Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, 
Centre de Médecine Génique Communautaire de l´Université de Montréal Centre
Hospitalier Affilié, Pavillon Notre-Dame. (3)Centro Colombiano de Investigación
en Tuberculosis (CCITB), Medellín, Colombia. (4)Grupo de Inmunología Celular e
Inmunogenética (GICIG), Instituto de Investigaciones Médicas, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Antioquia.

INTRODUCTION: Interferon gamma (IFN<U+03B3>) is the most potent cytokine involved in the
control of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), the etiological agent of human
tuberculosis (TB). Patients with active TB present reduced levels of IFN<U+03B3>, which 
may explain the lack of effective immunity against Mtb in these patients. The
diminished expression of or functional alterations in trans-acting factors that
regulate IFN<U+03B3> gene expression may explain the reduced levels of IFN<U+03B3> in TB
patients.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationships of genetic variants in the
transcription factors TBET, STAT1, STAT4, and HLX to susceptibility/resistance to
pulmonary TB.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eight candidate single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
were selected, and genotyped in 466 unrelated pulmonary TB patients and 300
healthy controls from Colombia, and the allelic and genetic associations with TB 
were analyzed.
RESULTS: The results indicate that no SNP in the transcription factors studied is
associated with TB. However, polymorphism rs11650354 in the TBET gene may be
associated with a decreased risk of TB; the TT genotype was significantly
associated with TB protection in a recessive genetic model (OR=0.089, 95% CI:
0.01-0.73, p=0.0069), although this association was not maintained after multiple
test correction (EMP2= 0.61).
CONCLUSION: In this study, the rs11650354 variant of TBET was suggested to
promote resistance to TB in a Colombian population. A future replication
case-control study using additional samples will be necessary to confirm this
suggestive association.

PMID: 24652136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):2915-23. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-11-536359. Epub 2014
Mar 14.

Gene expression signatures delineate biological and prognostic subgroups in
peripheral T-cell lymphoma.

Iqbal J(1), Wright G, Wang C, Rosenwald A, Gascoyne RD, Weisenburger DD, Greiner 
TC, Smith L, Guo S, Wilcox RA, Teh BT, Lim ST, Tan SY, Rimsza LM, Jaffe ES, Campo
E, Martinez A, Delabie J, Braziel RM, Cook JR, Tubbs RR, Ott G, Geissinger E,
Gaulard P, Piccaluga PP, Pileri SA, Au WY, Nakamura S, Seto M, Berger F, de Leval
L, Connors JM, Armitage J, Vose J, Chan WC, Staudt LM; Lymphoma Leukemia
Molecular Profiling Project and the International Peripheral T-cell Lymphoma
Project.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE;

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):2909-10.

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) encompasses a heterogeneous group of neoplasms 
with generally poor clinical outcome. Currently 50% of PTCL cases are not
classifiable: PTCL-not otherwise specified (NOS). Gene-expression profiles on 372
PTCL cases were analyzed and robust molecular classifiers and oncogenic pathways 
that reflect the pathobiology of tumor cells and their microenvironment were
identified for major PTCL-entities, including 114 angioimmunoblastic T-cell
lymphoma (AITL), 31 anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-positive and 48 ALK-negative
anaplastic large cell lymphoma, 14 adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma and 44
extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma that were further separated into NK-cell and
gdT-cell lymphomas. Thirty-seven percent of morphologically diagnosed PTCL-NOS
cases were reclassified into other specific subtypes by molecular signatures.
Reexamination, immunohistochemistry, and IDH2 mutation analysis in reclassified
cases supported the validity of the reclassification. Two major molecular
subgroups can be identified in the remaining PTCL-NOS cases characterized by high
expression of either GATA3 (33%; 40/121) or TBX21 (49%; 59/121). The GATA3
subgroup was significantly associated with poor overall survival (P = .01). High 
expression of cytotoxic gene-signature within the TBX21 subgroup also showed poor
clinical outcome (P = .05). In AITL, high expression of several signatures
associated with the tumor microenvironment was significantly associated with
outcome. A combined prognostic score was predictive of survival in an independent
cohort (P = .004).

PMCID: PMC4014836
PMID: 24632715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Clin Exp Immunol. 2014 Jul;177(1):149-60. doi: 10.1111/cei.12322.

Curcumin ameliorates autoimmune diabetes. Evidence in accelerated murine models
of type 1 diabetes.

Castro CN(1), Barcala Tabarrozzi AE, Winnewisser J, Gimeno ML, Antunica Noguerol 
M, Liberman AC, Paz DA, Dewey RA, Perone MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigación en Biomedicina de Buenos Aires (IBioBA),
CONICET<U+2009>-<U+2009>Partner Institute of the Max Planck Society, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Type 1 diabetes (T1DM) is a T cell-mediated autoimmune disease that selectively
destroys pancreatic ß cells. The only possible cure for T1DM is to control
autoimmunity against ß cell-specific antigens. We explored whether the natural
compound curcumin, with anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory activities, might
down-regulate the T cell response that destroys pancreatic ß cells to improve
disease outcome in autoimmune diabetes. We employed two accelerated autoimmune
diabetes models: (i) cyclophosphamide (CYP) administration to non-obese diabetic 
(NOD) mice and (ii) adoptive transfer of diabetogenic splenocytes into NODscid
mice. Curcumin treatment led to significant delay of disease onset, and in some
instances prevented autoimmune diabetes by inhibiting pancreatic leucocyte
infiltration and preserving insulin-expressing cells. To investigate the
mechanisms of protection we studied the effect of curcumin on key immune cell
populations involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. Curcumin modulates the T
lymphocyte response impairing proliferation and interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> production
through modulation of T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet), a key transcription
factor for proinflammatory T helper type 1 (Th1) lymphocyte differentiation, both
at the transcriptional and translational levels. Also, curcumin reduces nuclear
factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B activation in T cell receptor (TCR)-stimulated NOD lymphocytes. In
addition, curcumin impairs the T cell stimulatory function of dendritic cells
with reduced secretion of proinflammatory cytokines and nitric oxide (NO) and low
surface expression of co-stimulatory molecules, leading to an overall diminished 
antigen-presenting cell activity. These in-vitro effects correlated with ex-vivo 
analysis of cells obtained from curcumin-treated mice during the course of
autoimmune diabetes. These findings reveal an effective therapeutic effect of
curcumin in autoimmune diabetes by its actions on key immune cells responsible
for ß cell death.

© 2014 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC4089164
PMID: 24628444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Cytometry A. 2014 Jul;85(7):621-7. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.22451. Epub 2014 Feb 19.

Improved method to retain cytosolic reporter protein fluorescence while staining 
for nuclear proteins.

Heinen AP(1), Wanke F, Moos S, Attig S, Luche H, Pal PP, Budisa N, Fehling HJ,
Waisman A, Kurschus FC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center of the Johannes
Gutenberg, University of Mainz, 55131, Mainz, Germany.

Staining of transcription factors (TFs) together with retention of fluorescent
reporter proteins is hindered by loss of fluorescence using current available
methods. In this study, it is shown that current TF staining protocols do not
destroy fluorescent proteins (FPs) but rather that fixation is not sufficient to 
retain FPs in the cytosol of the permeabilized cells. In this article, a simple
and reliable protocol is elaborated, which allows efficient TF and cytokine
staining while retaining FPs inside fixed cells.

© 2014 International Society for Advancement of Cytometry.

PMID: 24616430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Clin Invest. 2014 Apr;124(4):1685-98. doi: 10.1172/JCI69780. Epub 2014 Mar 10.

iNKT cells require TSC1 for terminal maturation and effector lineage fate
decisions.

Wu J, Yang J, Yang K, Wang H, Gorentla B, Shin J, Qiu Y, Que LG, Foster WM, Xia
Z, Chi H, Zhong XP.

Terminal maturation of invariant NKT (iNKT) cells from stage 2 (CD44+NK1.1-) to
stage 3 (CD44+NK1.1+) is accompanied by a functional acquisition of a predominant
IFN-<U+03B3>-producing (iNKT-1) phenotype; however, some cells develop into
IL-17-producing iNKT (iNKT-17) cells. iNKT-17 cells are rare and restricted to a 
CD44+NK1.1- lineage. It is unclear how iNKT terminal maturation is regulated and 
what factors mediate the predominance of iNKT-1 compared with iNKT-17. The tumor 
suppressor tuberous sclerosis 1 (TSC1) is an important negative regulator of mTOR
signaling, which regulates T cell differentiation, function, and trafficking.
Here, we determined that mice lacking TSC1 exhibit a developmental block of iNKT 
differentiation at stage 2 and skew from a predominantly iNKT-1 population toward
a predominantly iNKT-17 population, leading to enhanced airway hypersensitivity. 
Evaluation of purified iNKT cells revealed that TSC1 promotes T-bet, which
regulates iNKT maturation, but downregulates ICOS expression in iNKT cells by
inhibiting mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1). Furthermore, mice lacking T-bet exhibited
both a terminal maturation defect of iNKT cells and a predominance of iNKT-17
cells, and increased ICOS expression was required for the predominance of iNKT-17
cells in the population of TSC1-deficient iNKT cells. Our data indicate that
TSC1-dependent control of mTORC1 is crucial for terminal iNKT maturation and
effector lineage decisions, resulting in the predominance of iNKT-1 cells.

PMCID: PMC3973110
PMID: 24614103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Nat Immunol. 2014 Apr;15(4):373-83. doi: 10.1038/ni.2834. Epub 2014 Mar 2.

The transcription factor BATF operates as an essential differentiation checkpoint
in early effector CD8+ T cells.

Kurachi M(1), Barnitz RA(2), Yosef N(3), Odorizzi PM(4), DiIorio MA(5), Lemieux
ME(6), Yates K(5), Godec J(5), Klatt MG(5), Regev A(7), Wherry EJ(1), Haining
WN(8).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. [2] Institute for Immunology,
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. [3]. (2)1] Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2].
(3)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (4)1]
Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. [2] Institute for Immunology,
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. (5)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (6)Bioinfo,
Plantagenet, Canada. (7)1] Bioinfo, Plantagenet, Canada. [2] Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (8)1] Department of Pediatric Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
[2] Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [3]
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [4].

The transcription factor BATF is required for the differentiation of interleukin 
17 (IL-17)-producing helper T cells (TH17 cells) and follicular helper T cells
(TFH cells). Here we identified a fundamental role for BATF in regulating the
differentiation of effector of CD8(+) T cells. BATF-deficient CD8(+) T cells
showed profound defects in effector population expansion and underwent
proliferative and metabolic catastrophe early after encountering antigen. BATF,
together with the transcription factors IRF4 and Jun proteins, bound to and
promoted early expression of genes encoding lineage-specific
transcription-factors (T-bet and Blimp-1) and cytokine receptors while
paradoxically repressing genes encoding effector molecules (IFN-<U+03B3> and granzyme
B). Thus, BATF amplifies T cell antigen receptor (TCR)-dependent expression of
transcription factors and augments the propagation of inflammatory signals but
restrains the expression of genes encoding effector molecules. This checkpoint
prevents irreversible commitment to an effector fate until a critical threshold
of downstream transcriptional activity has been achieved.

PMCID: PMC4000237
PMID: 24584090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Nihon Hansenbyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2013 Dec;82(3):111-7.

[Towards novel tuberculosis and leprosy vaccine development: the role of
Th1-inducing peptide in cytotoxic T cell differentiation].

[Article in Japanese]

Tamura T(1), Shimohakamada Y(2), Makino M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mycobacteriology, Leprosy Research Center, National Institute of
Infectious Diseases. toshikit@niid.go.jp (2)Department of Mycobacteriology,
Leprosy Research Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases.

The effectiveness of a vaccine against tuberculosis and leprosy is mainly judged 
by its capability to induce memory CD8 cytotoxic T cells (CTL). It has been
reported that 'help' from CD4+ T cells is required to induce memory CTL. However,
how CD4+ T cells instruct or support memory CTL during priming phase has not been
resolved in detail. Therefore, we examined the helper function of CD4+ T cells in
CTL differentiation. Peptide-25 is the major T cell epitope of Ag85B of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. We found that this peptide induced the expression of 
T-bet and TATA box binding protein-associated factor that can induce the
chromatin remodeling of ifn-gamma gene, and as a result induced Th1
differentiation even in the absence of IFN-gamma and IL-12. Next, we established 
an in vitro CTL differentiation system using Peptide-25, Peptide-25 specific CD4+
T cells, OVA specific CD8+ T cells and splenic DC. By using this system, we found
that CD4+ T cells activated DC even in the absence of IFN-gamma and CD40 ligand
association, and the activated DC induced the functional differentiation of CTL. 
To identify the regulatory factors for DC activation, we analyzed the gene
expression profile of helper CD4 T cells and identified 27 genes. Taken together,
these results suggest that the inducing factors for Th1 differentiation are not
indispensable to induce the functional differentiation of CTL.

PMID: 24579458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Adipocyte. 2014 Jan 1;3(1):58-62. doi: 10.4161/adip.26220. Epub 2013 Aug 28.

The immune cell transcription factor T-bet: A novel metabolic regulator.

Stolarczyk E(1), Lord GM(2), Howard JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes and Nutritional Sciences; Department of Experimental
Immunobiology; King's College London; London, UK. (2)Department of Experimental
Immunobiology; King's College London; London, UK.

Obesity-associated insulin resistance is accompanied by an alteration in the
Th1/Th2 balance in adipose tissue. T-bet (Tbx21) is an immune cell transcription 
factor originally described as the master regulator of Th1 cell development,
although is now recognized to have a role in both the adaptive and innate immune 
systems. T-bet also directs T-cell homing to pro-inflammatory sites by the
regulation of CXCR3 expression. T-bet(-/-) mice have increased visceral adiposity
but are more insulin-sensitive, exhibiting reduced immune cell content and
cytokine secretion specifically in the visceral fat depot, perhaps due to altered
T-cell trafficking. Studies of T-bet deficiency on Rag2-- and IFN-<U+03B3>-deficient
backgrounds indicate the importance of CD4(+) T cells and IFN-<U+03B3> in this model.
This favorable metabolic phenotype, uncoupling adiposity from insulin resistance,
is present in young lean mice yet persists with age and increasing obesity. We
suggest a novel role for T-bet in metabolic regulation.

PMCID: PMC3917935
PMID: 24575371  [PubMed]


195. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Jan 15;7(2):509-20. eCollection 2014.

Tim-1-Fc suppresses chronic cardiac allograft rejection and vasculopathy by
reducing IL-17 production.

Shi X(1), Zhang M(2), Liu F(1), Wang Z(1), Zhang L(1), Cheng H(3), Zhang S(4),
Fei T(1), Guo M(1), Bian J(3), Wang Q(2), Ding G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organ Transplantation, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military
Medical University Shanghai, China. (2)National Key Laboratory of Medical
Immunology & Institute of Immunology, Second Military Medical University
Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Pharmacology, 411 Naval Medical Hospital
Shanghai, China. (4)The Center for Biomedical Research, Tongji Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology Wuhan, China.

Previously, we demonstrated that Tim-1-Fc prevents acute cardiac graft rejection 
by inhibiting Th1 response. In the present report, we tackled the impact of
Tim-1-Fc on Th17 cells in a model of cardiac chronic rejection. Administration of
Tim-1-Fc did not result in a detectable impact on innate immunity and regulatory 
T cells, while it provided protection for Bm12-derive cardiac grafts against
chronic rejection in B6 recipients, as manifested by the reduction of
inflammatory infiltration along with less severity of vasculopathy. Studies in
T-bet(-/-) recipients by implanting Bm12-derived cardiac grafts further revealed 
that Tim-1-Fc significantly protected cardiac grafts from chronic rejection along
with attenuated production of IL-17 producing T cells. Depletion of CD4 and CD8 T
cells or blockade of IL-17 in T-bet(-/-) recipients demonstrated that Tim-1-Fc
selectively suppresses Th17 differentiation along with attenuated IL-17
secretion. Together, our data suggest that Tim-1-Fc protects cardiac grafts from 
chronic rejection by suppressing CD4 Th17 development and functionality.
Therefore, Tim-1-Fc might be a potential immunosuppressive agent in the setting
of cardiac transplantation.

PMCID: PMC3925895
PMID: 24551271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Apr;9(4):1171-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.1947. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Fusion protein of tapasin and hepatitis B core antigen 18-27 enhances T helper
cell type 1/2 cytokine ratio and antiviral immunity by inhibiting suppressors of 
cytokine signaling family members 1/3 in hepatitis B virus transgenic mice.

Tang Y(1), Chen X(1), Zhang Y(1), Tang Z(1), Zhuo M(1), Li D(1), Wang P(1), Zang 
G(1), Yu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, Shanghai JiaoTong University Affiliated
Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 200233, P.R. China.

Persistent hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is characterized by a weak adaptive 
immune response, which is considered to be due to an imbalance of T helper cell
types 1 and 2 (Th1/Th2). Suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) family members,
particularly SOCS1 and SOCS3, have been demonstrated to be important in the
regulation of T cell differentiation. Previous studies by our group showed that
the expressed and purified fusion protein of cytoplasmic transduction peptide
(CTP) and HBV core antigen 18-27 (HBcAg18-27)-tapasin was able to enter the
cytoplasm of bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs), promoting the
maturation of BMDCs and efficiently enhancing T cell immune responses in vitro.
In the present study, HBcAg-specific immune responses induced by
CTP-HBcAg18-27-tapasin in HBV were assessed in transgenic mice, and SOCS1 and
SOCS3 were identified as negative regulators of this response. The Th1/Th2
cytokine ratio was analyzed by ELISA. The expression of T cell-specific T-box
transcription factor (T-bet) and GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3), SOCS1 and SOCS3
were detected by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western
blot analysis. The results demonstrated that CTP-HBcAg18-27-tapasin significantly
increased the Th1/Th2 cytokine ratio in HBV transgenic mice.
CTP-HBcAg18-27-tapasin immunization more efficiently suppressed the expression of
serum hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), HBV DNA as well as liver HBsAg and
HBcAg in HBV transgenic mice. Furthermore, CTP-HBcAg18-27-tapasin promotes T-bet 
but reduces GATA-3 expression. In addition, the expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3 was
significantly downregulated in the CTP-HBcAg18-27-tapasin group compared with the
control groups. In conclusion, the present study demonstrated that
CTP-HBcAg18-27-tapasin enhanced the Th1/Th2 cytokine ratio and antiviral immunity
by suppressing SOCS1/3 in HBV transgenic mice.

PMID: 24535102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Immunity. 2014 Mar 20;40(3):355-66. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.01.002. Epub 2014 
Feb 13.

The transcription factors T-bet and Runx are required for the ontogeny of
pathogenic interferon-<U+03B3>-producing T helper 17 cells.

Wang Y(1), Godec J(2), Ben-Aissa K(1), Cui K(3), Zhao K(3), Pucsek AB(4), Lee
YK(5), Weaver CT(5), Yagi R(6), Lazarevic V(7).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)Department of Microbiology and
Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School and Department of Pediatric Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Systems Biology Center,
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. (6)Department of Immunology, Graduate
School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan. (7)Experimental
Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: lazarevicv@mail.nih.gov.

T helper 17 (Th17) cells can give rise to interleukin-17A (IL-17A)- and
interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>-double-producing cells that are implicated in development of
autoimmune diseases. However, the molecular mechanisms that govern generation of 
IFN-<U+03B3>-producing Th17 cells are unclear. We found that coexpression of the Th1 and
Th17 cell master transcription factors, T-bet and retinoid-related orphan
receptor gamma-t (ROR<U+03B3>t), respectively, did not generate Th cells with robust
IL-17 and IFN-<U+03B3> expression. Instead, development of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing Th17 cells
required T-bet and Runx1 or Runx3. IL-12-stimulated Th17 cells upregulated Runx1,
which bound to the Ifng locus in a T-bet-dependent manner. Reciprocally, T-bet or
Runx1 deficiency or inhibition of Runx transcriptional activity impaired the
development of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing Th17 cells during experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis, which correlated with substantially ameliorated disease
course. Thus, our studies identify a critical role for T-bet and Runx
transcription factors in the generation of pathogenic IFN-<U+03B3>-producing Th17 cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3965587
PMID: 24530058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 10;9(2):e88884. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088884. eCollection
2014.

Levels of CD56+TIM-3- effector CD8 T cells distinguish HIV natural virus
suppressors from patients receiving antiretroviral therapy.

Poonia B(1), Pauza CD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Virology, School of Medicine, University of Maryland,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Prolonged antiretroviral therapy (ART) with effective HIV suppression and
reconstitution of CD4 T cells, fails to restore CD8 T cell lytic effector
function that is needed to eradicate the viral reservoir. Better understanding of
the phenotype and function of circulating CD8 cells in HIV patients will
contribute to new targeted therapies directed at increasing CD8 T cell lytic
effector function and destruction of the viral reservoir. We show that CD8 T
cells from ART treated patients had sharply reduced expression of CD56 (neural
cell adhesion molecule-1), a marker associated with cytolytic function whereas
elite patients who control HIV in the absence of ART had CD56+ CD8 T cell levels 
similar to uninfected controls. The CD56+ CD8 T cells had higher perforin
upregulation as well as degranulation following stimulation with HIV gag peptides
compared with CD56 negative CD8 T cells. Elite patients had the highest
frequencies of perforin producing CD56+ CD8 T cells among all HIV+ groups. In
patients receiving ART we noted high levels of the exhaustion marker TIM-3 on
CD56+ CD8 T cells, implying that defective effector function was related to
immune exhaustion. CD56+ CD8 T cells from elite or treated HIV patients responded
to PMA plus ionomycin stimulation, and expressed transcription factors T-bet and 
EOMES at levels similar to uninfected controls. Consequently, the lytic effector 
defect in chronic HIV disease is due to immune exhaustion and quantitative loss
of CD56+ CD8 T cells and this defect is not repaired in patients where viremia is
suppressed and CD4 T cells are recovered after ART. Reconstituting the cytotoxic 
CD56+ subset of CD8+ T cells through new interventions might improve the lytic
effector capacity and contribute to reducing the viral reservoir. Our initial
studies indicate that IL-15 treatment partly reverses the CD56 defect, implying
that myeloid cell defects could be targeted for immune therapy during chronic HIV
disease.

PMCID: PMC3919829
PMID: 24520422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Exp Med. 2014 Mar 10;211(3):563-77. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131560. Epub 2014 Feb
10.

T-bet and Eomes instruct the development of two distinct natural killer cell
lineages in the liver and in the bone marrow.

Daussy C(1), Faure F, Mayol K, Viel S, Gasteiger G, Charrier E, Bienvenu J, Henry
T, Debien E, Hasan UA, Marvel J, Yoh K, Takahashi S, Prinz I, de Bernard S,
Buffat L, Walzer T.

Author information: 
(1)CIRI, International Center for Infectiology Research, Université de Lyon; 2
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1111; 3 Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Lyon; 4 Université Lyon 1, Centre International de Recherche en
Infectiologie; and 5 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR5308, 69007
Lyon, France.

Trail(+)DX5(-)Eomes(-) natural killer (NK) cells arise in the mouse fetal liver
and persist in the adult liver. Their relationships with Trail(-)DX5(+) NK cells 
remain controversial. We generated a novel Eomes-GFP reporter murine model to
address this question. We found that Eomes(-) NK cells are not precursors of
classical Eomes(+) NK cells but rather constitute a distinct lineage of innate
lymphoid cells. Eomes(-) NK cells are strictly dependent on both T-bet and IL-15,
similarly to NKT cells. We observed that, in the liver, expression of T-bet in
progenitors represses Eomes expression and the development of Eomes(+) NK cells. 
Reciprocally, the bone marrow (BM) microenvironment restricts T-bet expression in
developing NK cells. Ectopic expression of T-bet forces the development of
Eomes(-) NK cells, demonstrating that repression of T-bet is essential for the
development of Eomes(+) NK cells. Gene profile analyses show that Eomes(-) NK
cells share part of their transcriptional program with NKT cells, including genes
involved in liver homing and NK cell receptors. Moreover, Eomes(-) NK cells
produce a broad range of cytokines, including IL-2 and TNF in vitro and in vivo, 
during immune responses against vaccinia virus. Thus, mutually exclusive
expression of T-bet and Eomes drives the development of different NK cell
lineages with complementary functions.

PMCID: PMC3949572
PMID: 24516120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. ISME J. 2014 Jul;8(7):1403-17. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2014.3. Epub 2014 Feb 6.

Gut microbiome composition and function in experimental colitis during active
disease and treatment-induced remission.

Rooks MG(1), Veiga P(2), Wardwell-Scott LH(3), Tickle T(1), Segata N(1), Michaud 
M(1), Gallini CA(1), Beal C(4), van Hylckama-Vlieg JE(4), Ballal SA(5), Morgan
XC(1), Glickman JN(6), Gevers D(7), Huttenhower C(8), Garrett WS(9).

Author information: 
(1)Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. (2)1] Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA [2] Danone Research, Palaiseau, France. (3)1]
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA [2] Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. (4)Danone Research, Palaiseau, France. (5)Children's Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA. (6)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (7)Broad Institute
of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. (8)1] Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA [2] Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. (9)1]
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA [2] Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA [3] Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA [4]
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

Dysregulated immune responses to gut microbes are central to inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD), and gut microbial activity can fuel chronic inflammation.
Examining how IBD-directed therapies influence gut microbiomes may identify
microbial community features integral to mitigating disease and maintaining
health. However, IBD patients often receive multiple treatments during disease
flares, confounding such analyses. Preclinical models of IBD with well-defined
disease courses and opportunities for controlled treatment exposures provide a
valuable solution. Here, we surveyed the gut microbiome of the T-bet(-/-)
Rag2(-/-) mouse model of colitis during active disease and treatment-induced
remission. Microbial features modified among these conditions included altered
potential for carbohydrate and energy metabolism and bacterial pathogenesis,
specifically cell motility and signal transduction pathways. We also observed an 
increased capacity for xenobiotics metabolism, including benzoate degradation, a 
pathway linking host adrenergic stress with enhanced bacterial virulence, and
found decreased levels of fecal dopamine in active colitis. When transferred to
gnotobiotic mice, gut microbiomes from mice with active disease versus
treatment-induced remission elicited varying degrees of colitis. Thus, our study 
provides insight into specific microbial clades and pathways associated with
health, active disease and treatment interventions in a mouse model of colitis.

PMCID: PMC4069400
PMID: 24500617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2014 Feb 6;11:7. doi: 10.1186/1743-8977-11-7.

Nickel nanoparticles cause exaggerated lung and airway remodeling in mice lacking
the T-box transcription factor, TBX21 (T-bet).

Glista-Baker EE, Taylor AJ, Sayers BC, Thompson EA, Bonner JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental & Molecular Toxicology Program, Department of Biological
Sciences, North Carolina State University, Campus Box 7633, Raleigh, North
Carolina 27695, USA. james_bonner@ncsu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Nickel nanoparticles (NiNPs) are increasingly used in a variety of
industrial applications, including the manufacturing of multi-walled carbon
nanotubes (MWCNTs). While occupational nickel exposure is a known cause of
pulmonary alveolitis, fibrosis, and cancer, the health risks of NiNPs are not
well understood, especially in susceptible individuals such as asthmatics. The
T-box transcription factor Tbx21 (T-bet) maintains Th1 cell development and loss 
of T-bet is associated with a shift towards Th2 type allergic airway inflammation
that characterizes asthma. The purpose of this study was to determine the role of
T-bet in susceptibility to lung remodeling by NiNPs or MWCNTs.
METHODS: Wild-type (WT) and T-bet-/- mice were exposed to NiNPs or MWCNTs (4
mg/kg) by oropharyngeal aspiration (OPA). Necropsy was performed at 1 and 21
days. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was collected for differential counting
of inflammatory cells and for measurement of cytokines by ELISA. The left lung
was collected for histopathology. The right lung was analyzed for cytokine or
mucin (MUC5AC and MUC5B) mRNAs.
RESULTS: Morphometry of alcian-blue/periodic acid Schiff (AB/PAS)-stained lung
tissue showed that NiNPs significantly increased mucous cell metaplasia in
T-bet-/- mice at 21 days (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) compared to WT mice, and increased MUC5AC
and MUC5B mRNAs (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). MWCNTs also increased mucous cell metaplasia in
T-bet-/- mice, but to a lesser extent than NiNPs. Chronic alveolitis was also
increased by NiNPs, but not MWCNTs, in T-bet-/- mice compared to WT mice at 21
days (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). NiNPs also increased IL-13 and eosinophils (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) in BALF 
from T-bet-/- mice after 1 day. Interestingly, the chemokine CCL2 in the BALF of 
T-bet-/- mice was increased at 1 and 21 days (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001 and p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05,
respectively) by NiNPs, and to a lesser extent by MWCNTs at 1 day. Treatment of
T-bet-/- mice with a monoclonal anti-CCL2 antibody enhanced NiNP-induced mucous
cell metaplasia and MUC5AC mRNA levels (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), yet marginally reduced
NiNP-induced alveolitis.
CONCLUSION: These findings identify T-bet as a potentially important
susceptibility factor for NiNP exposure and to a lesser extent for MWCNT
exposure, and suggests that individuals with asthma are at greater risk.

PMCID: PMC3931667
PMID: 24499286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Int Immunol. 2014 Jul;26(7):383-95. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxu001. Epub 2014 Feb 4.

B-CLL cells acquire APC- and CTL-like phenotypic characteristics after
stimulation with CpG ODN and IL-21.

Hagn M(1), Blackwell SE(2), Beyer T(3), Ebel V(4), Fabricius D(5), Lindner S(3), 
Stilgenbauer S(6), Simmet T(4), Tam C(1), Neeson P(1), Trapani JA(1),
Schrezenmeier H(3), Weiner GJ(2), Jahrsdörfer B(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunology Program, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne 3002,
Australia. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Holden Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. (3)Institute of Clinical
Transfusion Medicine and Immunogenetics Ulm, German Red Cross Blood Transfusion
Service Baden-Württemberg - Hessen and Institute of Transfusion Medicine.
(4)Institute of Pharmacology of Natural Products and Clinical Pharmacology.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and. (6)Department of Internal Medicine III, Ulm
University, Ulm 89081, Germany. (7)Institute of Clinical Transfusion Medicine and
Immunogenetics Ulm, German Red Cross Blood Transfusion Service Baden-Württemberg 
- Hessen and Institute of Transfusion Medicine, bernd.jahrsdoerfer@uni-ulm.de.

CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG) and IL-21 are two promising agents for the
treatment of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL). Recently, we reported
that the combination of CpG and IL-21 (CpG/IL-21) can induce granzyme B
(GrB)-dependent apoptosis in B-CLL cells. Here, we demonstrate that treatment of 
B-CLL cells with CpG and IL-21 results in the development of antigen-presenting
cell (APC)-like cells with cytotoxic features. These properties eventually give
rise to B-CLL cell apoptosis, independently of their cytogenetic phenotype,
whereas normal B-cell survival is not negatively affected by CpG/IL-21. APC- and 
CTL-typical molecules found to be up-regulated in CpG/IL-21-stimulated B-CLL
cells include GrB, perforin, T-bet, monokine-induced by IFN-<U+03B3> and IFN-<U+03B3>-inducible
protein 10 (IP-10), as well as molecules important for cell adhesion, antigen
cross-presentation and costimulation. Also induced are molecules involved in GrB 
induction, trafficking and processing, whereas the GrB inhibitor Serpin B9
[formerly proteinase inhibitor-9 (PI-9)] is down-modulated by CpG/IL-21. In
conclusion, CpG/IL-21-stimulated B-CLL cells acquire features that are
reminiscent of killer dendritic cells, and which result in enhanced
immunogenicity, cytotoxicity and apoptosis. Our results provide novel insights
into the aberrant immune state of B-CLL cells and may establish a basis for the
development of an innovative cellular vaccination approach in B-CLL.

© The Japanese Society for Immunology. 2014. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4133571
PMID: 24497611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Clin Immunol. 2014 Mar;151(1):16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2014.01.003. Epub 2014
Jan 15.

The autoimmune disease-associated transcription factors EOMES and TBX21 are
dysregulated in multiple sclerosis and define a molecular subtype of disease.

Parnell GP(1), Gatt PN(1), Krupa M(2), Nickles D(3), McKay FC(1), Schibeci SD(1),
Batten M(4), Baranzini S(3), Henderson A(1), Barnett M(5), Slee M(2), Vucic S(6),
Stewart GJ(1), Booth DR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology and Allergy Research, Westmead Millennium Institute
University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia. (2)School of
Medicine, Flinders University of South Australia, South Australia 5042,
Australia. (3)Department of Neurology, University of California at San Francisco,
CA 94158, USA. (4)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, Sydney, NSW
2010, Australia. (5)Brain and Mind Research Institute, University of Sydney,
Sydney, NSW 2050 Australia. (6)Westmead Clinical School, University of Sydney,
Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia. (7)Institute for
Immunology and Allergy Research, Westmead Millennium Institute University of
Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address:
david.booth@sydney.edu.au.

We have identified a marked over-representation of transcription factors
controlling differentiation of T, B, myeloid and NK cells among the 110 MS genes 
now known to be associated with multiple sclerosis (MS). To test if the
expression of these genes might define molecular subtypes of MS, we interrogated 
their expression in blood in three independent cohorts of untreated MS (from
Sydney and Adelaide) or clinically isolated syndrome (CIS, from San Francisco)
patients. Expression of the transcription factors (TF) controlling T and NK cell 
differentiation, EOMES, TBX21 and other TFs was significantly lower in MS/CIS
compared to healthy controls in all three cohorts. Expression was tightly
correlated between these TFs, with other T/NK cell TFs, and to another
downregulated gene, CCL5. Expression was stable over time, but did not predict
disease phenotype. Optimal response to therapy might be indicated by
normalization of expression of these genes in blood.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24495857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Immunol. 2014 Mar 1;192(5):2237-43. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303119. Epub 2014
Jan 31.

Human <U+03B3>d thymocytes are functionally immature and differentiate into cytotoxic
type 1 effector T cells upon IL-2/IL-15 signaling.

Ribot JC(1), Ribeiro ST, Correia DV, Sousa AE, Silva-Santos B.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, 1649-028 Lisbon, Portugal.

Cytotoxicity and IFN-<U+03B3> production by human <U+03B3>d T cells underlie their potent
antitumor functions. However, it remains unclear where and how human <U+03B3>d T cells
acquire these key effector properties. Given the recent disclosure of a major
contribution of the thymus to murine <U+03B3>d T cell functional differentiation, in
this study we have analyzed a series of human pediatric thymuses. We found that
ex vivo-isolated <U+03B3>d thymocytes produced negligible IFN-<U+03B3> and lacked cytolytic
activity against leukemia cells. However, these properties were selectively
acquired upon stimulation with IL-2 or IL-15, but not IL-4 or IL-7. Unexpectedly,
TCR activation was dispensable for these stages of functional differentiation.
The effects of IL-2/IL-15 depended on MAPK/ERK signaling and induced de novo
expression of the transcription factors T-bet and eomesodermin, as well as the
cytolytic enzyme perforin, required for the cytotoxic type 1 program. These
findings have implications for the manipulation of <U+03B3>d T cells in cancer
immunotherapy.

PMID: 24489097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Clin Periodontol. 2014 May;41(5):451-9. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.12236.

Activation of RANKL-induced osteoclasts and memory T lymphocytes by Porphyromonas
gingivalis is serotype dependant.

Vernal R(1), Díaz-Zúñiga J, Melgar-Rodríguez S, Pujol M, Diaz-Guerra E, Silva A, 
Sanz M, Garcia-Sanz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Centro de Investigaciones
Biológicas (CIB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain; Periodontal Biology Laboratory, Department 
of Conservative Dentistry, Dental School, Universidad de Chile, Santiago de
Chile, Chile.

AIM: Destructive periodontitis is associated with a Th1-Th17 immune response and 
activation of RANKL-induced osteoclasts. In addition, Porphyromonas gingivalis K1
and K2 serotypes induce a strong Th1-Th17 response. This study aimed to
investigate whether these P. gingivalis serotypes induce higher osteoclasts
activation, by increased Th17-associated RANKL production, and an
antigen-specific memory T-lymphocyte response.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The RANKL production and TRAP(+) osteoclast induction were 
quantified on naïve T lymphocytes stimulated with dendritic cells primed with the
P. gingivalis serotypes. The T-bet, GATA-3, RORC2 and Foxp3 expression was
correlated with RANKL production. The frequency of proliferating memory T
lymphocytes in response to P. gingivalis serotypes was determined in both
periodontitis and healthy subjects.
RESULTS: T lymphocytes stimulated by K1 or K2-primed dendritic cells elicited
higher levels of RANKL and TRAP(+) osteoclasts than cells stimulated with the
other serotypes. RANKL positively correlated with RORC2. Whereas periodontitis
patients had a higher frequency of memory T lymphocytes responding to K1 or K2,
healthy subjects had a higher frequency of memory T lymphocytes responding to K4 
or K(-) .
CONCLUSIONS: P. gingivalis serotypes K1 and K2, but not others, are associated
with an increased production of the osteoclastogenesis-related factor RANKL. This
important information suggests that these serotypes could elicit a greater bone
resorption in vivo and have a role in the periodontitis pathogenesis.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24476556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:831907. doi: 10.1155/2013/831907. Epub 2013 Dec 18.

Prognostic significance of immunohistochemical phenotypes in patients treated for
high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.

Origoni M(1), Parma M(1), Dell'Antonio G(2), Gelardi C(1), Stefani C(1),
Salvatore S(1), Candiani M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology & Obstetrics, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University,
School of Medicine at San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Via Olgettina 58, 20132 
Milan, Italy. (2)Department of Pathology, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University,
School of Medicine at San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Via Olgettina 58, 20132 
Milan, Italy.

Strong evidence exists that the host's immune system plays a crucial role for the
development of human papillomavirus-related cervical premalignant and malignant
lesions. In particular, effective cell-mediated immunity (CMI) promotes
spontaneous infection clearance and cancer precursors regression in healthy
subjects, while immunosuppressed individuals are more likely to experience
infection persistence, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) lesions, and
cervical cancer. In this study, the prognostic significance of
immunohistochemical profiling of CD4+ T-cells, CD8+ T-cells, dendritic cells
(CD11c+), T-bet+, and GATA-3+ transcription factors has been studied in surgical 
specimens of 34 consecutive women affected by high-grade cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN2-3) submitted to cervical conization. Results have been correlated
with the clinical outcomes at 24 months after treatment and statistically
analyzed. Higher rates of CD4+ T-cells, CD11c+ dendritic cells, and T-bet+
transcription factor positivity showed a strong statistically significative
correlation with favourable clinical outcomes (P = 0.0001). These data reinforce 
the evidence of the relevance of the host's immune status in the natural history 
of HPV-related cervical disease and add a prognostic significance of the cervical
immunological profile in terms of predicting significant lower recurrence rates.

PMCID: PMC3878632
PMID: 24455729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 15;192(4):1707-17. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302258. Epub 2014
Jan 20.

Role of Th1/Th17 balance regulated by T-bet in a mouse model of Mycobacterium
avium complex disease.

Matsuyama M(1), Ishii Y, Yageta Y, Ohtsuka S, Ano S, Matsuno Y, Morishima Y, Yoh 
K, Takahashi S, Ogawa K, Hogaboam CM, Hizawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8575, Japan;

Th1 immune responses are thought to be important in protection against
intracellular pathogens. T-bet is a critical regulator for Th1 cell
differentiation and Th1 cytokine production. The aim of this study was to
determine the role of T-bet in host defense against Mycobacterium avium complex
(MAC) infection. Wild-type mice, T-bet-deficient mice, and T-bet-overexpressing
mice were infected with MAC via intratracheal inoculation. Macrophages and
dendritic cells obtained from these mice were incubated with MAC. T-bet-deficient
mice were highly susceptible to MAC, compared with wild-type mice and
T-bet-overexpressing mice. Neutrophilic pulmonary inflammation was also enhanced 
in T-bet-deficient mice, but attenuated in T-bet-overexpressing mice, following
MAC infection. Cytokine expression shifted toward Th1 in the lung and spleen of
T-bet-overexpressing mice, but toward Th17 in T-bet-deficient mice. IFN-<U+03B3>
supplementation to T-bet-deficient mice reduced systemic MAC growth but did not
reduce pulmonary inflammation. In contrast, neutralization of IL-17 in
T-bet-deficient mice reduced pulmonary inflammation but did not affect
mycobacterial growth in any organs tested. T-bet-deficient T cells tended to
differentiate toward Th17 cells in vitro following exposure to MAC. Treatment
with NO donor suppressed MAC-induced Th17 cell differentiation of T-bet-deficient
T cells. This study identified that the fine balance between Th1 and Th17
responses is essential in defining the outcome of MAC disease. T-bet functions as
a regulator for Th1/Th17 balance and is a critical determinant for host
resistance to MAC infection by controlling cytokine and NO levels.

PMID: 24446514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Mar;9(3):899-903. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.1893. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Local delivery of T-bet shRNA reduces inflammation in collagen II-induced
arthritis via downregulation of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17.

Xue Y(1), Yang Y(2), Su Z(1), Barnie PA(1), Zheng D(1), Zhang Y(1), Xu Y(1), Wang
S(1), Xu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu 212013, P.R. China. (2)The Affiliated People's
Hospital of Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu 212001, P.R. China.

Th1 and Th17 cells are involved in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
T-bet, a Th1-specific transcription factor, appears to drive the maturation of
Th1 and IFN-<U+03B3> secretion. In the present study, we established the T-bet shRNA
recombinant plasmid (p-T-shRNA) and explored its possible anti-inflammatory
effect in a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model by local injection of plasmid 
vectors. For the initiation of CIA, DBA/1J mice were immunized with type II
collagen (CII) in Freund's adjuvant and the CII-immunized mice were treated with 
p-T-shRNA. Levels of T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-17 and ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA in splenocytes and
synovial joints were measured by quantitative real-time PCR and T-bet expression 
in joint tissue was detected by immunohistochemistry staining. The intracellular 
IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 were analyzed by flow cytometry (FCM). The results demonstrated
that therapeutic administration on the local joints with p-T-shRNA signi<U+FB01>cantly
suppressed IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 gene expression and improved the pathogenesis of
arthritis in CIA mice, while administration of a plasmid expressing T-bet
(pIRES-T-bet) accelerated the disease onset. Our study suggests that T-bet may be
developed as a potential target for arthritis therapy.

PMID: 24425064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Infect Immun. 2014 Apr;82(4):1477-90. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01545-13. Epub 2014 Jan
13.

T-bet regulates immunity to Francisella tularensis live vaccine strain infection,
particularly in lungs.

Melillo AA(1), Foreman O, Bosio CM, Elkins KL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mycobacterial Diseases and Cellular Immunology, Division of
Bacterial, Parasitic and Allergenic Products, Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, Maryland, USA.

Upregulation of the transcription factor T-bet is correlated with the strength of
protection against secondary challenge with the live vaccine strain (LVS) of
Francisella tularensis. Thus, to determine if this mediator had direct
consequences in immunity to LVS, we examined its role in infection. Despite
substantial in vivo gamma interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>) levels, T-bet-knockout (KO) mice
infected intradermally (i.d.) or intranasally (i.n.) with LVS succumbed to
infection with doses 2 log units less than those required for their wild-type
(WT) counterparts, and exhibited significantly increased bacterial burdens in the
lung and spleen. Lungs of LVS-infected T-bet-KO mice contained fewer lymphocytes 
and more neutrophils and interleukin-17 than WT mice. LVS-vaccinated T-bet-KO
mice survived lethal LVS intraperitoneal secondary challenge but not high doses
of LVS i.n. challenge, independently of the route of vaccination. Immune T
lymphocytes from the spleens of i.d. LVS-vaccinated WT or KO mice controlled
intracellular bacterial replication in an in vitro coculture system, but cultures
with T-bet-KO splenocyte supernatants contained less IFN-<U+03B3> and increased amounts 
of tumor necrosis factor alpha. In contrast, immune T-bet-KO lung lymphocytes
were greatly impaired in controlling intramacrophage growth of LVS; this
functional defect is the likely mechanism underpinning the lack of respiratory
protection. Taken together, T-bet is important in host resistance to primary LVS 
infection and i.n. secondary challenge. Thus, T-bet represents a true, useful
correlate for immunity to LVS.

PMCID: PMC3993391
PMID: 24421047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 15;192(4):1954-61. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300876. Epub 2014
Jan 10.

KLRG1+ NK cells protect T-bet-deficient mice from pulmonary metastatic colorectal
carcinoma.

Malaisé M(1), Rovira J, Renner P, Eggenhofer E, Sabet-Baktach M, Lantow M, Lang
SA, Koehl GE, Farkas SA, Loss M, Agha A, Campistol JM, Schlitt HJ, Geissler EK,
Kroemer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg,
Germany.

We studied the developmental and functional mechanisms behind NK cell-mediated
antitumor responses against metastatic colorectal carcinoma (CRC) in mice. In
particular, we focused on investigating the significance of T-box transcription
factors and the immunotherapeutic relevance of IL-15 in the development and
function of tumor-reactive NK cells. Pulmonary CRC metastases were experimentally
seeded via an adoptive i.v. transfer of luciferase-expressing CT26 CRC cells that
form viewable masses via an in vivo imaging device; genetically deficient mice
were used to dissect the antitumor effects of developmentally different NK cell
subsets. IL-15 precomplexed to IL-15 receptor-a was used in immunotherapy
experiments. We found that mice deficient for the T-box transcription factor
T-bet lack terminally differentiated antitumor CD27(low)KLRG1(+) NK cells,
leading to a terminal course of rapid-onset pulmonary CRC metastases. The
importance of this NK cell subset for effective antitumor immunity was shown by
adoptively transferring purified CD27(low)KLRG1(+) NK cells into T-bet-deficient 
mice and, thereby, restoring immunity against lung metastasis formation.
Importantly, immunity to metastasis formation could also be restored in
T-bet-deficient recipients by treating mice with IL-15 precomplexed to IL-15
receptor-a, which induced the development of eomesodermin(+)KLRG1(+) NK cells
from existing NK cell populations. Thus, contingent upon their T-bet-dependent
development and activation status, NK cells can control metastatic CRC in mice,
which is highly relevant for the development of immunotherapeutic approaches in
the clinic.

PMID: 24415778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Mar;19(1):1-4. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.12.025. Epub 
2014 Jan 7.

Imbalanced expression of human Tim-1 and Tim-3 in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells from immune thrombocytopenia patients.

Zhang XM(1), Shan NN(2), Sun M(3), Wang X(1), Feng XM(1), Liu X(1), Li Y(1), Yuan
D(1), Ding M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shandong provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan, 250021,China. (2)Department of Hematology, Shandong provincial
Hospital affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, 250021,China. Electronic
address: snning@126.com. (3)Department of Hematology, Linzi District People's
Hospital, Zibo, 255100,China.

BACKGROUND: The T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain-(Tim)-1 molecule and Tim-3
are mainly expressed on activated T helper (Th) 2 and Th1 cells, respectively,
and have been implicated in the pathogenesis of some autoimmune diseases. Immune 
thrombocytopenia (ITP) is a common autoimmune disorder, and the complex
dysregulation of cellular immunity has been observed; however, the relationship
between Tims and excessive immune responses in ITP remains unclear.
METHODS: Using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), the
mRNA expression levels of Tim-1, Tim-3, T-box transcription factor (T-bet) and
GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3) were measured in the peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) of 45 newly diagnosed patients with active ITP, 34 ITP patients in 
remission and 31 healthy volunteers.
RESULTS: Tim-3 mRNA expression in PBMCs in newly diagnosed patients was
significantly decreased. At the same time, Tim-1 mRNA was not significantly
declined, which resulted in a decreased ratio of Tim-3 to Tim-1 in ITP patients
with active disease. During the remission stages, the levels of these
transcription factors were comparable with those observed in healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The reduced levels of Tim-3/Tim-1 in PBMCs during active stages of
the disease suggest a possible role in the pathogenesis and course of ITP.
Regulating the balance of Tim-1 and Tim-3 in ITP patients could also be a
therapeutic approach against ITP.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24412470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 15;192(4):1661-70. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300497. Epub 2014
Jan 8.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor promotes IL-10 production by NK cells.

Wagage S(1), John B, Krock BL, Hall AO, Randall LM, Karp CL, Simon MC, Hunter CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104;

The cytokine IL-10 has an important role in limiting inflammation in many
settings, including toxoplasmosis. In the present studies, an IL-10 reporter
mouse was used to identify the sources of this cytokine following challenge with 
Toxoplasma gondii. During infection, multiple cell types expressed the IL-10
reporter but NK cells were a major early source of this cytokine. These IL-10
reporter(+) NK cells expressed high levels of the IL-12 target genes T-bet,
KLRG1, and IFN-<U+03B3>, and IL-12 depletion abrogated reporter expression. However,
IL-12 signaling alone was not sufficient to promote NK cell IL-10, and activation
of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) was also required for maximal IL-10
production. NK cells basally expressed the AHR, relevant chaperone proteins, and 
the AHR nuclear translocator, which heterodimerizes with the AHR to form a
competent transcription factor. In vitro studies revealed that IL-12 stimulation 
increased NK cell AHR levels, and the AHR and AHR nuclear translocator were
required for optimal production of IL-10. Additionally, NK cells isolated from T.
gondii-infected Ahr(-/-) mice had impaired expression of IL-10, which was
associated with increased resistance to this infection. Taken together, these
data identify the AHR as a critical cofactor involved in NK cell production of
IL-10.

PMCID: PMC3955958
PMID: 24403534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Cancer Immunol Res. 2013 Oct;1(4):235-44. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-13-0068.

Enhancement of tumor-reactive cytotoxic CD4+ T cell responses after ipilimumab
treatment in four advanced melanoma patients.

Kitano S(1), Tsuji T(2), Liu C(3), Hirschhorn-Cymerman D(4), Kyi C(5), Mu Z(1),
Allison JP(6), Gnjatic S(7), Yuan JD(1), Wolchok JD(8).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Center for Cancer Immunotherapy, Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065. (2)Center for Immunotherapy, Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263. (3)Ludwig Center for Cancer Immunotherapy,
Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065 ; Swim
Across America Laboratory and Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Memorial,
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065. (4)Swim Across America
Laboratory and Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Memorial, Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065. (5)Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, NY 10065. (6)Department of Immunology, The University of
Texas-MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX. (7)Mount Sinai Icahn School of
Medicine, Tisch Cancer Institute, New York, NY 10029. (8)Ludwig Center for Cancer
Immunotherapy, Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065 ; Department of Medicine, Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065
; Swim Across America Laboratory and Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research,
Memorial, Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065 ; Weill Cornell
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10065.

CD4(+) T cells provide help to enhance and sustain cytotoxic CD8(+) T cell
responses. A direct lytic role for this cell population in mouse models further
supports the use of tumor-reactive CD4(+) T cells for cancer immunotherapy.
CTLA-4 blockade has been shown to expand antigen-specific cytotoxic CD4(+) T
cells in mouse models. We took advantage of spontaneous immunity to the NY-ESO-1 
cancer-testis antigen to investigate quantitative and qualitative changes in
antigen-specific CD4(+) T cell responses after ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4 monoclonal
antibody) treatment in advanced melanoma patients. Four NY-ESO-1 seropositive
melanoma patients were chosen upon the availability of suitable blood specimens
for characterizing the functions of NY-ESO-1 antigen-specific CD4(+) T cell
response by enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT), intracellular cytokine staining
(ICS) and cytotoxicity assays. Multiple NY-ESO-1 antigen-specific CD4(+) T cell
responses with Th1 dominance were induced or enhanced after ipilimumab treatment 
in peripheral blood in all four patients. NY-ESO-1 antigen-specific CD4(+) T cell
lines established from all 4 patients after ipilimumab treatment recognized
naturally processed NY-ESO-1 protein in antigen-presenting cells, expressed
master transcription factor Eomesodermin (Eomes) and secreted perforin and
Granzyme B. Finally, we demonstrated that these NY-ESO-1 antigen-specific CD4(+) 
T cell lines directly lysed autologous melanoma cell lines expressing NY-ESO-1 in
an MHC class II restricted manner. Our results show that antigen specific
cytotoxic CD4(+) T cell responses are induced after ipilimumab therapy in human
cancer patients. Ipilimumab may induce the expression of lytic granules on
antigen specific cytotoxic CD4(+) T cells via Eomes, revealing a novel
consequence of immunologic checkpoint blockade.

PMCID: PMC3880021
PMID: 24396833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2014 Jan;37(1):275-83. doi:
10.1016/j.etap.2013.12.001. Epub 2013 Dec 13.

Effects of Th1 and Th2 cells balance in pulmonary injury induced by nano titanium
dioxide.

Chang X(1), Fu Y(2), Zhang Y(3), Tang M(4), Wang B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Environmental Medicine and Engineering; Ministry of
Education, School of Public Health, Southeast University, Nanjing 210009, China; 
Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210009, China. Electronic address:
changxh0402@163.com. (2)Key Laboratory of Environmental Medicine and Engineering;
Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, Southeast University, Nanjing
210009, China. Electronic address: fckxxz@163.com. (3)Key Laboratory of
Environmental Medicine and Engineering; Ministry of Education, School of Public
Health, Southeast University, Nanjing 210009, China. Electronic address:
zhangyingjian321@126.com. (4)Key Laboratory of Environmental Medicine and
Engineering; Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, Southeast
University, Nanjing 210009, China; Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Biomaterials and
Devices, Southeast University, Nanjing 210009, China. Electronic address:
tm@seu.edu.cn. (5)Key Laboratory of Environmental Medicine and Engineering;
Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, Southeast University, Nanjing
210009, China; Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public
Health, Southeast University, Nanjing 210009, China. Electronic address:
wangbeilxb@gmail.com.

To explore the potential immunoregulatory mechanisms linking nano TiO2 and
pulmonary injury, Sprague Dawley rats were exposed by intra-tracheal instillation
to nano TiO2 with the individual doses of 0.5, 4.0 and 32 mg/kgb.w., micro TiO2
with 32 mg/kgb.w. and 0.9% NaCl, respectively. The exposure was conducted twice a
week, for four consecutive weeks. The results of lung histology demonstrated
increased macrophages accumulation, extensive disruption of alveolar septa,
slight alveolar thickness and expansion hyperemia. Mitochondria tumefaction
organelles dissolution, endoplasmic reticulum expansion and the gap of nuclear
broadening were shown. The changes of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-4 level showed no statistical 
difference. The mRNA expression of GATA-3 was up-regulated, whereas T-bet was
significantly down-regulated. The protein expression of T-bet decreased and there
were significant differences in nano 4 and 32 mg/kg groups. The imbalance of
Th1/Th2 cytokines might be one of the mechanisms of immunotoxicity of respiratory
system induced by nano TiO2 particles.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24378593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Feb;18(2):311-24. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.12.009.
Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Oleanolic acid suppresses ovalbumin-induced airway inflammation and Th2-mediated 
allergic asthma by modulating the transcription factors T-bet, GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t and 
Foxp3 in asthmatic mice.

Kim SH(1), Hong JH(2), Lee YC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Traditional Medicine & Bioscience, Daejeon University, Daejeon
300-716, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Herbology, College of Oriental
Medicine, Sangji University, Wonju 220-702, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Herbology, College of Oriental Medicine, Sangji University, Wonju 220-702,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: lyc072@sangji.ac.kr.

The natural product oleanolic acid is commonly found in a variety of medicinal
plants. It is a triterpenoid compound known for its anti-inflammatory effects as 
well as various other pharmacological properties. The aim of the current study
was to use a mouse model of allergic asthma to investigate whether oleanolic acid
has anti-asthmatic effects, and if so, to determine the mechanism of these
effects. Oleanolic acid suppressed eosinophil infiltration, allergic airway
inflammation, and Penh, which occurred by suppressing the production of IL-5,
IL-13, IL-17, and ovalbumin-specific IgE through the upregulation of T-bet and
Foxp3, and the downregulation of GATA-3 and ROR<U+03B3>t. The therapeutic effect of
oleanolic acid was due to suppression of Th2 cytokines (IL-5 and IL-13), B
cell-dependent production of OVA-specific IgE, and Gr-1 expression through the
T-bet, GATA-3, retinoic acid-related orphan receptor <U+03B3> t (ROR<U+03B3> t) and forkhead
box p3 (Foxp3) transcription pathways. It is therefore reasonable to suggest that
the anti-inflammatory and anti-asthmatic effects of oleanolic acid may be exerted
through inhibition of the GATA-3 and ROR<U+03B3>t pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24374304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Parasite Immunol. 2014 Apr;36(4):150-6. doi: 10.1111/pim.12094.

Analysis of the mucosal immune responses induced by single and trickle infections
with the bovine abomasal nematode Ostertagia ostertagi.

Mihi B(1), van Meulder F, Vancoppernolle S, Rinaldi M, Chiers K, van den Broeck
W, Goddeeris BM, Vercruysse J, Claerebout E, Geldhof P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Parasitology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.

The purpose of this study was to provide more information on the kinetics of the 
immunological changes occurring in the abomasal mucosa after single and trickle
infections with the bovine parasite Ostertagia ostertagi. The time course
analysis of gene expression revealed that the major changes coincided with the
emergence of adult worms from the gastric glands. These changes consisted of a
simultaneous upregulation of Th1- and Th2-type cytokines. In addition, a single
O. ostertagi infection elicited an upregulation of the epithelial-derived
cytokine IL33, while TSLP expression levels were not impacted. Apart from the
massive increase in inflammatory cytokines IL6, IL17 and IL21, O. ostertagi
infection also elicited an upregulation of the immunosuppressors TGFB, IL10 and
ARG1, as well as NK and <U+03B3>d-T cell markers. Furthermore, the cytotoxic factors
granulysin, perforin and granzyme B were upregulated following an O. ostertagi
infection. Analysis of cytokine transcript levels in animals receiving trickle
infections for 60 days showed a similar trend as observed following a single
infection except for IL33, IL6, GATA-3, TBX21 and NCR1, which were no longer
upregulated after trickle infections. Finally, the long trickle infections were
associated with mucosal eosinophilia and mastocytosis.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24372091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Phys Act Health. 2014 Sep;11(7):1386-92. doi: 10.1123/jpah.2012-0508. Epub 2013
Dec 20.

Moderate physical activity of music aerobic exercise increases lymphocyte counts,
specific subsets, and differentiation.

Yeh SH(1), Lai HL, Hsiao CY, Lin LW, Chuang YK, Yang YY, Yang KD.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Medical Research & Development, Show Chwan Memorial Hospital, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Moderate physical activity has been shown to promote immunity.
Different moderate physical activities may have different effects on immunity.
This study investigated the impacts of a 12-week regular music aerobic exercise
(MAE) program on leukocyte distribution, lymphocyte subsets, and lymphocyte
polarization.
METHODS: The study used a case-control design with pretest and posttest.
Forty-seven middle-age women were recruited for this study. Three participants
dropped out, 22 completed the 12-week MAE program, and the other 22 participants 
who had heat-intolerance or limited schedule eligibility were enrolled as the
control group without the MAE exercise.
RESULTS: Results showed that the MAE exercise for 12 weeks didn't change red
blood cells or total leukocytes but increased lymphocyte counts. The women in MAE
group revealed significant increases (P = 0.01) of CD3CD4, CD3CD8, and CD4CD25
cells, associated with Treg polarization showing enhanced FoxP3 but not T-bet,
Gata-3, or ROR<U+03B3>T expression (P < .01). The control group without exercise
revealed insignificant change of lymphocyte subsets or lymphocyte polarization.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that MAE increases specific lymphocyte subsets and 
enhances Treg cell differentiation. It is suggested to encourage moderate
physical activity of music aerobic exercise to enhance lymphocyte function of
middle-aged women.

PMID: 24368695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Feb;18(2):213-6. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.12.013.
Epub 2013 Dec 22.

Therapeutic effect of Halofuginone on ITP mice by regulating the differentiation 
of Th cell subsets.

Jin C(1), Jia Y(2), Jin C(1), Dong H(1), Cheng P(1), Zhou J(1), Wang Y(3), Zheng 
B(4), Liu F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Analytical Section of Attached Hospital of Jining Medical College, Jining,
Shandong Province, PR China. (2)Radiology Department of Jining First People's
Hospital, Jining, Shandong Province, PR China. (3)Pediatric Emergency Department 
of Attached Hospital of Jining Medical College, Jining, Shandong Province, PR
China. (4)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Guangdong Medical College,
Dongguan, Guangdong Province, PR China. (5)Department of Immunology and
Microbiology, Guangdong Medical College, Dongguan, Guangdong Province, PR China. 
Electronic address: jincq2008@163.com.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the therapeutic effect of
halofuginone (HF) in the treatment of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)
and explore the underlying mechanism. Sixty ITP mice were divided into four
groups including control group, low dose group (25 mg/kg HF), medium dose group
(50 mg/kg HF), and high dose group (100 mg/kg HF). Corresponding dose of HF was
administrated by gavage daily in HF groups for 7 days, and the same volume of
saline was given in control group. Platelet counts were 28.87 ± 3.91 × 10(9)/L,
57.13 ± 2.75 × 10(9)/L, 86.73 ± 3.06 × 10(9)/L and 89.73 ± 2.84 × 10(9)/L in
control group, low dose group, medium dose group, and high dose group
respectively, on day 7 after intragastrically administration of HF or saline.
Compared with control group, three HF groups showed significantly increased
levels of INF-<U+03B3> and IL-2 (all P < 0.05), and significantly decreased
concentrations of IL-4 and IL-10(all P < 0.05). The expression of T-bet mRNA
increased and the expression of GATA-3 mRNA decreased (all P < 0.05) in ITP mice 
after intragastric administration with different dose of HF. HF significantly
recovered peripheral platelet counts in ITP mice through promoting Th1 cell
differentiation and attenuating Th2 differentiation in ITP mice.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24368123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Clin Dev Immunol. 2013;2013:967301. doi: 10.1155/2013/967301. Epub 2013 Dec 2.

T cell vaccination inhibits Th1/Th17/Tfh frequencies and production of
autoantibodies in collagen-induced arthritis.

Li S(1), Niu X(2), Xi Y(2), Deng S(2), Li C(2), Zhao Q(2), Chen G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Shanghai 200025, China ;
Breast Cancer Institute, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai
200032, China. (2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Shanghai 200025,
China.

The aim of this study is to determine whether the regulatory role of T cell
vaccination (TCV) is through inhibition of Th1/Th17/Tfh and production of
autoantibodies on collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). First, CIA mice were treated 
with TCV. After disease onset, the incidence and severity of change in joint
histopathology were evaluated. Mice in the TCV-treated group showed less disease 
severity and less infiltration of inflammatory cells in the joint sections. TCV
decreased the frequencies of Th1/Th17/Tfh cells and related cytokines. Reduction 
of IL-21 may be associated with both Tfh and Th17, which further influence B cell
and T cell responses. In addition, inhibition of Th1/Th17/Tfh frequencies led to 
the reduced expression of T-bet, ROR a , ROR <U+03B3> t, and Bcl6. Lastly, the
proliferation of type-II-collagen-(CII-) specific T cells and the production of
anti-CII antibodies were inhibited in the TCV-treated group. The results provide 
novel evidence that the therapeutic effects of TCV on CIA are associated with the
inhibition of Th1/Th17/Tfh frequencies and autoantibodies production.

PMCID: PMC3865644
PMID: 24363764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Vestn Ross Akad Med Nauk. 2013;(7):53-6.

[Association of polymorphism Rs6737848 in the Socs5 gene with bronchial asthma].

[Article in Russian]

Saltykova IV, Freidin MB, Bragina EIu, Ogorodova LM, Puzyrev VP.

AIM: To investigate the role of polymorphic variants of immune-response modifying
genes in predisposition to asthma.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The analysis of restriction fragments length polymorphism
was used to investigate 10 single-nucleotide polymorphisms: IFNG rs2069705,
IFNGR2 rs17880053, IL4 rs 2070874, IL4RA rs 1805010, GATA3 rs10905277, TBX21
rs11652969, PIASY rs3760903, PIAS3 rs12756687, STATS rs16967593, and SOCS5
rs6737848 in 106 asthma patients and 115 healthy people.
RESULTS: The rs6737848 SOCS5 polymorphism was significantly associated with
asthma in additive model (p = 0.05, OR = 0.338, 95% CI 0.158-0.723) and in
dominant model (p = 0.02, OR = 0.284, CI 0.126-0.638). None of the polymorphisms 
of the studied genes was associated with total IgE levels.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report on the association of rs6737848 SOCS5 with 
asthma.

PMID: 24340963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2014;38(2):183-9. doi: 10.1007/s11239-013-1036-3.

Downregulation of T-bet/GATA-3 ratio induced by IL-11 treatment is responsible
for Th1/Th2 balance restoration in human immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP).

Yao R(1), Lin Y, Li Q, Zhou X, Pan X, Bao Y, He M, Zhu B, Guo W, Lin X, Jin L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
College, Wenzhou, 325000, China, yaorongxin@126.com.

Abnormal cellular immunity induced by deranged Th1/Th2 profile has been revealed 
to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of immune thrombocytopenic purpura
(ITP). Correction of the shifted Th1/Th2 balance represents a potential
therapeutic approach to treat ITP. Here, we investigated the effects of IL-11 on 
the restoration of Th1/Th2 balance in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) isolated from adult ITP patients. As shown here, we observed a higher
ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 gene expression by quantitative real-time PCR in the PBMCs 
from ITP patients, consistent with the presence of an abnormally high Th1/Th2
ratio. Remarkably, upon IL-11 treatment, a reversal of T-bet/GATA-3 ratio in ITP 
was achieved and was shown to be responsible for the restoration of Th1/Th2
balance, with IL-11 at 100 ng/ml demonstrating the highest efficiency. T-bet and 
GATA-3 are the two transcriptional factors that have been indicated to be the
master regulators for Th1 and Th2 lineage commitment, respectively. In the
presence of 100 ng/ml IL-11, GATA-3 transcript abundance rose up to ~85-fold of
that measured in untreated cells, whereas T-bet transcripts were lowered merely
to ~41%, suggesting that GATA-3 was the major contributor for the reversal of
T-bet/GATA-3 ratio. Thus, our findings may very well encourage the development of
novel medicines that specifically target and correct the T-bet/GATA-3 imbalance
identified in ITP.

PMID: 24338248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Agric Food Chem. 2014 Jan 29;62(4):902-11. doi: 10.1021/jf404752c. Epub 2014
Jan 16.

Structural characterization of a novel polysaccharide from pulp tissues of Litchi
chinensis and its immunomodulatory activity.

Jing Y(1), Huang L, Lv W, Tong H, Song L, Hu X, Yu R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnological Institute of Chinese Materia Medica and Department of
Pharmacology, Jinan University , 601 Huangpu Avenue West, Guangzhou 510632, China
.

A novel polysaccharide (LCP50W) with a molecular weight of 4.72 × 10(4) Da was
isolated from the pulp tissues of Litchi chinensis . The chemical structure of
LCP50W was characterized using physicochemical and instrumental analyses. The
results indicated that the main chain of LCP50W consisted of (1<U+2192>3)-linked
ß-L-rhamnopyranosyl, (1<U+2192>6)-linked a-D-glucopyranosyl, and (1<U+2192>2,6)-linked
a-D-glucopyranosyl residues, which branched at O-6. The three branches consisted 
of (1<U+2192>2)-linked a-L-rhamnopyranosyl, (1<U+2192>3)-linked a-D-galactopyranosyl, and
(1<U+2192>3)-linked a-L-mannopyranosyl residues, terminated with (1<U+2192>)-linked
a-L-arabinopyranosyl residues, respectively. The in vitro immunomodulatory assay 
revealed that LCP50W promoted the proliferation of mouse splenocytes and enhanced
the cytotoxicity of NK cells. LCP50W boosted the secretion of Th1 cytokine IFN-<U+03B3> 
while it inhibited the secretion of Th2 cytokine IL-4; it also enhanced the
expression of T-bet while it inhibited the expression of GATA-3. Additionally,
LCP50W promoted the development of cell cycle toward the S phase.

PMID: 24320227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Jan;36(1):299-304. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.11.016.
Epub 2013 Dec 4.

Role of CD4(+) and CD8a(+) T cells in protective immunity against Edwardsiella
tarda infection of ginbuna crucian carp, Carassius auratus langsdorfii.

Yamasaki M(1), Araki K(2), Nakanishi T(3), Nakayasu C(4), Yamamoto A(5).

Author information: 
(1)The United Graduate School of Agricultural Sciences, Kagoshima University,
1-21-24 Korimoto, Kagoshima 890-8580, Japan. (2)Faculty of Fisheries, Kagoshima
University, 4-50-20 Shimoarata, Kagoshima 890-0056, Japan. Electronic address:
araki@fish.kagoshima-u.ac.jp. (3)College of Bioresource Sciences, Nihon
University, 1866 Kameino, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 252-0880, Japan. (4)National
Research Institute of Aquaculture, Fisheries Research Agency, Minami-ise, Mie
516-0193, Japan. (5)Faculty of Fisheries, Kagoshima University, 4-50-20
Shimoarata, Kagoshima 890-0056, Japan.

Edwardsiella tarda is an intracellular pathogen that causes edwardsiellosis in
fish. Our previous study suggests that cell-mediated immunity (CMI) plays an
essential role in protection against E. tarda infection. In the present study, we
adoptively transferred T-cell subsets sensitized with E. tarda to isogenic naïve 
ginbuna crucian carp to determination the T-cell subsets involved in protecting
fish from E. tarda infection. Recipients of CD4(+) and CD8a(+) cells acquired
significant resistance to infection with E. tarda 8 days after sensitization,
indicating that helper T cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes plays crucial roles in
protective immunity to E. tarda. Moreover, transfer of sensitized CD8a(+) cells
up-regulated the expression of genes encoding interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and perforin, 
suggesting that protective immunity to E. tarda involves cell-mediated
cytotoxicity and interferon-<U+03B3>-mediated induction of CMI. The results establish
that CMI plays a crucial role in immunity against E. tarda. These findings
provide novel insights into understanding the role of CMI to intracellular
pathogens of fish.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24316500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Epilepsy Res. 2013 Dec;107(3):238-43. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2013.09.004. Epub
2013 Oct 5.

Genetic variations of immunoregulatory genes associated with Rasmussen syndrome.

Takahashi Y(1), Mogami Y, Mine J, Imai K, Koide Y, Matsuda K, Akasaka N, Konishi 
T, Imamura A, Inoue Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Epilepsy Center, Shizuoka Institute of Epilepsy and Neurological
Disorder, 886 Urushiyama, Aoi-ward, Shizuoka, Japan; Department of Pediatrics,
Gifu University School of Medicine, Yanagido, Gifu, Japan. Electronic address:
takahashi-ped@umin.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the genetic predisposition of Rasmussen syndrome (RS).
METHODS: In 29 Japanese patients, we examined the genome sequences of cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA4), programmed cell-death 1 (PDCD1), and
T-bet (TBX21) genes by direct sequencing, and evaluated the significance of SNPs 
(single nucleotide polymorphism) by comparison with Hap Map data.
RESULTS: In all patients, no disease-causative mutations were found in CTLA4,
PDCD1, and T-bet. However, rs231775 SNP in exon 1 of CTLA4 showed significant
positive genotypic (p=0.0363) and allelic associations (p=0.0137) with onset of
RS compared with Japanese controls, as did rs231779 SNP in intron 1 of CTLA4
(p=0.0467 and 0.0188, respectively). Also, rs2227982 SNP in exon 5 of PDCD1
showed significant positive genotypic and allelic associations with RS (p=0.0145 
and 0.0114, respectively). Poor cognitive outcome (IQ below 50) was found in 0%
of wild type (C/C), 9% of heterologous (C/T) and 25% of homologous (T/T) genotype
of rs2227982. Quadriplegia was found only in homologous (T/T) genotype, and
hemiplegia was in heterologous (C/T) and homologous (T/T) genotype of rs2227982. 
No association between SNPs of T-bet and RS onset was found. Regarding SNPs in
promoter regions (rs4794067 and rs17250932) of T-bet, however, IQ below 50 was
found in 19% of wild type (T/T) and 0% of heterologous (T/C) genotype of
rs4794067, and in 19% of wild type (T/T) and 0% of heterologous (T/C) genotype of
rs17250932. Quadriplegic patients were found only in wild-type patients
(rs4794067 and rs17250932).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified three SNPs (rs231775, rs231779, rs2227982) as some of 
the SNPs associated with onset of Japanese RS. We need further studies in other
populations to confirm these genetic predispositions in RS.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24269013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Hum Immunol. 2014 Feb;75(2):129-33. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2013.11.011. Epub 2013 
Nov 18.

The polymorphisms of T cell-specific TBX21 gene may contribute to the
susceptibility of chronic immune thrombocytopenia in Chinese population.

Zhang D(1), Zhang X(1), Ge M(1), Xuan M(1), Li H(1), Yang Y(1), Fu R(1), Zhou
F(1), Zheng Y(1), Yang R(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology &
Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union
Medical College, 288 Nanjing Road, Tianjin 300020, China. (2)State Key Laboratory
of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology & Blood Diseases Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, 288 Nanjing
Road, Tianjin 300020, China. Electronic address: rcyang65@163.com.

Chronic primary immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) is an acquired autoimmune
hemorrhagic disease characterized by both reduced platelet counts and suppression
of megakaryocyte and platelet development. T cell-specific T-box transcription
factor gene (TBX21) plays a critical role in the development and maintenance of T
helper 1 (Th1) cells. Recently, several studies have confirmed that the T-1554C
and T-1993C polymorphisms of this gene can influence its expression level and are
associated with autoimmune diseases. Therefore, we speculated that TBX21
polymorphisms might be associated with the susceptibility of chronic ITP in
Chinese population. We investigated the distributions of TBX21 (T-1514C and
T-1993C) polymorphisms in 275 patients with chronic ITP and 261 healthy controls 
by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism. We
observed significant overrepresentation of T allele and T/T genotype at T-1993C
(but not T-1514C) in patients compared with controls. Stratified analysis by
gender and age of disease onset revealed comparable observations in both female
and childhood ITP cohorts. In conclusion, the T-1993C polymorphisms of TBX21 gene
may be associated with the susceptibility of chronic primary ITP in Chinese
population.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24262372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Mar;95(3):521-30. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0613331. Epub 2013 Nov 18.

SerpinB1 regulates homeostatic expansion of IL-17+ <U+03B3>d and CD4+ Th17 cells.

Zhao P(1), Hou L, Farley K, Sundrud MS, Remold-O'Donnell E.

Author information: 
(1)5.3 Blackfan Circle, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
eileen.remold-odonnell@childrens.harvard.edu.

SerpinB1 is an endogenous inhibitor of serine proteases recognized for its
anti-inflammatory and host-protective properties. Although loss of serpinB1 in
mice does not result in gross immune deregulation, serpinb1a(-/-) mice display
increased mortality and inflammation-associated morbidity upon challenge with
influenza virus. Here, we show that IL-17A(+) <U+03B3>d and CD4(+) Th17 cells are
already expanded in the lungs of serpinb1a(-/-) mice at steady-state. Both <U+03B3>d and
aß(+) CD4(+) CCR6(+) T cells isolated from the lungs of naive serpinb1a(-/-) mice
displayed a skewed transcriptional profile relative to WT cells, including
increased Th17 signature transcripts [Il17a, l17f, and Rorc (ROR<U+03B3>t)] and
decreased Th1 signature transcripts [Ifng, Cxcr3, and Tbx21 (T-bet)] in <U+03B3>d T
cells. In addition to the lung, IL-17A(+) <U+03B3>d and CD4(+) Th17 cells were increased
in the spleen of naive serpinb1a(-/-) mice, despite normal aß and <U+03B3>d T cell
development in the thymus. Within the <U+03B3>d T cell compartment, loss of serpinb1a
prompted selective expansion of V<U+03B3>4(+) and V<U+03B3>6/Vd1(+) cells, which also displayed
elevated expression of the proliferating cell nuclear antigen, Ki-67, and IL-17A.
Given that serpinb1a is preferentially expressed in WT IL-17A(+) <U+03B3>d and CD4(+)
Th17 cell subsets vis-à-vis other T cell lineages, our findings reveal a novel
function of serpinB1 in limiting untoward expansion of lymphocytes with a Th17
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3923080
PMID: 24249741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Immunol. 2013 Dec 15;191(12):5925-32. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202254. Epub 2013 
Nov 18.

Genome-wide regulatory analysis reveals that T-bet controls Th17 lineage
differentiation through direct suppression of IRF4.

Gökmen MR(1), Dong R, Kanhere A, Powell N, Perucha E, Jackson I, Howard JK,
Hernandez-Fuentes M, Jenner RG, Lord GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Immunobiology, Division of Transplantation
Immunology and Mucosal Biology and Medical Research Council Centre for
Transplantation, Guy's Campus, King's College London, London SE1 9RT, United
Kingdom;

The complex relationship between Th1 and Th17 cells is incompletely understood.
The transcription factor T-bet is best known as the master regulator of Th1
lineage commitment. However, attention is now focused on the repression of
alternate T cell subsets mediated by T-bet, particularly the Th17 lineage. It has
recently been suggested that pathogenic Th17 cells express T-bet and are
dependent on IL-23. However, T-bet has previously been shown to be a negative
regulator of Th17 cells. We have taken an unbiased approach to determine the
functional impact of T-bet on Th17 lineage commitment. Genome-wide analysis of
functional T-bet binding sites provides an improved understanding of the
transcriptional regulation mediated by T-bet, and suggests novel mechanisms by
which T-bet regulates Th cell differentiation. Specifically, we show that T-bet
negatively regulates Th17 lineage commitment via direct repression of the
transcription factor IFN regulatory factor-4 (IRF4). An in vivo analysis of the
pathogenicity of T-bet-deficient T cells demonstrated that mucosal Th17 responses
were augmented in the absence of T-bet, and we have demonstrated that the roles
of T-bet in enforcing Th1 responses and suppressing Th17 responses are separable.
The interplay of the two key transcription factors T-bet and IRF4 during the
determination of T cell fate choice significantly advances our understanding of
the mechanisms underlying the development of pathogenic T cells.

PMCID: PMC3858236
PMID: 24249732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Mar;44(3):887-93. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343841. Epub 2013 Dec
16.

T-bet is a new synergistic meeting point for the BCR and TLR9 signaling cascades.

Kövesdi D(1), Angyal A, Huber K, Szili D, Sármay G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary.

The importance of the BCR and TLR9 in autoimmunity and in the production of
auto-antibodies is well established but the underlying molecular mechanism still 
needs to be determined. Here, we aim to characterize the BCR-TLR9 cross-talk by
its effect on T-bet, as T-bet is activated and regulated by both receptors and
has an important role in class-switching to pathological IgG2a in mice. Using
primary mouse B cells, we demonstrate that T-bet expression is synergistically
elevated by the cross-talk between the BCR and TLR9. To test the effect of this
synergy on IgG2a-switching, the levels of switched B cells were checked by
functional tests. We found that BCR costimulation had no additional effect on
TLR9-induced IgG2a expression, however the expression of Rad51 was
synergistically increased. To check the biological significance of the synergy,
we compared T-bet expression in B cells from healthy and collagen-induced
arthritis mice but no differences were found. Taken together, we demonstrate here
that signaling cascades driven by the BCR and TLR9 have a newly identified
meeting point at T-bet. The two cascades act synergistically on T-bet; however
additional signals may be needed to induce prolonged functional responses such as
class-switch recombination.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24249581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 11;8(11):e74698. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074698.
eCollection 2013.

Inhibition of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cell function and conversion into Th1-like
effectors by a Toll-like receptor-activated dendritic cell vaccine.

Lee MK 4th(1), Xu S, Fitzpatrick EH, Sharma A, Graves HL, Czerniecki BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Harrison Department of Surgical Research, Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Despite the success of vaccines against some microbial pathogens, their utility
in the prevention and treatment of cancer has thus far been limited. We have
previously demonstrated that vaccination with dendritic cells activated with the 
TLR-4 ligand LPS and IFN-<U+03B3> promotes an antigen-specific anti-tumor response that 
prevents tumor recurrence. To evaluate this mechanistically, we here studied the 
effects of this TLR-activated DC on regulatory T cell activity. Dendritic cells
activated with LPS and IFN- <U+03B3> negated the effects of regulatory T cells on
responder cell proliferation. Restoration of responder cell proliferation was
noted when TLR-activated dendritic cells were separated from both regulators and 
responders by a semi-permeable membrane. The effect is therefore mediated by a
soluble factor but was independent of both IL-6 and IL-12. Furthermore, the
soluble mediator appeared to act at least in part on the regulators themselves
rather than responder cells exclusively. Because recent studies have demonstrated
conversion of T regulatory cells into IL-17-producing effectors, we further
questioned whether the TLR-activated dendritic cell would induce cytokine
production and effector function in our system. We found that regulators produced
a substantial amount of IFN- <U+03B3> in the presence of TLR-activated dendritic cells
but not immature dendritic cells. IFN-<U+03B3> production was associated with
upregulation of the Th1 transcriptional regulator T-bet, and a significant
fraction of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing regulators coexpressed T-bet and FoxP3. While the
effects of the LPS-activated dendritic cell on responder cell proliferation were 
IL-12 independent, upregulation of T-bet was inhibited by a neutralizing
anti-IL-12 antibody. Collectively, these and prior data suggest that varying
innate immune signals may direct the phenotype of the immune response in part by 
inhibiting suppressor T cells and promoting differentiation of these regulators
into particular subsets of effectors.

PMCID: PMC3823870
PMID: 24244265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Immunol. 2013 Dec 15;191(12):5973-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301521. Epub 2013 
Nov 15.

Essential functions for ID proteins at multiple checkpoints in invariant NKT cell
development.

Verykokakis M(1), Krishnamoorthy V, Iavarone A, Lasorella A, Sigvardsson M, Kee
BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637;

Invariant NKT (iNKT) cells display characteristics of both adaptive and innate
lymphoid cells (ILCs). Like other ILCs, iNKT cells constitutively express ID
proteins, which antagonize the E protein transcription factors that are essential
for adaptive lymphocyte development. However, unlike ILCs, ID2 is not essential
for thymic iNKT cell development. In this study, we demonstrated that ID2 and ID3
redundantly promoted iNKT cell lineage specification involving the induction of
the signature transcription factor PLZF and that ID3 was critical for development
of TBET-dependent NKT1 cells. In contrast, both ID2 and ID3 limited iNKT cell
numbers by enforcing the postselection checkpoint in conventional thymocytes.
Therefore, iNKT cells show both adaptive and innate-like requirements for ID
proteins at distinct checkpoints during iNKT cell development.

PMCID: PMC3864619
PMID: 24244015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Immunity. 2013 Nov 14;39(5):819-32. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.09.012.

The polycomb protein Ezh2 regulates differentiation and plasticity of CD4(+) T
helper type 1 and type 2 cells.

Tumes DJ(1), Onodera A, Suzuki A, Shinoda K, Endo Y, Iwamura C, Hosokawa H,
Koseki H, Tokoyoda K, Suzuki Y, Motohashi S, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

After antigen encounter by CD4(+) T cells, polarizing cytokines induce the
expression of master regulators that control differentiation. Inactivation of the
histone methyltransferase Ezh2 was found to specifically enhance T helper 1 (Th1)
and Th2 cell differentiation and plasticity. Ezh2 directly bound and facilitated 
correct expression of Tbx21 and Gata3 in differentiating Th1 and Th2 cells,
accompanied by substantial trimethylation at lysine 27 of histone 3 (H3K27me3).
In addition, Ezh2 deficiency resulted in spontaneous generation of discrete IFN-<U+03B3>
and Th2 cytokine-producing populations in nonpolarizing cultures, and under these
conditions IFN-<U+03B3> expression was largely dependent on enhanced expression of the
transcription factor Eomesodermin. In vivo, loss of Ezh2 caused increased
pathology in a model of allergic asthma and resulted in progressive accumulation 
of memory phenotype Th2 cells. This study establishes a functional link between
Ezh2 and transcriptional regulation of lineage-specifying genes in terminally
differentiated CD4(+) T cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24238339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Clin Dev Immunol. 2013;2013:460316. doi: 10.1155/2013/460316. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

The diagnostic value of transcription factors T-bet/GATA3 ratio in predicting
antibody-mediated rejection.

Li X(1), Sun Q, Zhang M, Chen J, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Nephrology, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University
Clinical School of Medicine, 305 East Zhongshan Road, Nanjing 210002, China.

BACKGROUND: Previous data showed that the predominance of intraglomerular T-bet
or GATA3 is correlated with different mechanisms of rejection, suggesting that
the ratio of T-bet/GATA3 might be used to distinguish antibody-mediated rejection
(ABMR) and T-cell-mediated rejection (TCMR).
METHODS: We compared the intraglomerular T-bet/GATA3 ratio in ABMR and TCMR. The 
intragraft expression of T-bet and GATA3 was studied via immunohistochemistry.
The correlation of the diagnosis of AMR with the ratio of T-bet/GATA3 was
examined.
RESULTS: Both intraglomerular T-bet- and GATA3-expressing cells were increased
during acute rejection. T-bet/GATA3>1 was strongly correlated with ABMR (93.3%
versus 18.2%). The incidence of positive HLA-I/II antibodies and glomerulitis is 
significantly higher in T-bet/GATA3>1 group (P < 0.001, 0.013, resp.). The scores
of peritubular capillary inflammation and glomerulitis were also higher in
T-bet/GATA3>1 group (P = 0.052, P < 0.001, resp.). Nevertheless, T-bet/GATA3>1 is
also correlated with C4d-negative ABMR and resistance to steroid treatment.
Compared with C4d deposition, T-bet/GATA3>1 had a slight lower (90% versus 100%) 
specificity but a much higher (87.5% versus 68.8%) sensitivity.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggested that intraglomerular predominance of T-bet over
GATA3 might be used as diagnosis maker of ABMR in addition to C4d, especially in 
C4d-negative cases.

PMCID: PMC3819890
PMID: 24235972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Immunity. 2013 Nov 14;39(5):833-45. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.10.007. Epub 2013 
Nov 7.

Interferon regulatory factor 4 sustains CD8(+) T cell expansion and effector
differentiation.

Yao S(1), Buzo BF, Pham D, Jiang L, Taparowsky EJ, Kaplan MH, Sun J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA; Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2013 Nov 14;39(5):797-9.

Upon infection, CD8(+) T cells undergo a stepwise process of early activation,
expansion, and differentiation into effector cells. How these phases are
transcriptionally regulated is incompletely defined. Here, we report that
interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4), dispensable for early CD8(+) T cell
activation, was vital for sustaining the expansion and effector differentiation
of CD8(+) T cells. Mechanistically, IRF4 promoted the expression and function of 
Blimp1 and T-bet, two transcription factors required for CD8(+) T cell effector
differentiation, and simultaneously repressed genes that mediate cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis. Selective ablation of Irf4 in peripheral CD8(+) T cells
impaired antiviral CD8(+) T cell responses, viral clearance, and CD8(+)
T cell-mediated host recovery from influenza infection. IRF4 expression was
regulated by T cell receptor (TCR) signaling strength via mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR). Our data reveal that IRF4 translates differential strength of
TCR signaling into different quantitative and qualitative CD8(+) T cell
responses.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3855863
PMID: 24211184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 23;8(10):e77184. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077184.
eCollection 2013.

Partial sleep restriction activates immune response-related gene expression
pathways: experimental and epidemiological studies in humans.

Aho V(1), Ollila HM, Rantanen V, Kronholm E, Surakka I, van Leeuwen WM, Lehto M, 
Matikainen S, Ripatti S, Härmä M, Sallinen M, Salomaa V, Jauhiainen M, Alenius H,
Paunio T, Porkka-Heiskanen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland.

Epidemiological studies have shown that short or insufficient sleep is associated
with increased risk for metabolic diseases and mortality. To elucidate mechanisms
behind this connection, we aimed to identify genes and pathways affected by
experimentally induced, partial sleep restriction and to verify their connection 
to insufficient sleep at population level. The experimental design simulated
sleep restriction during a working week: sleep of healthy men (N = 9) was
restricted to 4 h/night for five nights. The control subjects (N = 4) spent 8
h/night in bed. Leukocyte RNA expression was analyzed at baseline, after sleep
restriction, and after recovery using whole genome microarrays complemented with 
pathway and transcription factor analysis. Expression levels of the ten most
up-regulated and ten most down-regulated transcripts were correlated with
subjective assessment of insufficient sleep in a population cohort (N = 472).
Experimental sleep restriction altered the expression of 117 genes. Eight of the 
25 most up-regulated transcripts were related to immune function. Accordingly,
fifteen of the 25 most up-regulated Gene Ontology pathways were also related to
immune function, including those for B cell activation, interleukin 8 production,
and NF-<U+03BA>B signaling (P<0.005). Of the ten most up-regulated genes, expression of 
STX16 correlated negatively with self-reported insufficient sleep in a population
sample, while three other genes showed tendency for positive correlation. Of the 
ten most down-regulated genes, TBX21 and LGR6 correlated negatively and TGFBR3
positively with insufficient sleep. Partial sleep restriction affects the
regulation of signaling pathways related to the immune system. Some of these
changes appear to be long-lasting and may at least partly explain how prolonged
sleep restriction can contribute to inflammation-associated pathological states, 
such as cardiometabolic diseases.

PMCID: PMC3806729
PMID: 24194869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Allergol Int. 2013 Dec;62(4):495-502. doi: 10.2332/allergolint.13-OA-0572. Epub
2013 Oct 25.

Increased CXCL10 expression in nasal fibroblasts from patients with refractory
chronic rhinosinusitis and asthma.

Yoshikawa M(1), Wada K, Yoshimura T, Asaka D, Okada N, Matsumoto K, Moriyama H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is characterized by local inflammation
of the sinonasal tissues. CRS patients with nasal polyps and asthma often develop
acute exacerbation of sinonasal symptoms after upper respiratory tract
infections. However, the influence of concomitant asthma on the nasal immune
response to viral infection remains unclear.
METHODS: Specimens of nasal polyp and mucosal tissues were obtained from 3 groups
of CRS patients (n = 14 per group): 1) patients without asthma (CRS group), 2)
patients with aspirin-tolerant asthma (ATA group), and 3) patients with
aspirin-intolerant asthma (AIA group). Nasal fibroblasts isolated from the
specimens were stimulated with poly I:C. CXCL10 expression was analyzed by the
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and enzyme-linked
immunoadsorbent assay. Biopsy specimens from CRS patients without asthma were
subjected to immunohistochemistry for detection of T-bet and GATA-3 expression in
CD3+ T cells by double labeling.
RESULTS: Nasal fibroblasts from the ATA and AIA groups showed significantly
enhanced expression of CXCL10 mRNA and protein after poly I:C stimulation
compared with cells from the CRS group and the control group (normal nasal
mucosa). In addition to T helper (Th)2 cells, there was more abundant
infiltration of Th1 cells into tissues from the AIA and ATA groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that CRS associated with asthma may become
intractable through the over-production of CXCL10 in response to viral infection.

PMID: 24153332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 11;8(10):e76040. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076040.
eCollection 2013.

IL-17A and IL-2-expanded regulatory T cells cooperate to inhibit Th1-mediated
rejection of MHC II disparate skin grafts.

Vokaer B(1), Charbonnier LM, Lemaître PH, Spilleboudt C, Le Moine A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Immunology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Gosselies,
Belgium.

Several evidences suggest that regulatory T cells (Treg) promote Th17
differentiation. Based on this hypothesis, we tested the effect of IL-17A
neutralization in a model of skin transplantation in which long-term graft
survival depends on a strong in vivo Treg expansion induced by transient
exogenous IL-2 administration. As expected, IL-2 supplementation prevented
rejection of MHC class II disparate skin allografts but, surprisingly, not in
IL-17A-deficient recipients. We attested that IL-17A was not required for
IL-2-mediated Treg expansion, intragraft recruitment or suppressive capacities.
Instead, IL-17A prevented allograft rejection by inhibiting Th1 alloreactivity
independently of Tregs. Indeed, T-bet expression of naive alloreactive CD4+ T
cells and the subsequent Th1 immune response was significantly enhanced in IL-17A
deficient mice. Our results illustrate for the first time a protective role of
IL-17A in CD4+-mediated allograft rejection process.

PMCID: PMC3795694
PMID: 24146810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Exp Med. 2013 Nov 18;210(12):2773-89. doi: 10.1084/jem.20122798. Epub 2013 Oct 
21.

Overexpression of TLR7 promotes cell-intrinsic expansion and autoantibody
production by transitional T1 B cells.

Giltiay NV(1), Chappell CP, Sun X, Kolhatkar N, Teal TH, Wiedeman AE, Kim J,
Tanaka L, Buechler MB, Hamerman JA, Imanishi-Kari T, Clark EA, Elkon KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and 2 Division of Rheumatology, School of Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195.

Toll-like receptor (TLR), a ligand for single-stranded RNA, has been implicated
in the development of pathogenic anti-RNA autoantibodies both in systemic lupus
erythematous (SLE) patients and in murine models of lupus. It is still unclear,
however, where and how TLR7-mediated interactions affect the development of
autoreactive B cells. We found that overexpression of TLR7 in transgenic mice
(TLR7.1Tg) leads to marked alterations of transitional (T1) B cells, associated
with their expansion and proliferation within the splenic red pulp (RP). This
phenotype was intrinsic to the T1 subset of B cells and occurred independently of
type 1 IFN signals. Overexpression of RNase in TLR7.1Tg mice significantly
limited the expansion and proliferation of T1 cells, indicating that endogenous
RNA complexes are driving their activation. TLR7.1Tg T1 cells were
hyper-responsive to anti-IgM and TLR7 ligand stimulation in vitro and produced
high concentrations of class-switched IgG2b and IgG2c, including anti-RNA
antibodies. Our results demonstrate that initial TLR7 stimulation of B cells
occurs at the T1 stage of differentiation in the splenic RP and suggest that
dysregulation of TLR7 expression in T1 cells can result in production of
autoantibodies.

PMCID: PMC3832927
PMID: 24145511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Biol Chem. 2013 Dec 6;288(49):35170-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.481440. Epub 2013 
Oct 21.

Ikaros sets the potential for Th17 lineage gene expression through effects on
chromatin state in early T cell development.

Wong LY(1), Hatfield JK, Brown MA.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611.

Th17 cells are important effectors of immunity to extracellular pathogens,
particularly at mucosal surfaces, but they can also contribute to pathologic
tissue inflammation and autoimmunity. Defining the multitude of factors that
influence their development is therefore of paramount importance. Our previous
studies using Ikaros(-/-) CD4+ T cells implicated Ikaros in Th1 versus Th2
lineage decisions. Here we demonstrate that Ikaros also regulates Th17
differentiation through its ability to promote expression of multiple Th17
lineage-determining genes, including Ahr, Runx1, Rorc, Il17a, and Il22. Ikaros
exerts its influence on the chromatin remodeling of these loci at two distinct
stages in CD4+ T helper cell development. In naive cells, Ikaros is required to
limit repressive chromatin modifications at these gene loci, thus maintaining the
potential for expression of the Th17 gene program. Subsequently, Ikaros is
essential for the acquisition of permissive histone marks in response to Th17
polarizing signals. Additionally, Ikaros represses the expression of genes that
limit Th17 development, including Foxp3 and Tbx21. These data define new targets 
of the action of Ikaros and indicate that Ikaros plays a critical role in CD4+ T 
cell differentiation by integrating specific cytokine cues and directing
epigenetic modifications that facilitate activation or repression of relevant
genes that drive T cell lineage choice.

PMCID: PMC3853268
PMID: 24145030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Nov;43(11):2810-3. doi: 10.1002/eji.201344109. Epub 2013 Oct 
21.

T-bet or not T-bet: taking the last bow on the autoimmunity stage.

Spath S(1), Becher B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Immunology, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.

Comment on
    Eur J Immunol. 2013 Nov;43(11):2818-23.
    Eur J Immunol. 2013 Nov;43(11):2824-31.

The search for the encephalitogenic factor driving pathogenic T cells in
autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis (MS), and
psoriasis has proven to be a long and difficult mission, which is not yet
completed. In this issue of the European Journal of Immunology, the importance of
the transcription factor T-bet, previously shown to be essential for the
induction of autoimmune disease in mice, is challenged. Two independent groups,
O'Connor et al. [Eur. J. Immunol. 2013. 43:2818-2823] report] and Grifka-Walk et 
al. [Eur. J. Immunol. 2013. 43:2824-2831], report that T-bet is not mandatory for
T cells to cause experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), which serves as
a paradigmatic T-cell-mediated autoimmune disease. Both groups found that T-bet
KO mice were fully susceptible to develop EAE, both after immunization with
self-antigen and after adoptive transfer of IL-23-polarized autoaggressive T
cells. T-bet deficiency mediated the loss of IFN-<U+03B3> expression but retained or
even enhanced GM-CSF and IL-17 production by central nervous system
(CNS)-infiltrating T cells. These findings indicate that we have lost the last
transcriptional regulator previously held to be required for the generation of
autoimmune pathogenic T cells.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24142468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Blood. 2013 Dec 12;122(25):4119-28. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-05-505180. Epub 2013 
Oct 18.

The histone methyltransferase Ezh2 is a crucial epigenetic regulator of
allogeneic T-cell responses mediating graft-versus-host disease.

He S(1), Xie F, Liu Y, Tong Q, Mochizuki K, Lapinski PE, Mani RS, Reddy P,
Mochizuki I, Chinnaiyan AM, Mineishi S, King PD, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine.

Posttranscriptional modification of histones by methylation plays an important
role in regulating Ag-driven T-cell responses. We have recently drawn
correlations between allogeneic T-cell responses and the histone
methyltransferase Ezh2, which catalyzes histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation. The 
functional relevance of Ezh2 in T-cell alloimmunity remains unclear. Here, we
identify a central role of Ezh2 in regulating allogeneic T-cell proliferation,
differentiation, and function. Conditional loss of Ezh2 in donor T cells
inhibited graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) in mice after allogeneic bone marrow
(BM) transplantation. Although Ezh2-deficient T cells were initially activated to
proliferate upon alloantigenic priming, their ability to undergo continual
proliferation and expansion was defective during late stages of GVHD induction.
This effect of Ezh2 ablation was largely independent of the proapoptotic molecule
Bim. Unexpectedly, as a gene silencer, Ezh2 was required to promote the
expression of transcription factors Tbx21 and Stat4. Loss of Ezh2 in T cells
specifically impaired their differentiation into interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>-producing
effector cells. However, Ezh2 ablation retained antileukemia activity in
alloreactive T cells, leading to improved overall survival of the recipients. Our
findings justify investigation of modulating Ezh2 as a therapeutic strategy for
the treatment of GVHD and other T cell-mediated inflammatory disorders.

PMCID: PMC3862282
PMID: 24141370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Ethnopharmacol. 2013 Dec 12;150(3):907-17. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.09.033. Epub
2013 Oct 17.

Shenghua Decoction reduces uterine bleeding and regulates T-cell paradigm in
human deciduas of RU486 medical abortion.

Li X(1), Zhang M, Wang B, Li Y, Wang L, Zhao X, Zhou X, Guo Y, Jiang G, Yao C.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Tumor Immunology and Traditional Chinese Medicine
Immunology, Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences,
18877 Jingshi Road, Jinan 250062, China; Key Laboratory for Rare & Uncommon
Disease, Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, 18877
Jingshi Road, Jinan 250062, China; Key Laboratory of Biotechnology Drugs of the
Ministry of Public Health, Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of
Medical Sciences, 18877 Jingshi Road, Jinan 250062, China; Laboratory for
Immunopharmacology of State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, 18877 Jingshi 
Road, Jinan 250062, China.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Excessive uterine bleeding is the most common and
problematic side effect of RU486 medical abortion. Shenghua Decoction (SHD) is a 
well-known traditional Chinese herbal prescription for reducing uterine bleeding 
induced by RU486 medical abortion. However, its therapeutic mechanism still
remains unclear. The Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm plays an important role in
achieving maternal-fetal immunotolerance and its bias participates in
RU486-induced abortion. Our previous research on mice demonstrated that the
uterine bleeding volume is negatively related to the proportions of Th1 and Th17 
cells whereas positively related to the proportions of Th2 and Treg cells.
Additionally, Th1-type cytokine inducing effect was identified in our previous
study. Therefore, it was hypothesized that SHD reduced the uterine bleeding in
RU486 medical abortion by inducing Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm bias. The purpose
of this study was to determine the regulatory effect and the mechanism of SHD on 
human decidual Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm for alleviating uterine bleeding in
RU486 medical abortion.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 90 women within seven weeks of a normal intrauterine
pregnancy, who elected for termination of pregnancy, were divided into three
groups; vacuum aspiration group, RU486 group, and SHD-RU486 group. Duration of
uterine bleeding was recorded and volume of uterine bleeding was measured by the 
method of alkaline hematin photometric. To determine the regulatory effect of SHD
on Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm, the proportions of Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg cells in the 
decidua of different groups were analyzed using a FACS calibur. Correlation was
analyzed in order to demonstrate the relationship between the Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg
paradigm and the uterine bleeding in RU486 medical abortion. Moreover, to
elucidate the mechanism underlying the T-cell paradigm regulating of SHD, the
mRNA and protein expressions of subset-specific transcription factors (T-bet,
GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>t, and Foxp3) for the differentiation of Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm
in human decidual CD4(+) T cells were detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay and western blot analysis 
respectively. Moreover, the mRNA expression of the characteristic cytokines of
Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm (IFN<U+03B3>, IL-4, IL-17A, TGF-ß) were analyzed by RT-PCR
assay.
RESULT: Compared with RU486 group, both the uterine bleeding volume and duration 
reduced significantly in SHD-RU486 group. Both the duration and the volume of the
uterine bleeding demonstrated negative correlation with the proportions of Th1
and Th17 cells, whereas showed positive correlation with Th2 and Treg cells. SHD 
increased the proportions of Th1 and Th17 cells whereas decreased those of Th2
and Treg cells. Thus, the ratios of Th1/Th2 and Th17/Treg cells elevated markedly
after SHD treatment. SHD promoted the mRNA as well as the protein expressions of 
subset-specific transcription factors for the differentiation of Th1 and Th17
subsets (T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t) while inhibited those of Th2 and Treg cells (GATA-3 and
Foxp3). Moreover, the mRNA expression of Th1- and Th17- type cytokines (IFN<U+03B3> and 
IL-17A) was up-regulated while that of Th2-type and Treg-produced cytokines (IL-4
and TGF-ß) was down-regulated significantly after SHD administration.
CONCLUSION: Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm bias was involved in RU486 medical
abortion. SHD reduced the uterine bleeding efficiently by inducing Th1 and Th17
skews in the maternal-fetal of RU486 medical abortion patients. The regulatory
effect of SHD on Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg paradigm in RU486 medical abortion is
attributed to the modulation of transcription and protein expression of
subset-specific transcription factors for T-cell subsets differentiation and
their characteristic cytokines.

© 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jun 11;93(22):1696-9.

[Study on the dendritic cell subsets in peripheral blood and its relationship
with the expressions of Gata-3 and T-bet in lymphocytes of patients with immune
thrombocytopenia].

[Article in Chinese]

Li R(1), Qu W, Fu R, Wang GJ, Wang XM, Wang HQ, Li LJ, Liu H, Wu YH, Xing LM,
Guan J, Liu H, Shao ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, General Hospital, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin 300052, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the relationship between the dendritic cell (DC) subsets
and abnormal expression of transcription factors Gata-3 and T-bet in patients
with immune thrombocytopenia (ITP).
METHODS: The plasmacytoid DC (pDC) and myeloid DC (mDC) of 33 ITP (16 untreated, 
17 remitted) patients and 12 healthy controls were analyzed by flow cytometry
(FCM) . The expressions of Gata-3 mRNA and T-bet mRNA in peripheral blood
mononuclear cell (PBMNC) were detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) .The levels of interleukin-4 (IL-4) and interferon-gamma
(IFN-<U+03B3>) were measured by FCM in 33 ITP patients and 12 healthy controls.
RESULTS: The percentage of pDC in PBMNC was 0.49% ± 0.18% in untreated and it was
higher than that in remitted ITP patients (0.27% ± 0.17%) and in controls (0.32% 
± 0.13%) (both P < 0.05). The percentage of mDC in PBMNC was 0.23% ± 0.17% in
untreated, which was lower than that in remitted ITP patients (0.33% ± 0.18)% and
in controls (0.31% ± 0.11%), but no statistic difference in mDC expression
existed among 3 groups (P > 0.05). pDC/mDC ratios was (3.15 ± 2.01) in untreated 
ITP patients and it was higher than that in remitted ITP patients (0.81 ± 0.32)
and in controls (1.07 ± 0.44) (both P < 0.05). The relative mRNA expression
levels of Gata-3 were 2775 ± 489, 1357 ± 307 and 652 ± 165 respectively. And the 
expression of Gata-3mRNA in untreated group was higher than that in remission
group or healthy controls (both P < 0.05). The relative mRNA expression levels of
T-bet were 782 ± 394, 583 ± 176 and 576 ± 120. No statistic difference in T-bet
expression existed among 3 groups (P > 0.05). Gata-3mRNA/T-bet mRNA ratio was
(4.13 ± 1.69 ) in untreated group and it was higher than that of remission group 
(2.45 ± 0.69) or controls (1.15 ± 0.27) (both P < 0.05). The level of IL-4 in the
untreated group was 9.14% ± 4.34% and it was higher than that of remission group 
(4.78% ± 1.69%) or controls (4.86% ± 1.41%). The level of IFN-<U+03B3> in the untreated 
group was lower than that of controls (P < 0.05). Significant positive
correlations existed between Gata-3 and pDC/mDC ratio (r = 0.585, P < 0.01).
Significant positive correlations existed between Gata-3 and IL-4 ( r = 0.463, P 
< 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The mechanism of ITP may be due to a disorder of DC subsets and a
high expression of Gata-3.

PMID: 24124674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 4;8(10):e76495. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076495. eCollection
2013.

Astragaloside IV attenuates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis of mice by 
counteracting oxidative stress at multiple levels.

He Y(1), Du M, Gao Y, Liu H, Wang H, Wu X, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Complex Prescription, Institute of Chinese Materia 
Medica, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, P.R. China
; Department of Pharmacognosy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, P.R.
China.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic autoimmune neuroinflammatory disease found
mostly in young adults in the western world. Oxidative stress induced neuronal
apoptosis plays an important role in the pathogenesis of MS. In current study,
astragaloside IV (ASI), a natural saponin molecule isolated from Astragalus
membranceus, given at 20 mg/kg daily attenuated the severity of experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in mice significantly. Further studies
disclosed that ASI treatment inhibited the increase of ROS and pro-inflammatory
cytokine levels, down-regulation of SOD and GSH-Px activities, and elevation of
iNOS, p53 and phosphorylated tau in central nervous system (CNS) as well as the
leakage of BBB of EAE mice. Meanwhile, the decreased ratio of Bcl-2/Bax was
reversed by ASI. Moreover, ASI regulated T-cell differentiation and infiltration 
into CNS. In neuroblast SH-SY5Y cells, ASI dose-dependently reduced cellular ROS 
level and phosphorylation of tau in response to hydrogen peroxide challenge by
modulation of Bcl-2/Bax ratio. ASI also inhibited activation of microglia both in
vivo and in vitro. iNOS up-regulation induced by IFN<U+03B3> stimulation was abolished
by ASI dose-dependently in BV-2 cells. In summary, ASI prevented the severity of 
EAE progression possibly by counterbalancing oxidative stress and its effects via
reduction of cellular ROS level, enhancement of antioxidant defense system,
increase of anti-apoptotic and anti-inflammatory pathways, as well as modulation 
of T-cell differentiation and infiltration into CNS. The study suggested ASI may 
be effective for clinical therapy/prevention of MS.

PMCID: PMC3790693
PMID: 24124567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 4;8(10):e74946. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074946. eCollection
2013.

Characterization of transcription factor phenotypes within antigen-specific CD4+ 
T cells using qualitative multiplex single-cell RT-PCR.

Phetsouphanh C(1), Xu Y, Amin J, Seddiki N, Procopio F, Sekaly RP, Zaunders JJ,
Kelleher AD.

Author information: 
(1)Kirby Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia ; Centre for
Applied Medical Research, St Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

Current research on antigen specific CD4+ T cells indicates that there is
functional and phenotypic heterogeneity within these populations, but the extent 
of this heterogeneity is poorly described. The CD134/CD25 assay allows live
isolation of antigen specific cells in vitro for down-stream molecular analysis. 
Antigen specific CD4+ T cells were examined at the molecular level by lineage
specific transcription factor profiling using qualitative multiplex single cell
RT-PCR and Lock Nucleic Acid (LNA) probes allowed unbiased amplification and
delineation of expression of Tbx21, Gata3, Rorc, Foxp3 and Bcl-6. It overcomes
the limitations of previous assays by allowing identification of transcription
factor mRNA in single antigen specific cells with high sensitivity (down to 10
femtograms) and specificity. Patterns of responses can be robustly characterized 
using <200 cells based on exact binomial calculations. These results are
reproducible with a CV of 6%. The patterns of heterogeneity are stable within an
individual antigen specific response but vary between responses to different
antigens. Responses to CMV have a Th1 predominant profile (35.6% of responding
cells expressing tbx21) whereas responses to Tetanus Toxoid have a Th2 biased
profile (22% of responding cells expressing gata3), with unexpectedly high levels
of Treg cells found in both populations. Here we describe a methodology that
allows live isolation of Ag specific cells and transcription factor profiling at 
a single cell level to robustly delineate the different CD4+ T cell subsets
within this population. This novel method is a powerful tool that can be used to 
study CD4+ T cell heterogeneity within extremely small populations of cells and
where cell numbers are limited.

PMCID: PMC3790772
PMID: 24124462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Immunol. 2013 Nov 15;191(10):5065-73. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301546. Epub 2013 
Oct 11.

Increased level of E protein activity during invariant NKT development promotes
differentiation of invariant NKT2 and invariant NKT17 subsets.

Hu T(1), Wang H, Simmons A, Bajaña S, Zhao Y, Kovats S, Sun XH, Alberola-Ila J.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104.

E protein transcription factors and their natural inhibitors, Id proteins, play
critical and complex roles during lymphoid development. In this article, we
report that partial maintenance of E protein activity during positive selection
results in a change in the cell fate determination of developing iNKT cells, with
a block in the development of iNKT1 cells and a parallel increase in the iNKT2
and iNKT17 subsets. Because the expression levels of the transcription factors
that drive these alternative functional fates (GATA-3, ROR<U+03B3>T, T-bet, and Runx-3) 
are not altered, our results suggest that E protein activity controls a novel
checkpoint that regulates the number of iNKT precursors that choose each fate.

PMCID: PMC3832958
PMID: 24123679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;45(12):2808-20. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.09.016. Epub 2013 Oct 9.

CD46: the 'multitasker' of complement proteins.

Yamamoto H(1), Fara AF, Dasgupta P, Kemper C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Transplant Immunology and Mucosal Biology, MRC Centre for
Transplantation, King's College London, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK; The
Urology Centre, Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundations Trust, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Complement is undeniably quintessential for innate immunity by detecting and
eliminating infectious microorganisms. Recent work, however, highlights an
equally profound impact of complement on the induction and regulation of a wide
range of immune cells. In particular, the complement regulator CD46 emerges as a 
key sensor of immune activation and a vital modulator of adaptive immunity. In
this review, we summarize the current knowledge of CD46-mediated signalling
events and their functional consequences on immune-competent cells with a
specific focus on those in CD4(+) T cells. We will also discuss the promises and 
challenges that potential therapeutic modulation of CD46 may hold and pose.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Dec;35(6):1891-8. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.09.020.
Epub 2013 Oct 9.

The biofunction of orange-spotted grouper (Epinephelus coioides) CC chemokine
ligand 4 (CCL4) in innate and adaptive immunity.

Hsu YJ(1), Hou CY, Lin SJ, Kuo WC, Lin HT, Lin JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, College of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National 
Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan.

CC chemokine (motif) ligand 4 (CCL4) is indispensable to the chemoattraction of
macrophages, natural killer cells, and lymphocytes in mammals; however, it has
only been cloned in a limited number of fish species and information related to
its biofunction remains ambiguous with regard to teleosts. To explore the role of
teleost CCL4, we first evaluated the mRNA expression of the Epinephelus coioides 
CCL4 (gCCL4) gene in various organs under LPS and poly (I:C) stimulated;
secondary, we evaluated the immune-related genes expression of fish under the
recombinant gCCL4 protein stimulated. Our results revealed an increase in the
mRNA of gCCL4 in immune organs immediately following stimulation by poly (I:C);
however, in LPS stimulated fish, the expression did not increase until nearly 24 
h after induction. In biofunction assays, recombinant gCCL4 was found to induce
chemotactic activity in the peripheral blood leukocytes of groupers and
up-regulate the gene expressions of grouper TNFA1 (TNF-a1), TNFA2 (TNF-a2), IFNG 
(IFN-<U+03B3>), MX, TBX21 (T-bet), CD8 (a and ß chain). These findings indicate that
grouper CCL4 attracts leukocytes, induces an inflammatory response, and drives
lymphocyte differentiation into the Th1 pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Clin Periodontol. 2014 Jan;41(1):19-30. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.12176. Epub 2013 Nov 
5.

Distinct human T-lymphocyte responses triggered by Porphyromonas gingivalis
capsular serotypes.

Vernal R(1), Diaz-Guerra E, Silva A, Sanz M, Garcia-Sanz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Centro de Investigaciones
Biológicas (CIB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain; Periodontal Biology Laboratory, Department 
of Conservative Dentistry, Dental School, Universidad de Chile, Santiago de
Chile, Chile.

AIM: Porphyromonas gingivalis can synthesize an extracellular capsule and
different serotypes have been described based on capsular antigenicity. On
dendritic cells (DCs), the type of capsule present plays a role on the strength
of the developed immune response. This study aimed to investigate the
T-lymphocyte responses when stimulated with autologous mature DCs exposed to
different P. gingivalis K-serotypes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Naïve CD4(+) T-lymphocytes were obtained from healthy
subjects and stimulated with autologous DCs primed with increasing multiplicity
of infections of the different P. gingivalis K-serotypes. The Th1, Th2, Th17 and 
T-regulatory cytokines and transcription factor levels were quantified.
RESULTS: Distinct types of response were detected when T-lymphocytes were
stimulated by DCs primed with the different P. gingivalis K-serotypes.
T-lymphocytes stimulated by K1 or K2-primed DCs elicited higher levels of Th1 and
Th17-associated cytokines, T-bet and RORC2 than T-lymphocytes stimulated with DCs
primed with the other serotypes. Conversely, the serotypes K3-K5 induced higher
levels of Th2-associated cytokines and GATA-3 than the others.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that DCs primed with the different P.
gingivalis K-serotypes elicited distinct T-cell responses. Strains K1 (W83) and
K2 (HG184) induced a Th1/Th17 pattern of immune response and K3 (A7A1-28), K4
(ATCC(®49417) ), and K5 (HG1690) a Th2 response.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24117627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 Nov;13(11):777-89. doi: 10.1038/nri3536. Epub 2013 Oct 11.

T-bet: a bridge between innate and adaptive immunity.

Lazarevic V(1), Glimcher LH, Lord GM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Originally described over a decade ago as a T cell transcription factor
regulating T helper 1 cell lineage commitment, T-bet is now recognized as having 
an important role in many cells of the adaptive and innate immune system. T-bet
has a fundamental role in coordinating type 1 immune responses by controlling a
network of genetic programmes that regulate the development of certain immune
cells and the effector functions of others. Many of these transcriptional
networks are conserved across innate and adaptive immune cells and these shared
mechanisms highlight the biological functions that are regulated by T-bet.

PMID: 24113868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Sci Rep. 2013 Oct 10;3:2915. doi: 10.1038/srep02915.

Asthma treatment outcome in adults is associated with rs9910408 in TBX21 gene.

Lopert A(1), Rijavec M, Zavbi M, Koroec P, Flear M.

Author information: 
(1)Outpatient practice for pulmonary diseases and allergy, Murska Sobota,
Slovenia.

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are one of the most commonly used asthma therapies 
and have highly variable treatment success. Polymorphisms in TBX21, a gene
important for the biological action of corticosteroids, could be associated with 
treatment response in asthmatics. We genotyped for rs9910408 in TBX21 in 208
adult asthmatic patients, treated at least 3 years with ICS. Polymorphism
rs9910408 was associated with response to ICS treatment. When treatment success
was assessed by a decrease in bronchial hyperresponsiveness (BHR), the frequency 
of AA genotype was significantly higher in good responders (P = 0.049). This
genotype related response was even more evident in the subgroups of non-smokers
(P = 0.008) and in non-atopic patients (P = 0.009). AA genotype was
overrepresented among good responders according to changes in FEV1 in the
subgroups of non-smokers (P = 0.013) and in non-atopic patients (P = 0.048). Our 
results showed that treatment response to ICS, assessed as changes in BHR and
FEV1, is associated with TBX21.

PMCID: PMC3794369
PMID: 24107858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 1;8(10):e75983. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075983. eCollection
2013.

Innate immune response of alveolar macrophage to house dust mite allergen is
mediated through TLR2/-4 co-activation.

Liu CF(1), Drocourt D, Puzo G, Wang JY, Riviere M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut de Pharmacologie et de 
Biologie Structurale, Toulouse, France ; Université de Toulouse, Université Paul 
Sabatier, Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, Toulouse, France 
; Institutes of Basic Medicine, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.

House dust mite, Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (Der p), is one of the major
allergens responsible for allergic asthma. However, the putative receptors
involved in the signalization of Der p to the innate immune cells are still
poorly defined as well as the impact of their activation on the outcome of the
allergen-induced cell response. We previously reported that the HDM activation of
mouse alveolar macrophages (AM) involves the TLR4/CD14 cell surface receptor
complex. Here using a TLR ligand screening essay, we demonstrate that HDM protein
extract engages the TLR2, in addition to the TLR4, in engineered TLR-transfected 
HEK cells but also in the MH-S mouse alveolar macrophage cell line model.
Moreover we found that the concomitant recruitment of the MH-S cell's TLR2 and
TLR4 receptors by the HDM extract activates the MyD88-dependent signaling pathway
and leads to the secretion of the NF-<U+03BA>B regulated pro-inflammatory factors NO and
TNF-a. However unlike with the canonical TLR4 ligand (i.e. the bacterial LPS)
mobilization of TLR4 by the HDM extract induces a reduced production of the IL-12
pro-inflammatory cytokine and fails to trigger the expression of the T-bet
transcription factor. Finally we demonstrated that HDM extract down-regulates LPS
induced IL-12 and T-bet expression through a TLR2 dependent mechanism. Therefore,
we propose that the simultaneous engagement of the TLR2 and TLR4 receptors by the
HDM extract results in a cross regulated original activation pattern of the AM
which may contribute to the Th2 polarization of the allergen-induced immune
response. The deciphering of these cross-regulation networks is of prime
importance to open the way for original therapeutic strategies taking advantage
of these receptors and their associated signaling pathways to treat allergic
asthma.

PMCID: PMC3787959
PMID: 24098413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Nat Immunol. 2013 Nov;14(11):1146-54. doi: 10.1038/ni.2731. Epub 2013 Oct 6.

Steady-state production of IL-4 modulates immunity in mouse strains and is
determined by lineage diversity of iNKT cells.

Lee YJ(1), Holzapfel KL, Zhu J, Jameson SC, Hogquist KA.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Center for Immunology,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Mar;15(3):305.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Nov;14(11):1110-1.

Invariant natural killer T cells (iNKT cells) can produce copious amounts of
interleukin 4 (IL-4) early during infection. However, indirect evidence suggests 
they may produce this immunomodulatory cytokine in the steady state. Through
intracellular staining for transcription factors, we have defined three subsets
of iNKT cells (NKT1, NKT2 and NKT17) that produced distinct cytokines; these
represented diverse lineages and not developmental stages, as previously thought.
These subsets exhibited substantial interstrain variation in numbers. In several 
mouse strains, including BALB/c, NKT2 cells were abundant and were stimulated by 
self ligands to produce IL-4. In those strains, steady-state IL-4 conditioned
CD8(+) T cells to become 'memory-like', increased serum concentrations of
immunoglobulin E (IgE) and caused dendritic cells to produce chemokines. Thus,
iNKT cell-derived IL-4 altered immunological properties under normal steady-state
conditions.

PMCID: PMC3824254
PMID: 24097110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Immunol. 2013 Nov 15;191(10):5085-96. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301730. Epub 2013 
Oct 2.

Coadministration of polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid and immunostimulatory
complexes modifies antigen processing in dendritic cell subsets and enhances HIV 
gag-specific T cell immunity.

Quinn KM(1), Yamamoto A, Costa A, Darrah PA, Lindsay RW, Hegde ST, Johnson TR,
Flynn BJ, Loré K, Seder RA.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Currently approved adjuvants induce protective Ab responses but are more limited 
for generating cellular immunity. In this study, we assessed the effect of
combining two adjuvants with distinct mechanisms of action on their ability to
prime T cells: the TLR3 ligand, polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly I:C), and
immunostimulatory complexes (ISCOMs). Each adjuvant was administered alone or
together with HIV Gag protein (Gag), and the magnitude, quality, and phenotype of
Gag-specific T cell responses were assessed. For CD8 T cells, all adjuvants
induced a comparable response magnitude, but combining poly I:C with ISCOMs
induced a high frequency of CD127(+), IL-2-producing cells with decreased
expression of Tbet compared with either adjuvant alone. For CD4 T cells,
combining poly I:C and ISCOMs increased the frequency of multifunctional cells,
producing IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-2, and TNF, and the total magnitude of the response compared 
with either adjuvant alone. CD8 or CD4 T cell responses induced by both adjuvants
mediated protection against Gag-expressing Listeria monocytogenes or vaccinia
viral infections. Poly I:C and ISCOMs can alter Ag uptake and/or processing, and 
we therefore used fluorescently labeled HIV Gag and DQ-OVA to assess these
mechanisms, respectively, in multiple dendritic cell subsets. Poly I:C promoted
uptake and retention of Ag, whereas ISCOMs enhanced Ag degradation. Combining
poly I:C and ISCOMs caused substantial death of dendritic cells but persistence
of degraded Ag. These data illustrate how combining adjuvants, such as poly I:C
and ISCOMs, that modulate Ag processing and have potent innate activity, can
enhance the magnitude, quality, and phenotype of T cell immunity.

PMCID: PMC4100557
PMID: 24089189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Immunol. 2013 Nov 1;191(9):4699-708. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300396. Epub 2013
Sep 27.

The transcription factor T-bet regulates parasitemia and promotes pathogenesis
during Plasmodium berghei ANKA murine malaria.

Oakley MS(1), Sahu BR, Lotspeich-Cole L, Solanki NR, Majam V, Pham PT, Banerjee
R, Kozakai Y, Derrick SC, Kumar S, Morris SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bacterial, Parasitic, and Allergenic Products, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, Rockville, MD 20852.

The pathogenesis of experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) is an immunologic
process, mediated in part by Th1 CD4(+) T cells. However, the role of the Th1
CD4(+) T cell differentiation program on the ability to control parasitemia and
susceptibility to ECM disease during blood stage malaria has never been assessed 
directly. Using the Plasmodium berghei ANKA murine model of ECM and mice
deficient for the transcription factor T-bet (the master regulator of Th1 cells) 
on the susceptible C57BL/6 background, we demonstrate that although T-bet plays a
role in the regulation of parasite burden, it also promotes the pathogenesis of
ECM. T-bet-deficient (Tbx21(-/-)) mice had higher parasitemia than wild type
controls did during the ECM phase of disease (17.7 ± 3.1% versus 10.9 ± 1.5%). In
addition, although 100% (10/10) of wild type mice developed ECM by day 9 after
infection, only 30% (3/10) of Tbx21(-/-) mice succumbed to disease during the
cerebral phase of infection. Resistance to ECM in Tbx21(-/-) mice was associated 
with diminished numbers of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing CD4(+) T cells in the spleen and a
lower accumulation of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells in the brain. An augmented Th2
immune response characterized by enhanced production of activated GATA-3(+)
CD4(+) T cells and elevated levels of the eotaxin, MCP-1, and G-CSF cytokines was
observed in the absence of T-bet. Our results suggest that in virulent malarias, 
immune modulation or therapy resulting in an early shift toward a Th2 response
may help to ameliorate the most severe consequences of malaria immunopathogenesis
and the prospect of host survival.

PMID: 24078698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 20;8(9):e75148. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075148. eCollection
2013.

Alterations in regulatory T cells induced by specific oligosaccharides improve
vaccine responsiveness in mice.

Schijf MA(1), Kerperien J, Bastiaans J, Szklany K, Meerding J, Hofman G, Boon L, 
van Wijk F, Garssen J, Van't Land B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Immunology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands ; Department of Immunology,
Nutricia Research, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Prophylactic vaccinations are generally performed to protect naïve individuals
with or without suppressed immune responsiveness. In a mouse model for Influenza 
vaccinations the specific alterations of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T-cells
(Tregs) in the immune modulation induced by orally supplied oligosaccharides
containing scGOS/lcFOS/pAOS was assessed. This dietary intervention increased
vaccine specific DTH responses. In addition, a significant increased percentage
of T-bet(+) (Th1) activated CD69(+)CD4(+) T cells (p<0.001) and reduced
percentage of Gata-3(+) (Th2) activated CD69(+)CD4(+)T cells (p<0.001) was
detected in the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) of mice receiving scGOS/lcFOS/pAOS
compared to control mice. Although no difference in the number or percentage of
Tregs (CD4(+)Foxp3(+)) could be determined after scGOS/lcFOS/pAOS intervention,
the percentage of CXCR3 (+) /T-bet(+) (Th1-Tregs) was significantly reduced
(p<0.05) in mice receiving scGOS/lcFOS/pAOS as compared to mice receiving placebo
diets. Moreover, although no absolute difference in suppressive capacity could be
detected, an alteration in cytokine profile suggests a regulatory T cell shift
towards a reducing Th1 suppression profile, supporting an improved vaccination
response.IN CONCLUSION: These data are indicative for improved vaccine
responsiveness due to reduced Th1 suppressive capacity in the Treg population of 
mice fed the oligosaccharide specific diet, showing compartmentalization within
the Treg population. The modulation of Tregs to control immune responses provides
an additional arm of intervention using alternative strategies possibly leading
to the development of improved vaccines.

PMCID: PMC3779252
PMID: 24073243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4440-6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301741. Epub 2013
Sep 20.

Double deficiency for ROR<U+03B3>t and T-bet drives Th2-mediated allograft rejection in 
mice.

Sabet-Baktach M(1), Eggenhofer E, Rovira J, Renner P, Lantow M, Farkas SA,
Malaisé M, Edtinger K, Shaotang Z, Koehl GE, Dahlke MH, Schlitt HJ, Geissler EK, 
Kroemer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, University of
Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.

Although Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells are thought to be major effector cells in
adaptive alloimmune responses, their respective contribution to allograft
rejection remains unclear. To precisely address this, we used mice genetically
modified for the Th1 and Th17 hallmark transcription factors T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t,
respectively, which allowed us to study the alloreactive role of each subset in
an experimental transplant setting. We found that in a fully mismatched
heterotopic mouse heart transplantation model, T cells deficient for T-bet (prone
to Th17 differentiation) versus ROR<U+03B3>t (prone to Th1 differentiation) rejected
allografts at a more accelerated rate, indicating a predominance of Th17- over
Th1-driven alloimmunity. Importantly, T cells doubly deficient for both T-bet and
ROR<U+03B3>t differentiated into alloreactive GATA-3-expressing Th2 cells, which
promptly induced allograft rejection characterized by a Th2-type intragraft
expression profile and eosinophilic infiltration. Mechanistically, Th2-mediated
allograft rejection was contingent on IL-4, as its neutralization significantly
prolonged allograft survival by reducing intragraft expression of Th2 effector
molecules and eosinophilic allograft infiltration. Moreover, under IL-4
neutralizing conditions, alloreactive double-deficient T cells upregulated
Eomesodermin (Eomes) and IFN-<U+03B3>, but not GATA-3. Thus, in the absence of T-bet and
ROR<U+03B3>t, Eomes may salvage Th1-mediated alloimmunity that underlies IL-4
neutralization-resistant allograft rejection. We summarize that, whereas Th17
cells predictably promote allograft rejection, IL-4-producing GATA-3(+) Th2
cells, which are generally thought to protect allogeneic transplants, may
actually be potent facilitators of organ transplant rejection in the absence of
T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t. Moreover, Eomes may rescue Th1-mediated allograft rejection in
the absence of IL-4, T-bet, and ROR<U+03B3>t.

PMID: 24058178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Nat Immunol. 2013 Nov;14(11):1190-8. doi: 10.1038/ni.2712. Epub 2013 Sep 22.

Expression and regulation of intergenic long noncoding RNAs during T cell
development and differentiation.

Hu G(1), Tang Q, Sharma S, Yu F, Escobar TM, Muljo SA, Zhu J, Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)1] Systems Biology Center, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. [2].

Although intergenic long noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) have been linked to gene
regulation in various tissues, little is known about lincRNA transcriptomes in
the T cell lineages. Here we identified 1,524 lincRNA clusters in 42 T cell
samples, from early T cell progenitors to terminally differentiated helper T cell
subsets. Our analysis revealed highly dynamic and cell-specific expression
patterns for lincRNAs during T cell differentiation. These lincRNAs were located 
in genomic regions enriched for genes that encode proteins with immunoregulatory 
functions. Many were bound and regulated by the key transcription factors T-bet, 
GATA-3, STAT4 and STAT6. We found that the lincRNA LincR-Ccr2-5'AS, together with
GATA-3, was an essential component of a regulatory circuit in gene expression
specific to the TH2 subset of helper T cells and was important for the migration 
of TH2 cells.

PMCID: PMC3805781
PMID: 24056746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Urol Oncol. 2014 Jan;32(1):45.e23-30. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2013.06.008. Epub
2013 Sep 18.

Predicting response to bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) in patients with carcinoma 
in situ of the bladder.

Nunez-Nateras R(1), Castle EP(2), Protheroe CA(3), Stanton ML(4), Ocal TI(4),
Ferrigni EN(2), Ochkur SI(3), Jacobsen EA(3), Hou YX(2), Andrews PE(2), Colby
TV(4), Lee NA(3), Lee JJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Phoenix, AZ. Electronic address:
nunez.rafael@mayo.edu. (2)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Phoenix,
AZ. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic Arizona,
Scottsdale, AZ. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine/Pathology, Mayo Clinic
Arizona, Scottsdale, AZ.

PURPOSE: Currently, there is no reliable tool to predict response to intravesical
bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG). Based on the fact that BCG is a Th1-polarizing
immunotherapy, we attempt to correlate the pretreatment immunologic tumor
microenvironment (Th1 or Th2) with response to therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Bladder cancer patients with initial diagnosis of
carcinoma in situ (Tis) were stratified based on their response to BCG treatment.
A total of 38 patients met inclusion criteria (20 patients who responded and 18
patients who did not respond). Immunohistochemical (IHC) methods known to assess 
the type of immunologic microenvironment (Th1 vs. Th2) were performed on tumor
tissue obtained at initial biopsy/resection: the level of tumor eosinophil
infiltration and degranulation (Th2 response); the number of tumor-infiltrating
GATA-3(+) (Th2-polarized) lymphocytes; and the number of tumor-infiltrating
T-bet(+) (Th1-polarized) lymphocytes. Results obtained from these metrics were
correlated with response to treatment with BCG immunotherapy.
RESULTS: The IHC metrics of the tumor immune microenvironment prior to BCG
treatment were each statistically significant predictors of responders (R) vs.
nonresponders (NR). Eosinophil infiltration and degranulation was higher for R
vs. NR: 1.02 ± 0.17 vs. 0.5 ± 0.12 (P = 0.01) and 1.1 ± 0.15 vs. 0.56 ± 0.15 (P =
0.04), respectively. Ratio of GATA-3(+) (Th2-polarized) lymphocytes to T-bet(+)
(Th1-polarized) lymphocytes was higher for R vs. NR: 4.85 ± 0.94 vs. 0.98 ± 0.19 
(P<0.001). The 3 markers were combined to create a Th2 signature biomarker, which
was a statistically significant (P<0.0001) predictor of R vs. NR. All IHC markers
demonstrated that a preexisting Th1 immunologic environment within the tumor was 
predictive of BCG failure.
CONCLUSION: The Th1 vs. Th2 polarization of bladder tumor immune microenvironment
prior to treatment with BCG represents a prognostic metric of response to
therapy. If a patient has a preexisting Th1 immunologic response within the
tumor, there is no value in using a therapy intended to create a Th1 immunologic 
response. An algorithm integrating 3 IHC methods provided a sensitive and
specific technique that may become a useful tool for pathologists and urologists 
to predict response to BCG in patients with carcinoma in situ of the bladder.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3953142
PMID: 24055426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4383-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301228. Epub 2013
Sep 13.

TCF-1 controls ILC2 and NKp46+ROR<U+03B3>t+ innate lymphocyte differentiation and
protection in intestinal inflammation.

Mielke LA(1), Groom JR, Rankin LC, Seillet C, Masson F, Putoczki T, Belz GT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia;

Innate lymphocyte populations play a central role in conferring protective
immunity at the mucosal frontier. In this study, we demonstrate that T cell
factor 1 (TCF-1; encoded by Tcf7), a transcription factor also important for NK
and T cell differentiation, is expressed by multiple innate lymphoid cell (ILC)
subsets, including GATA3(+) nuocytes (ILC2) and NKp46(+) ILCs (ILC3), which
confer protection against lung and intestinal inflammation. TCF-1 was
intrinsically required for the differentiation of both ILC2 and NKp46(+) ILC3.
Loss of TCF-1 expression impaired the capacity of these ILC subsets to produce
IL-5, IL-13, and IL-22 and resulted in crippled responses to intestinal infection
with Citrobacter rodentium. Furthermore, a reduction in T-bet expression required
for Notch-2-dependent development of NKp46(+) ILC3 showed a dose-dependent
reduction in TCF-1 expression. Collectively, our findings demonstrate an
essential requirement for TCF-1 in ILC2 differentiation and reveal a link among
Tcf7, Notch, and Tbx21 in NKp46(+) ILC3 development.

PMID: 24038093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Oct 15;168(6):5396-404. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.08.050.
Epub 2013 Aug 24.

Endothelial microparticles exert differential effects on functions of Th1 in
patients with acute coronary syndrome.

Lu Y(1), Li L, Yan H, Su Q, Huang J, Fu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Second People's Hospital of Qinzhou, Qinzhou
535099, Guangxi, China.

BACKGROUND: Endothelial microparticles (EMPs) can be involved in inflammatory
process, blood coagulation, and regulation of vascular function. However, it
remains unclear whether EMPs participate in the pathogenesis of ACS. The purpose 
of this study is to investigate the impact of EMPs on Th1/Th2 development and
functions in vitro.
METHODS: Eight-five patients were allocated into SAP group (n=27), UAP group
(n=28), and AMI group (n=30). Twenty hospitalized patients with normal coronary
angiography were recruited as controls. The frequency of EMPs, IFN-<U+03B3>, and IL-4
levels were measured, and the correlation between EMPs and Th1/Th2 cytokine was
analyzed. PBMCs isolated from patients with ACS were treated in vitro with EMPs. 
This was followed by flow cytometry for Th1/Th2 counts, real-time PCR and western
blotting for T-bet and GATA mRNA and protein expression, and ELISA for IFN-<U+03B3>,
TNF-a, IL-4, and IL-10.
RESULTS: This study proved that the frequency of EMPs was significantly increased
in ACS patients. There was a significant positive correlation between EMPs and
IFN-<U+03B3>. EMPs could significantly upregulate the differentiation and function of
Th1 through increasing the expression of T-bet mRNA and protein. Furthermore,
this study also indicated that EMP treatment in vitro could promote the
expression of TNF-a, which exerts adverse effects on the pathogenesis and
progression of atherosclerosis.
CONCLUSIONS: EMPs may be involved in the immune and inflammatory processes that
take part in artery atherosclerosis and that they do so by regulating Th1/Th2
differentiation and function. They may play an important role in the pathogenesis
of coronary atherosclerosis and plaque instability.

© 2013.

PMID: 24012161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 1;191(7):3712-24. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300319. Epub 2013
Sep 4.

Active STAT5 regulates T-bet and eomesodermin expression in CD8 T cells and
imprints a T-bet-dependent Tc1 program with repressed IL-6/TGF-ß1 signaling.

Grange M(1), Verdeil G, Arnoux F, Griffon A, Spicuglia S, Maurizio J, Buferne M, 
Schmitt-Verhulst AM, Auphan-Anezin N.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille 
13288, France;

In adoptive therapy, CD8 T cells expressing active STAT5 (STAT5CA) transcription 
factors were found to be superior to unmanipulated counterparts in long-term
persistence, capacity to infiltrate autochthonous mouse melanomas, thrive in
their microenvironment, and induce their regression. However, the molecular
mechanisms sustaining these properties were undefined. In this study, we report
that STAT5CA induced sustained expression of genes controlling tissue homing,
cytolytic granule composition, type 1 CD8 cytotoxic T cell-associated effector
molecules granzyme B(+), IFN-<U+03B3>(+), TNF-a(+), and CCL3(+), but not IL-2, and
transcription factors T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing analyses identified the genes possessing
regulatory regions to which STAT5 bound in long-term in vivo maintained
STAT5CA-expressing CD8 T cells. This analysis identified 34% of the genes
differentially expressed between STAT5CA-expressing and nonexpressing effector T 
cells as direct STAT5CA target genes, including those encoding T-bet, Eomes, and 
granzyme B. Additionally, genes encoding the IL-6R and TGFbRII subunits were
stably repressed, resulting in dampened IL-17-producing CD8 T cell polarization
in response to IL-6 and TGF-ß1. The absence of T-bet did not affect
STAT5CA-driven accumulation of the T cells in tissue or their granzyme B
expression but restored IL-2 secretion and IL-6R and TGFbRII expression and
signaling, as illustrated by IL-17 induction. Therefore, concerted
STAT5/T-bet/Eomes regulation controls homing, long-term maintenance, recall
responses, and resistance to polarization towards IL-17-producing CD8 T cells
while maintaining expression of an efficient type 1 CD8 cytotoxic T cell program 
(granzyme B(+), IFN-<U+03B3>(+)).

PMID: 24006458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. PLoS Biol. 2013;11(8):e1001633. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001633. Epub 2013 Aug 
20.

Stable T-bet(+)GATA-3(+) Th1/Th2 hybrid cells arise in vivo, can develop directly
from naive precursors, and limit immunopathologic inflammation.

Peine M(1), Rausch S, Helmstetter C, Fröhlich A, Hegazy AN, Kühl AA, Grevelding
CG, Höfer T, Hartmann S, Löhning M.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Charité-University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Differentiated T helper (Th) cell lineages are thought to emerge from alternative
cell fate decisions. However, recent studies indicated that differentiated Th
cells can adopt mixed phenotypes during secondary immunological challenges. Here 
we show that natural primary immune responses against parasites generate
bifunctional Th1 and Th2 hybrid cells that co-express the lineage-specifying
transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 and co-produce Th1 and Th2 cytokines. The 
integration of Th1-promoting interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and interleukin (IL)-12 signals
together with Th2-favoring IL-4 signals commits naive Th cells directly and
homogeneously to the hybrid Th1/2 phenotype. Specifically, IFN-<U+03B3> signals are
essential for T-bet(+)GATA-3(+) cells to develop in vitro and in vivo by breaking
the dominance of IL-4 over IL-12 signals. The hybrid Th1/2 phenotype is stably
maintained in memory cells in vivo for months. It resists reprogramming into
classic Th1 or Th2 cells by Th1- or Th2-promoting stimuli, which rather induce
quantitative modulations of the combined Th1 and Th2 programs without abolishing 
either. The hybrid phenotype is associated with intermediate manifestations of
both Th1 and Th2 cell properties. Consistently, hybrid Th1/2 cells support
inflammatory type-1 and type-2 immune responses but cause less immunopathology
than Th1 and Th2 cells, respectively. Thus, we propose the self-limitation of
effector T cells based on the stable cell-intrinsic balance of two opposing
differentiation programs as a novel concept of how the immune system can prevent 
excessive inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3747991
PMID: 23976880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Dec;43(12):3361-71. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343635. Epub 2013 Sep
10.

The POSH/JIP-1 scaffold network regulates TCR-mediated JNK1 signals and effector 
function in CD8(+) T cells.

Cunningham CA(1), Knudson KM, Peng BJ, Teixeiro E, Daniels MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology & Department of Surgery,
Center for Cellular and Molecular Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.

Signals from the T-cell recognition of antigen program effector functions are
necessary to clear infections and tumors. The JNK pathway is critically important
in regulating this process. In T lymphocytes, JNK1 and JNK2 have distinct
functions depending on their maturation state and cell-type. However, the
mechanisms that regulate their isoform-specific activity and function are still
unclear. Here, we identify plenty of SH3 (POSH) and JNK-interacting protein 1
(JIP-1) as a multiprotein scaffold network for TCR-mediated JNK1 activation in
CD8(+) T cells. Disruption of the POSH/JIP-1 complex led to profound defects in
the activation of JNK1, as well as deficient activation or induction of the
transcription factors c-Jun, T-bet, and Eomesodermin. Furthermore, disruption of 
the POSH/JIP complex in CD8(+) T cells resulted in impaired proliferation,
decreased cytokine expression, and the inability to control tumors. Collectively,
these data identify a mechanism for the specific regulation of TCR-dependent JNK1
activation and function that is key for CD8(+) T-cell responses.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23963642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS Biol. 2013 Jul;11(7):e1001616. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001616. Epub 2013 
Jul 30.

Mapping differentiation under mixed culture conditions reveals a tunable
continuum of T cell fates.

Antebi YE(1), Reich-Zeliger S, Hart Y, Mayo A, Eizenberg I, Rimer J, Putheti P,
Pe'er D, Friedman N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

Cell differentiation is typically directed by external signals that drive
opposing regulatory pathways. Studying differentiation under polarizing
conditions, with only one input signal provided, is limited in its ability to
resolve the logic of interactions between opposing pathways. Dissection of this
logic can be facilitated by mapping the system's response to mixtures of input
signals, which are expected to occur in vivo, where cells are simultaneously
exposed to various signals with potentially opposing effects. Here, we
systematically map the response of naïve T cells to mixtures of signals driving
differentiation into the Th1 and Th2 lineages. We characterize cell state at the 
single cell level by measuring levels of the two lineage-specific transcription
factors (T-bet and GATA3) and two lineage characteristic cytokines (IFN-<U+03B3> and
IL-4) that are driven by these transcription regulators. We find a continuum of
mixed phenotypes in which individual cells co-express the two lineage-specific
master regulators at levels that gradually depend on levels of the two input
signals. Using mathematical modeling we show that such tunable mixed phenotype
arises if autoregulatory positive feedback loops in the gene network regulating
this process are gradual and dominant over cross-pathway inhibition. We also find
that expression of the lineage-specific cytokines follows two independent
stochastic processes that are biased by expression levels of the master
regulators. Thus, cytokine expression is highly heterogeneous under mixed
conditions, with subpopulations of cells expressing only IFN-<U+03B3>, only IL-4, both
cytokines, or neither. The fraction of cells in each of these subpopulations
changes gradually with input conditions, reproducing the continuous internal
state at the cell population level. These results suggest a differentiation
scheme in which cells reflect uncertainty through a continuously tuneable mixed
phenotype combined with a biased stochastic decision rather than a binary
phenotype with a deterministic decision.

PMCID: PMC3728017
PMID: 23935451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Cytotechnology. 2014 May;66(3):373-82. doi: 10.1007/s10616-013-9585-z. Epub 2013 
Aug 11.

NF<U+03BA>B attenuates IL-5 production and upregulates T-box transcription factors in
Th2-like T cells.

Hashiguchi M(1), Kobayashi A, Kashiwakura Y, Kojima H, Kanno Y, Kurosu A,
Tokudome S, Kobata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Dokkyo Medical University, 880
Kitakobayashi, Mibu, Tochigi, 321-0293, Japan, mhashi@dokkyomed.ac.jp.

IL-5 plays important roles in eosinophil differentiation, expansion, and
recruitment. The regulation of IL-5 seems critical for the treatment of
eosinophil-mediated allergic reactions. However, the precise mechanisms for IL-5 
regulation remain unknown. In this study, we investigated how IL-5 production is 
regulated. The transduction of GATA-3 into a murine T cell hybridoma resulted in 
acquiring the ability to produce IL-5 in response to an antigenic stimulus like
Th2 cells. This production was dependent on the cAMP-PKA pathway, but not on p38 
activation. Transduction of NIK largely impaired IL-5 production. RelA and RelB
similarly impaired IL-5 production. RelA decreased not only IL-5 protein amount
but mRNA. RelA also inhibited Il5-luciferase reporter activity. The transduction 
of GATA-3 decreased the expression of Tbx21 and Eomes, but the additional
transduction of RelA abrogated the decreased expression of GATA-3-induced Tbx21
and Eomes. Furthermore, the transduction of T-bet or Eomes into the
GATA-3-transduced T cell hybridoma impaired IL-5 production. These results
suggested that strong enhancement of the NF<U+03BA>B pathway downregulates IL-5
production and upregulates T-box protein expression to shift an immune response
from Th2 to inflammatory Th1.

PMCID: PMC3973803
PMID: 23934330  [PubMed]


266. Cell Rep. 2013 Aug 15;4(3):554-65. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.07.008. Epub 2013
Aug 8.

Low-affinity T cells are programmed to maintain normal primary responses but are 
impaired in their recall to low-affinity ligands.

Knudson KM(1), Goplen NP, Cunningham CA, Daniels MA, Teixeiro E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.

T cell responses to low-affinity T cell receptor (TCR) ligands occur in the
context of infection, tumors, and autoimmunity despite diminished TCR signal
strength. The processes that enable such responses remain unclear. We show that
distinct mechanisms drive effector/memory development in high- and low-affinity T
cells. Low-affinity cells preferentially differentiate into memory precursors of 
a central memory phenotype that are interleukin (IL)-12R(lo), IL-7R(hi), and
Eomes(hi). Strikingly, in contrast to naive cells, low-affinity memory cells were
impaired in the response to low- but not high-affinity ligands, indicating that
low-affinity cells are programmed to generate diverse immune responses while
avoiding autoreactivity. Affinity and antigen dose directly correlated with
IL-12R signal input and T-bet but not with Eomes expression because low- affinity
signals were more potent inducers of Eomes at a high antigen dose. Our studies
explain how weak antigenic signals induce complete primary immune responses and
provide a framework for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23933258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 20;110(34):E3216-24. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1312348110. Epub 2013 Aug 6.

T-box transcription factor T-bet, a key player in a unique type of B-cell
activation essential for effective viral clearance.

Rubtsova K(1), Rubtsov AV, van Dyk LF, Kappler JW, Marrack P.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Denver, CO 80206, USA.

IgG2a is known to be the most efficient antibody isotype for viral clearance.
Here, we demonstrate a unique pathway of B-cell activation, leading to IgG2a
production, and involving synergistic stimulation via B-cell antigen receptors,
toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7), and IFN<U+03B3> receptors on B cells. This synergistic
stimulation leads to induction of T-box transcription factor T-bet expression in 
B cells, which, in turn, drives expression of CD11b and CD11c on B cells.
T-bet/CD11b/CD11c positive B cells appear during antiviral responses and produce 
high titers of antiviral IgG2a antibodies that are critical for efficient viral
clearance. The results thus demonstrate a previously unknown role for T-bet
expression in B cells during viral infections. Moreover, the appearance of
T-bet(+) B cells during antiviral responses and during autoimmunity suggests a
possible link between these two processes.

PMCID: PMC3752276
PMID: 23922396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cell Immunol. 2013 Jul-Aug;284(1-2):37-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2013.07.001.
Epub 2013 Jul 12.

Allergenicity potential of red kidney bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) proteins in
orally treated BALB/c mice and passively sensitized RBL-2H3 cells.

Kumar S(1), Sharma A, Verma AK, Chaudhari BP, Das M, Jain SK, Dwivedi PD.

Author information: 
(1)Food Toxicology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research
(Formerly - Industrial Toxicology Research Centre), Mahatma Gandhi Marg, P.O. Box
No. 80, Lucknow 226 001, India; Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, 
Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi 110 062, India. Electronic address:
sandeep_sant@yahoo.co.in.

Red kidney bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) is one the most commonly consumed legumes
that requires an in depth understanding of its allergenicity. Therefore, the aim 
of this study was to explore the allergenicity of red kidney bean proteins
following oral exposure in BALB/c mice and elucidate the levels of Th1/Th2
transcription factors induced by red kidney bean proteins in rat basophilic
leukemia cells (RBL-2H3 cells) passively sensitized with the sera of red kidney
bean sensitized mice. Red kidney bean proteins showed enhanced levels of total
and specific IgE, anaphylactic symptoms, thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) and 
peritoneal albumin over control. Enhanced release of ß-hexosaminidase along with 
up regulated expressions of GATA-3, STAT-6, T-bet, c-MAF and NFAT were observed
in the RBL-2H3 cells exposed with red kidney bean proteins when compared to that 
of the controls. Taken together, exposure of red kidney bean proteins may cause
allergic symptoms in mice and the ambivalent effect on Th2/Th1 transcription
factors in RBL-2H3 cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23916877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Mol Immunol. 2013 Dec;56(4):423-33. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.06.008. Epub 2013 
Aug 1.

Wnt signaling inhibits CTL memory programming.

Xiao Z(1), Sun Z, Smyth K, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD 20742 USA. Electronic address: xiao0028@umd.edu.

Induction of functional CTLs is one of the major goals for vaccine development
and cancer therapy. Inflammatory cytokines are critical for memory CTL
generation. Wnt signaling is important for CTL priming and memory formation, but 
its role in cytokine-driven memory CTL programming is unclear. We found that wnt 
signaling inhibited IL-12-driven CTL activation and memory programming. This
impaired memory CTL programming was attributed to up-regulation of eomes and
down-regulation of T-bet. Wnt signaling suppressed the mTOR pathway during CTL
activation, which was different to its effects on other cell types.
Interestingly, the impaired memory CTL programming by wnt was partially rescued
by mTOR inhibitor rapamycin. In conclusion, we found that crosstalk between wnt
and the IL-12 signaling inhibits T-bet and mTOR pathways and impairs memory
programming which can be recovered in part by rapamycin. In addition, direct
inhibition of wnt signaling during CTL activation does not affect CTL memory
programming. Therefore, wnt signaling may serve as a new tool for CTL
manipulation in autoimmune diseases and immune therapy for certain cancers.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3783547
PMID: 23911398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Nov;43(11):2818-23. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343689. Epub 2013 Aug
21.

T-bet is essential for Th1-mediated, but not Th17-mediated, CNS autoimmune
disease.

O'Connor RA(1), Cambrook H, Huettner K, Anderton SM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Inflammation Research, Centre for Multiple
Sclerosis Research and Centre for Immunity Infection and Evolution, Queen's
Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2013 Nov;43(11):2810-3.

T cells that produce both IL-17 and IFN-<U+03B3>, and co-express ROR-<U+03B3>t and T-bet, are
often found at sites of autoimmune inflammation. However, it is unknown whether
this co-expression of T-bet with ROR-<U+03B3>t is a prerequisite for immunopathology. We
show here that T-bet is not required for the development of Th17-driven
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). The disease was not impaired in 
T-bet(-/-) mice and was associated with low IFN-<U+03B3> production and elevated IL-17
production among central nervous system (CNS) infiltrating CD4(+) T cells.
T-bet(-/-) Th17 cells generated in the presence of IL-6/TGF-ß/IL-1 and IL-23
produced GM-CSF and high levels of IL-17 and induced disease upon transfer to
naïve mice. Unlike their WT counterparts, these T-bet(-/-) Th17 cells did not
exhibit an IL-17<U+2192>IFN-<U+03B3> switch upon reencounter with antigen in the CNS,
indicating that this functional change is not critical to disease development. In
contrast, T-bet was absolutely required for the pathogenicity of
myelin-responsive Th1 cells. T-bet-deficient Th1 cells failed to accumulate in
the CNS upon transfer, despite being able to produce GM-CSF. Therefore, T-bet is 
essential for establishing Th1-mediated inflammation but is not required to drive
IL-23-induced GM-CSF production, or Th17-mediated autoimmune inflammation.

© 2013 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by WILEY-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4068221
PMID: 23878019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Nov;43(11):2824-31. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343723. Epub 2013 Aug
23.

Highly polarized Th17 cells induce EAE via a T-bet independent mechanism.

Grifka-Walk HM(1), Lalor SJ, Segal BM.

Author information: 
(1)Holtom-Garrett Program in Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Center,
Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2013 Nov;43(11):2810-3.

In the MOG35-55 induced EAE model, autoreactive Th17 cells that accumulate in the
central nervous system acquire Th1 characteristics via a T-bet dependent
mechanism. It remains to be determined whether Th17 plasticity and
encephalitogenicity are causally related to each other. Here, we show that IL-23 
polarized T-bet(-/-) Th17 cells are unimpaired in either activation or
proliferation, and induce higher quantities of the chemokines RANTES and CXCL2
than WT Th17 cells. Unlike their WT counterparts, T-bet(-/-) Th17 cells retain an
IL-17(hi) IFN-<U+03B3>(neg-lo) cytokine profile following adoptive transfer into
syngeneic hosts. This population of highly polarized Th17 effectors is capable of
mediating EAE, albeit with a milder clinical course. It has previously been
reported that the signature Th1 and Th17 effector cytokines, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17, are
dispensable for the development of autoimmune demyelinating disease. The current 
study demonstrates that the "master regulator" transcription factor, T-bet, is
also not universally required for encephalitogenicity. Our results contribute to 
a growing body of data showing heterogeneity of myelin-reactive T cells and the
independent mechanisms they employ to inflict damage to central nervous system
tissues, complicating the search for therapeutic targets relevant across the
spectrum of individuals with multiple sclerosis.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3838449
PMID: 23878008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 4;8(7):e68952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068952. Print 2013.

Probiotics can generate FoxP3 T-cell responses in the small intestine and
simultaneously inducing CD4 and CD8 T cell activation in the large intestine.

Smelt MJ(1), de Haan BJ, Bron PA, van Swam I, Meijerink M, Wells JM, Faas MM, de 
Vos P.

Author information: 
(1)Top Institute Food and Nutrition, Wageningen, The Netherlands.

Most studies on probiotics aim to restore intestinal homeostasis to reduce
immune-pathology in disease. Of equal importance are studies on how probiotics
might prevent or delay disease in healthy individuals. However, knowledge on
mechanisms of probiotic actions in healthy individuals is scarce. To gain more
insight in how different bacterial strains may modulate the healthy intestinal
immune system, we investigated the effect of the food derived bacterial strains
L. plantarum WCFS1, L. salivarius UCC118, and L. lactis MG1363, on the intestinal
regulatory immune phenotype in healthy mice. All three bacterial strains induced 
an upregulation of activity and numbers of CD11c(+) MHCII(+) DCs in the
immune-sampling Peyer's Patches. Only L. salivarius UCC118 skewed towards an
immune regulatory phenotype in the small intestinal lamina propria (SILP). The
effects were different in the large intestine lamina propria. L. salivarius
UCC118 induced activation in both CD4 and CD8 positive T-cells while L. plantarum
WCFS1 induced a more regulatory phenotype. Moreover, L. plantarum WCFS1 decreased
the Th1/Th2 ratio in the SILP. Also L. lactis MG1363 had immunomodulatory
effects. L. lactis MG1363 decreased the expression of the GATA-3 and T-bet in the
SILP. As our data show that contradictory effects may occur in different parts of
the gut, it is recommended to study effects of probiotic in different sites in
the intestine. Our strain-specific results suggest that unspecified application
of probiotics may not be very effective. Our data also indicate that selection of
specific probiotic strain activities on the basis of responses in healthy mice
may be a promising strategy to specifically stimulate or suppress immunity in
specific parts of the intestine.

PMCID: PMC3701681
PMID: 23861953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Sci Rep. 2013;3:2164. doi: 10.1038/srep02164.

Differential epigenome-wide DNA methylation patterns in childhood
obesity-associated asthma.

Rastogi D(1), Suzuki M, Greally JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
drastogi@montefiore.org

While DNA methylation plays a role in T-helper (Th) cell maturation, its
potential dysregulation in the non-atopic Th1-polarized systemic inflammation
observed in obesity-associated asthma is unknown. We studied DNA methylation
epigenome-wide in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 8 obese
asthmatic pre-adolescent children and compared it to methylation in PBMCs from 8 
children with asthma alone, obesity alone and healthy controls. Differentially
methylated loci implicated certain biologically relevant molecules and pathways. 
PBMCs from obese asthmatic children had distinctive DNA methylation patterns,
with decreased promoter methylation of CCL5, IL2RA and TBX21, genes encoding
proteins linked with Th1 polarization, and increased promoter methylation of
FCER2, a low-affinity receptor for IgE, and of TGFB1, inhibitor of Th cell
activation. T-cell signaling and macrophage activation were the two primary
pathways that were selectively hypomethylated in obese asthmatics. These findings
suggest that dysregulated DNA methylation is associated with non-atopic
inflammation observed in pediatric obesity-associated asthma.

PMCID: PMC3712321
PMID: 23857381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Histopathology. 2013 Oct;63(4):482-98. doi: 10.1111/his.12160. Epub 2013 Jul 15.

Nodal reactive and neoplastic proliferation of monocytoid and marginal zone B
cells: an immunoarchitectural and molecular study highlighting the relevance of
IRTA1 and T-bet as positive markers.

Bob R(1), Falini B, Marafioti T, Paterson JC, Pileri S, Stein H.

Author information: 
(1)Pathodiagnostik Berlin, Berlin Reference and Consultation Centre for Lymphoma 
and Haematopathology, Berlin, Germany; Institute for Pathology, Campus Benjamin
Franklin, Charite Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

AIMS: Marginal zone B cells (MZCs) and monocytoid B cells (MBCs) appear to be
related lymphoid cells that take part in reactive and neoplastic marginal zone
proliferations. These lesions are not yet well characterized, and the aim of this
study was to find better diagnostic criteria for them.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We analysed 60 nodal lesions with MBC and/or MZC
proliferation for their morphological, immunophenotypic, molecular genetic and IG
gene rearrangement features. On the basis of the results of the rearrangement
assay and immunoglobulin light chain restriction, the lesions were divided into
reactive and neoplastic groups. Among the neoplastic lesions, polymorphic and
monomorphic subgroups emerged. All reactive lesions had morphological features of
the polymorphic subgroup. By immunohistochemistry, IRTA1 and/or T-bet expression 
was found in all reactive lesions and in 90% of neoplastic lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: IRTA1 and T-bet are positive markers for the identification of
MZC/MBC proliferations, and thus for the diagnosis of nodal marginal zone
lymphoma (NMZL). Polymorphic and monomorphic subgroups of NMZL could be
distinguished. Most morphological and immunophenotypic patterns in reactive and
neoplastic nodal expansions of MZCs and MBCs overlapped. Therefore, PCR clonality
assay of the immunoglobulin heavy and light chain gene loci is the most reliable 
method for their differentiation.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23855758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Cancer Gene Ther. 2013 Aug;20(8):469-77. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2013.42. Epub 2013 Jul 
12.

Extranodal induction of therapeutic immunity in the tumor microenvironment after 
intratumoral delivery of Tbet gene-modified dendritic cells.

Chen L(1), Taylor JL, Sabins NC, Lowe DB, Qu Y, You Z, Storkus WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Murine dendritic cells (DC) transduced to express the Type-1 transactivator T-bet
(i.e. mDC.Tbet) and delivered intratumorally as a therapy are superior to control
wild-type DC in slowing the growth of established subcutaneous MCA205 sarcomas in
vivo. Optimal antitumor efficacy of mDC.Tbet-based gene therapy was dependent on 
host natural killer (NK) cells and CD8(+) T cells, and required mDC.Tbet
expression of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules, but was
independent of the capacity of the injected mDC.Tbet to produce proinflammatory
cytokines (interleukin-12 family members or interferon-<U+03B3>) or to migrate to
tumor-draining lymph nodes based on CCR7 ligand chemokine recruitment.
Conditional (CD11c-DTR) or genetic (BATF3(-/-)) deficiency in host
antigen-crosspresenting DC did not diminish the therapeutic action of
intratumorally delivered wild-type mDC.Tbet. Interestingly, we observed that
intratumoral delivery of mDC.Tbet (versus control mDC.Null) promoted the acute
infiltration of NK cells and naive CD45RB(+) T cells into the tumor
microenvironment (TME) in association with elevated expression of NK- and
T-cell-recruiting chemokines by mDC.Tbet. When taken together, our data support a
paradigm for extranodal (cross)priming of therapeutic Type-1 immunity in the TME 
after intratumoral delivery of mDC.Tbet-based gene therapy.

PMCID: PMC3775601
PMID: 23846252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Nov;31(7):550-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.06.009.
Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Development- and activity-dependent expression of clusterin in the mouse
olfactory bulb.

Wu RQ(1), Xu ZX, Rao XP, Xu FQ.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance and Atomic and Molecular
Physics, Wuhan Institute of Physics and Mathematics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Wuhan 430071, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049,
China.

Clusterin, a protein involved in many biological processes, is expressed broadly 
in the central nervous system, but its functions remain largely unknown. As
preparations for elucidating some possible functions, we examined the
spatiotemporal expression patterns of clusterin in the mouse olfactory bulb at
different developmental stages and under different neuronal activity levels. Our 
results revealed a dynamic expression of the protein during development.
Clusterin signal was seemingly diffuse during the early stages of development,
shifted to the cell somas later and then predominantly to the axons of projection
neurons in the adult stage, with a transition point at approximately postnatal
day 18. The effects of olfactory deficits on the clusterin expression level in an
anosmic mouse model were neuron-specific: the signals increased remarkably from
faint to strong in olfactory sensory neurons, reduced considerably from
moderate/strong to faint in the centrifugal projection neurons, decreased
moderately from moderate to faint in the local bulbar projection neurons, and
remained intense in long-distance bulbar projection neurons. These results showed
that clusterin expression is modulated dynamically during development and by
sensory activity. These findings deepen our understanding of this broadly
expressed protein.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23831077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Immunol. 2013 Aug 15;191(4):1606-13. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301116. Epub 2013
Jul 3.

Notch signaling regulates T cell accumulation and function in the central nervous
system during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Sandy AR(1), Stoolman J, Malott K, Pongtornpipat P, Segal BM, Maillard I.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Systemic inhibition of Notch signaling was previously shown to attenuate
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a disease model of multiple
sclerosis in mice. Different studies attributed these effects to decreased T-bet 
and IFN-<U+03B3> expression, enhanced regulatory T cell function, reduced T cell
chemotaxis to the CNS, or impaired Th9 cell differentiation. Interpretation of
these heterogeneous findings is difficult because past experimental strategies
did not ensure complete Notch inhibition in T cells and because many cell
populations could be affected by systemic Notch blockade. To resolve the role of 
Notch in T cells during EAE, we used the pan-Notch inhibitor dominant-negative
form of Mastermind-like 1 (DNMAML), as well as several complementary
loss-of-function approaches specifically in myelin-reactive T cells. Notch
inhibition in T cells profoundly decreased EAE incidence and severity.
Notch-deprived myelin-reactive T cells had preserved activation and effector
differentiation in secondary lymphoid tissues. However, Notch-deprived T cells
failed to accumulate in the CNS after immunization. Parking wild-type and DNMAML 
T cells together in bone marrow chimeras increased accumulation of Notch-deprived
T cells in the CNS after immunization but did not prevent EAE, indicating the
absence of dominant suppression by DNMAML T cells. Analysis of CNS-infiltrating
DNMAML T cells revealed markedly defective IL-17A and IFN-<U+03B3> production, despite
preserved T-bet expression. Collectively, our findings capture the profound
overall effects of Notch signaling in myelin-reactive T cells and demonstrate
that Notch controls the accumulation and pathogenic functions of CD4(+) T cells
within their target organ but not in lymphoid tissues during EAE.

PMCID: PMC3735619
PMID: 23825310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Acta Otolaryngol. 2013 Sep;133(9):951-6. doi: 10.3109/00016489.2013.803153. Epub 
2013 Jul 4.

The engraftment and differentiation of transplanted bone marrow-derived cells in 
the olfactory bulb after methimazole administration.

Noda Y(1), Nishizaki K, Yoshinobu J, Orita Y, Tsujigiwa H, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Okayama, Japan.

CONCLUSION: Bone marrow-derived cells can be engrafted in the olfactory bulb and 
a few cells can differentiate into mitral/tufted cells in the olfactory bulb.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate whether bone marrow-derived cells can be engrafted
into the olfactory bulb and differentiate into neurons and glial cells after
methimazole administration.
METHODS: Bone marrow of GFP (green fluorescence protein) mice was transplanted
into lethally irradiated recipient mice. Immunostaining was performed to confirm 
the cell types of bone marrow-derived cells expressing GFP.
RESULTS: GFP-positive cells were observed in the olfactory bulb at 2 days after
methimazole administration. The number of dendritic GFP-positive cells increased 
up to 30 days after methimazole administration and then decreased. Double
immunostaining for GFP and Iba1 or TBX21 showed that a large population of the
GFP-positive cells had characteristics of microglia/macrophages and a few cells
had characteristics of mitral/tufted cells.

PMID: 23822107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Immunity. 2013 Jun 27;38(6):1261-70. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.06.003. Epub 2013
Jun 20.

Pathogen-specific Treg cells expand early during mycobacterium tuberculosis
infection but are later eliminated in response to Interleukin-12.

Shafiani S(1), Dinh C, Ertelt JM, Moguche AO, Siddiqui I, Smigiel KS, Sharma P,
Campbell DJ, Way SS, Urdahl KB.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Thymically derived Foxp3<U+207A> regulatory T (Treg) cells have a propensity to
recognize self-peptide:MHC complexes, but their ability to respond to
epitope-defined foreign antigens during infectious challenge has not been
demonstrated. Here we show that pulmonary infection with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (Mtb), but not Listeria monocytogenes (Lm), induced robust lymph
node expansion of a highly activated population of pathogen-specific Treg cells
from the pre-existing pool of thymically derived Treg cells. These
antigen-specific Treg cells peaked in numbers 3 weeks after infection but
subsequently underwent selective elimination driven, in part, by
interleukin-12-induced intrinsic expression of the Th1-cell-promoting
transcription factor T-bet. Thus, the initial Mtb-induced inflammatory response
promotes pathogen-specific Treg cell proliferation, but these cells are actively 
culled later, probably to prevent suppression during later stages of infection.
These findings have important implications for the prevention and treatment of
tuberculosis and other chronic diseases in which antigen-specific Treg cells
restrict immunity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3827956
PMID: 23791647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 15;191(2):902-11. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203229. Epub 2013
Jun 14.

Opposing roles of STAT4 and Dnmt3a in Th1 gene regulation.

Pham D(1), Yu Q, Walline CC, Muthukrishnan R, Blum JS, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The STAT transcription factor STAT4 is a critical regulator of Th1
differentiation and inflammatory disease. Yet, how STAT4 regulates gene
expression is still unclear. In this report, we define a STAT4-dependent sequence
of events including histone H3 lysine 4 methylation, Jmjd3 association with STAT4
target loci, and a Jmjd3-dependent decrease in histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation and DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt) 3a association with STAT4 target 
loci. Dnmt3a has an obligate role in repressing Th1 gene expression, and in Th1
cultures deficient in both STAT4 and Dnmt3a, there is recovery in the expression 
of a subset of Th1 genes that is sufficient to increase IFN-<U+03B3> production.
Moreover, although STAT4-deficient mice are protected from the development of
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, mice deficient in STAT4 and
conditionally deficient in Dnmt3a in T cells develop paralysis. Th1 genes that
are derepressed in the absence of Dnmt3a have greater induction after the ectopic
expression of the Th1-associated transcription factors T-bet and Hlx1. Together, 
these data demonstrate that STAT4 and Dnmt3a play opposing roles in regulating
Th1 gene expression, and that one mechanism for STAT4-dependent gene programming 
is in establishing a derepressed genetic state susceptible to transactivation by 
additional fate-determining transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3703830
PMID: 23772023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 15;191(2):678-87. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203360. Epub 2013
Jun 12.

STAT4 and T-bet are required for the plasticity of IFN-<U+03B3> expression across Th2
ontogeny and influence changes in Ifng promoter DNA methylation.

Williams CL(1), Schilling MM, Cho SH, Lee K, Wei M, Aditi, Boothby M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville TN
37232, USA.

CD4(+) T cells developing toward a Th2 fate express IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 while
inhibiting production of cytokines associated with other Th types, such as the
Th1 cytokine IFN- <U+03B3>. IL-4-producing Th2 effector cells give rise to a long-lived 
memory population committed to reactivation of the Th2 cytokine gene expression
program. However, reactivation of these effector-derived cells under Th1-skewing 
conditions leads to production of IFN-<U+03B3> along with IL-4 in the same cell. We now 
show that this flexibility ("plasticity") of cytokine expression is preceded by a
loss of the repressive DNA methylation of the Ifng promoter acquired during Th2
polarization yet requires STAT4 along with T-box expressed in T cells.
Surprisingly, loss of either STAT4 or T-box expressed in T cells increased Ifng
promoter CpG methylation in both effector and memory Th2 cells. Taken together,
our data suggest a model in which the expression of IFN-<U+03B3> by Th2-derived memory
cells involves attenuation of epigenetic repression in memory Th2 cells, combined
with Th1-polarizing signals after their recall activation.

PMCID: PMC3702659
PMID: 23761633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Immunity. 2013 Jun 27;38(6):1250-60. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.05.009. Epub 2013
Jun 6.

Effector-like CD8<U+207A> T cells in the memory population mediate potent protective
immunity.

Olson JA(1), McDonald-Hyman C, Jameson SC, Hamilton SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Center for Immunology,
University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2013 Jun 27;38(6):1090-1.

The CD8<U+207A> memory T cell population is heterogeneous, and it is unclear which
subset(s) optimally mediate the central goal of the immune system-protection
against infection. Here we investigate the protective capacities of CD8<U+207A> T cell
subsets present at the memory stage of the immune response. We show that a
population of CD8<U+207A> T cells bearing markers associated with effector cells
(KLRG1(hi), CD27(lo), T-bet(hi), Eomes(lo)) persisted to the memory phase and
provided optimal control of Listeria monocytogenes and vaccinia virus, despite
weak recall proliferative responses. After antigen-specific boosting, this
population formed the predominant secondary memory subset and maintained superior
pathogen control. The effector-like memory subset displayed a distinct pattern of
tissue distribution and localization within the spleen, and their enhanced
capacity to eliminate Listeria involved specialized utilization of cytolysis.
Together, these data suggest that long-lived effector CD8<U+207A> T cells are optimal
for protective immunity against certain pathogens.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3703254
PMID: 23746652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Exp Med. 2013 Jul 1;210(7):1311-29. doi: 10.1084/jem.20112615. Epub 2013 Jun 3.

Therapeutic targeting of NOTCH signaling ameliorates immune-mediated bone marrow 
failure of aplastic anemia.

Roderick JE(1), Gonzalez-Perez G, Kuksin CA, Dongre A, Roberts ER, Srinivasan J, 
Andrzejewski C Jr, Fauq AH, Golde TE, Miele L, Minter LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Severe aplastic anemia (AA) is a bone marrow (BM) failure (BMF) disease
frequently caused by aberrant immune destruction of blood progenitors. Although a
Th1-mediated pathology is well described for AA, molecular mechanisms driving
disease progression remain ill defined. The NOTCH signaling pathway mediates Th1 
cell differentiation in the presence of polarizing cytokines, an action requiring
enzymatic processing of NOTCH receptors by <U+03B3>-secretase. Using a mouse model of
AA, we demonstrate that expression of both intracellular NOTCH1(IC) and T-BET, a 
key transcription factor regulating Th1 cell differentiation, was increased in
spleen and BM-infiltrating T cells during active disease. Conditionally deleting 
Notch1 or administering <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitors (GSIs) in vivo attenuated disease 
and rescued mice from lethal BMF. In peripheral T cells from patients with
untreated AA, NOTCH1(IC) was significantly elevated and bound to the TBX21
promoter, showing NOTCH1 directly regulates the gene encoding T-BET. Treating
patient cells with GSIs in vitro lowered NOTCH1(IC) levels, decreased NOTCH1
detectable at the TBX21 promoter, and decreased T-BET expression, indicating that
NOTCH1 signaling is responsive to GSIs during active disease. Collectively, these
results identify NOTCH signaling as a primary driver of Th1-mediated pathogenesis
in AA and may represent a novel target for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC3698520
PMID: 23733784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Jun;93(6):819-21. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0313149.

Editorial: Profiling senescent influenza-specific T cells in the elderly.

Messaoudi I, Slifka MK.

Comment on
    J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Jun;93(6):825-36.

PMID: 23723376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;5(6):358-68. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjt017. Epub 2013 May
24.

Cbl-b mediates TGFß sensitivity by downregulating inhibitory SMAD7 in primary T
cells.

Gruber T(1), Hinterleitner R, Hermann-Kleiter N, Meisel M, Kleiter I, Wang CM,
Viola A, Pfeifhofer-Obermair C, Baier G.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Pharmacology and Genetics, Medical University of Innsbruck,
Innsbruck, Austria.

T cell-intrinsic transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) receptor signaling plays an 
essential role in controlling immune responses. The RING-type E3 ligase Cbl-b has
been shown to mediate the sensitivity of T cells to TGFß; however, the mechanism 
underlying this process is unknown. This study shows that SMAD7, an established
negative regulator of TGFß receptor (TGFßR) signaling, is a key downstream
effector target of Cbl-b. SMAD7 protein levels, but not SMAD7 mRNA levels, are
upregulated in cblb(-/-) T cells. Cbl-b directly interacts with and ubiquitinates
SMAD7, suggesting that Cbl-b posttranscriptionally regulates SMAD7. In support of
this notion, concomitant genetic loss of SMAD7 in cblb(-/-) mice restored TGFß
sensitivity on T cell cytokine responses and abrogated the tumor rejection
phenotype of cblb(-/-) mice. These results demonstrate an essential and
non-redundant role for Cbl-b in controlling TGFßR signaling by directly targeting
SMAD7 for degradation during T cell responses in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 23709694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. PLoS One. 2013 May 15;8(5):e64170. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064170. Print 2013.

Cholecystokinin: an excitatory modulator of mitral/tufted cells in the mouse
olfactory bulb.

Ma J(1), Dankulich-Nagrudny L, Lowe G.

Author information: 
(1)Monell Chemical Senses Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of
America.

Cholecystokinin (CCK) is widely distributed in the brain as a sulfated
octapeptide (CCK-8S). In the olfactory bulb, CCK-8S is concentrated in two
laminae: an infraglomerular band in the external plexiform layer, and an
inframitral band in the internal plexiform layer (IPL), corresponding to somata
and terminals of superficial tufted cells with intrabulbar projections linking
duplicate glomerular maps of olfactory receptors. The physiological role of CCK
in this circuit is unknown. We made patch clamp recordings of CCK effects on
mitral cell spike activity in mouse olfactory bulb slices, and applied
immunohistochemistry to localize CCKB receptors. In cell-attached recordings,
mitral cells responded to 300 nM-1 µM CCK-8S by spike excitation, suppression, or
mixed excitation-suppression. Antagonists of GABAA and ionotropic glutamate
receptors blocked suppression, but excitation persisted. Whole-cell recordings
revealed that excitation was mediated by a slow inward current, and suppression
by spike inactivation or inhibitory synaptic input. Similar responses were
elicited by the CCKB receptor-selective agonist CCK-4 (1 µM). Excitation was less
frequent but still occurred when CCKB receptors were blocked by LY225910, or
disrupted in CCKB knockout mice, and was also observed in CCKA knockouts. CCKB
receptor immunoreactivity was detected on mitral and superficial tufted cells,
colocalized with Tbx21, and was absent from granule cells and the IPL. Our data
indicate that CCK excites mitral cells postsynaptically, via both CCKA and CCKB
receptors. We hypothesize that extrasynaptic CCK released from tufted cell
terminals in the IPL may diffuse to and directly excite mitral cell bodies,
creating a positive feedback loop that can amplify output from pairs of glomeruli
receiving sensory inputs encoded by the same olfactory receptor. Dynamic
plasticity of intrabulbar projections suggests that this could be an
experience-dependent amplification mechanism for tuning and optimizing olfactory 
bulb signal processing in different odor environments.

PMCID: PMC3655022
PMID: 23691163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cell Mol Immunol. 2013 Jul;10(4):289-91. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2013.18. Epub 2013 May 
20.

T-bet in the spot light: roles in distinct T-cell fate determination.

Jayaraman S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Peoria, IL,
USA. anue2468@uic.edu

The transcription factor T-bet was originally described to be important for the
differentiation of the CD4(+) Th1 subset. More recent investigations implicate
T-bet in the lineage commitment of a variety of innate immune cells also. The
T-bet appears to have a dual role in the immune system. Under certain conditions 
T-bet provides a beneficial role, whereas the exaggerated expression of T-bet in 
certain innate lymphoid cells can be detrimental to the host. Therefore, this
transcription factor needs to be carefully regulated. The feedback control and
the epigenetic mechanisms involved in the expression of T-bet remain to be fully 
elucidated.

PMCID: PMC4003208
PMID: 23686227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Jul;16(7):949-57. doi: 10.1038/nn.3407. Epub 2013 May 19.

Olfactory cortical neurons read out a relative time code in the olfactory bulb.

Haddad R(1), Lanjuin A, Madisen L, Zeng H, Murthy VN, Uchida N.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Brain Science, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013 Jul;14(7):458.

Odor stimulation evokes complex spatiotemporal activity in the olfactory bulb,
suggesting that both the identity of activated neurons and the timing of their
activity convey information about odors. However, whether and how downstream
neurons decipher these temporal patterns remains unknown. We addressed this
question by measuring the spiking activity of downstream neurons while
optogenetically stimulating two foci in the olfactory bulb with varying relative 
timing in mice. We found that the overall spike rates of piriform cortex neurons 
(PCNs) were sensitive to the relative timing of activation. Posterior PCNs showed
higher sensitivity to relative input times than neurons in the anterior piriform 
cortex. In contrast, olfactory bulb neurons rarely showed such sensitivity. Thus,
the brain can transform a relative time code in the periphery into a firing
rate-based representation in central brain areas, providing evidence for the
relevance of a relative time-based code in the olfactory bulb.

PMCID: PMC3695490
PMID: 23685720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Immunology. 2013 Sep;140(1):111-22. doi: 10.1111/imm.12122.

Acute infection of mice with Clostridium difficile leads to eIF2a phosphorylation
and pro-survival signalling as part of the mucosal inflammatory response.

Sadighi Akha AA(1), Theriot CM, Erb-Downward JR, McDermott AJ, Falkowski NR, Tyra
HM, Rutkowski DT, Young VB, Huffnagle GB.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5642, USA.

The current study sought to delineate the gene expression profile of the host
response in the caecum and colon during acute infection with Clostridium
difficile in a mouse model of infection, and to investigate the nature of the
unfolded protein response in this process. The infected mice displayed a
significant up-regulation in the expression of chemokines (Cxcl1, Cxcl2 and
Ccl2), numerous pro-inflammatory cytokines (Ifng, Il1b, Il6, and Il17f), as well 
as Il22 and a number of anti-microbial peptides (Defa1, Defa28, Defb1, Slpi and
Reg3g) at the site(s) of infection. This was accompanied by a significant influx 
of neutrophils, dendritic cells, cells of the monocyte/macrophage lineage and all
major subsets of lymphocytes to these site(s). However, CD4 T cells of the
untreated and C. difficile-infected mice expressed similar levels of CD69 and
CD25. Neither tissue had up-regulated levels of Tbx21, Gata3 or Rorc. The caeca
and colons of the infected mice showed a significant increase in eukaryotic
initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) phosphorylation, but neither the splicing of Xbp1
nor the up-regulation of endoplasmic reticulum chaperones, casting doubt on the
full-fledged induction of the unfolded protein response by C. difficile. They
also displayed significantly higher phosphorylation of AKT and signal transducer 
and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), an indication of pro-survival
signalling. These data underscore the local, innate, pro-inflammatory nature of
the response to C. difficile and highlight eIF2a phosphorylation and the
interleukin-22-pSTAT3-RegIII<U+03B3> axis as two of the pathways that could be used to
contain and counteract the damage inflicted on the intestinal epithelium.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3809711
PMID: 23668260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Jan;27(2):81-4.

[The role of sinomenine in treatment of allergic rhinitis mice model and its
mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen Z(1), Tao Z, Zhang N, Ren J, Deng Y, Xiao B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, People's Hospital of Wuhan
University, Wuhan, 430060, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the role of sinomenine in treatment of allergic rhinitis
mice model and its possible mechanism.
METHOD: We used ovalbumin (OVA) to make allergic rhinitis model of BALB/c mice.
Saline was used in the control group. When we challenged the mice with OVA
intranasally, the mice in sinomenine treatment group were feed by the food
containing sinomenine. Mice were then killed 24 h after the last OVA challenge.
The noses of mice from each group were removed en bloc and fixed, then each
section was stained with hematoxylin and eosin. ELISA assay was used to measure
the concentration of anti-OVA IgE, IL-4 and IFN-gamma. The proteins expressive
level of T-bet and GATA3 were examined.
RESULT: Nasal mucosa of the mice in sinomenine treatment group were not
hyperplasia and without obvious infiltration of eosinophils. The concentration of
anti-OVA IgE, IL-4 and IFN-gamma in the serum and T-bet and GATA3 expression
levels of sinomenine treatment group were lower than those of allergic rhinitis
group.
CONCLUSION: The sinomenine can be used to treat allergic rhinitis mice, and the
mechanism may rely on the improvements of the Th1/Th2 imbalance.

PMID: 23650707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Exp Med. 2013 Jun 3;210(6):1079-86. doi: 10.1084/jem.20122135. Epub 2013 May 6.

TNF receptor associated factor 3 plays a key role in development and function of 
invariant natural killer T cells.

Yi Z(1), Stunz LL, Bishop GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

TCR signaling is a prerequisite for early stage development of invariant natural 
killer T (iNKT) cells, whereas IL-15 signaling is required for expansion and
maturation at later stages. In this study, we show that TNF receptor associated
factor 3 (TRAF3) plays a critical role in the transition between these two
distinct signaling pathways and developmental stages. TRAF3-deficient iNKT cells 
in CD4(Cre)TRAF3(flox/flox) (T-TRAF3(-/-)) mice exhibit defective up-regulation
of T-bet and CD122, two critical molecules for IL-15 signaling, and as a
consequence, IL-15-mediated iNKT cell proliferation and survival are impaired.
Consistently, development of iNKT cells in T-TRAF3(-/-) mice shows a major defect
at developmental stages 2 and 3, but not stages 0 and 1. We further demonstrated 
that defective T-bet up-regulation occurring during the stage 1 to stage 2
transition results from reduced TCR signaling in TRAF3(-/-) iNKT cells. In
addition, mature TRAF3(-/-) iNKT cells displayed defective cytokine responses
upon TCR stimulation. Collectively, our results reveal that by modulating the
relative strength of TCR signaling, TRAF3 is an important regulator of iNKT cell 
development and functions.

PMCID: PMC3674694
PMID: 23650438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e61135. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061135. Print 2013.

Enhanced immune response and protective effects of nano-chitosan-based DNA
vaccine encoding T cell epitopes of Esat-6 and FL against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection.

Feng G(1), Jiang Q, Xia M, Lu Y, Qiu W, Zhao D, Lu L, Peng G, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China.

Development of a novel and effective vaccine against Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(M.tb) is a challenging for preventing TB infection. In this study, a novel
nanoparticle-based recombinant DNA vaccine was developed, which contains Esat-6
three T cell epitopes (Esat-6/3e) and fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (FL)
genes (termed Esat-6/3e-FL), and was enveloped with chitosan (CS) nanoparticles
(nano-chitosan). The immunologic and protective efficacy of the
nano-chitosan-based DNA vaccine (termed nano-Esat-6/3e-FL) was assessed in
C57BL/6 mice after intramuscular prime vaccination with the plasmids DNA and
nasal boost with the Esat-6/3e peptides. The results showed that the immunized
mice remarkably elicited enhanced T cell responses and protection against M.tb
H37Rv challenge. These findings indicate that the nano-chitosan can significantly
elevate the immunologic and protective effects of the DNA vaccine, and the
nano-Esat-6/3e-FL is a useful vaccine for preventing M.tb infection in mice.

PMCID: PMC3634041
PMID: 23637790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Immunol. 2013 Jun 1;190(11):5818-28. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203452. Epub 2013
May 1.

T cell-specific notch inhibition blocks graft-versus-host disease by inducing a
hyporesponsive program in alloreactive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.

Sandy AR(1), Chung J, Toubai T, Shan GT, Tran IT, Friedman A, Blackwell TS, Reddy
P, King PD, Maillard I.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) induced by donor-derived T cells remains the
major limitation of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (allo-BMT). We
previously reported that the pan-Notch inhibitor dominant-negative form of
Mastermind-like 1 (DNMAML) markedly decreased the severity and mortality of acute
GVHD mediated by CD4(+) T cells in mice. To elucidate the mechanisms of Notch
action in GVHD and its role in CD8(+) T cells, we studied the effects of Notch
inhibition in alloreactive CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells using mouse models of
allo-BMT. DNMAML blocked GVHD induced by either CD4(+) or CD8(+) T cells. Both
CD4(+) and CD8(+) Notch-deprived T cells had preserved expansion in lymphoid
organs of recipients, but profoundly decreased IFN-<U+03B3> production despite normal
T-bet and enhanced Eomesodermin expression. Alloreactive DNMAML T cells exhibited
decreased Ras/MAPK and NF-<U+03BA>B activity upon ex vivo restimulation through the TCR.
In addition, alloreactive T cells primed in the absence of Notch signaling had
increased expression of several negative regulators of T cell activation,
including Dgka, Cblb, and Pdcd1. DNMAML expression had modest effects on in vivo 
proliferation but preserved overall alloreactive T cell expansion while enhancing
accumulation of pre-existing natural regulatory T cells. Overall, DNMAML T cells 
acquired a hyporesponsive phenotype that blocked cytokine production but
maintained their expansion in irradiated allo-BMT recipients, as well as their in
vivo and ex vivo cytotoxic potential. Our results reveal parallel roles for Notch
signaling in alloreactive CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells that differ from past reports
of Notch action and highlight the therapeutic potential of Notch inhibition in
GVHD.

PMCID: PMC3660433
PMID: 23636056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Cell Rep. 2013 May 30;3(5):1378-88. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.03.035. Epub 2013 
Apr 25.

Autoimmune memory T helper 17 cell function and expansion are dependent on
interleukin-23.

Haines CJ(1), Chen Y, Blumenschein WM, Jain R, Chang C, Joyce-Shaikh B, Porth K, 
Boniface K, Mattson J, Basham B, Anderton SM, McClanahan TK, Sadekova S, Cua DJ, 
McGeachy MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Merck Research Laboratories, 901 California Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

Interleukin-23 (IL-23) is essential for the differentiation of pathogenic
effector T helper 17 (Th17) cells, but its role in memory Th17 cell responses is 
unclear. Using the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) model, we
report that memory Th17 cells rapidly expanded in response to rechallenge and
migrated to the CNS in high numbers, resulting in earlier onset and increased
severity of clinical disease. Memory Th17 cells were generated from IL-17+ and
ROR<U+03B3>t+ precursors, and the stability of the Th17 cell phenotype depended on the
amount of time allowed for the primary response. IL-23 was required for this
enhanced recall response. IL-23 receptor blockade did not directly impact IL-17
production, but did impair the subsequent proliferation and generation of
effectors coexpressing the Th1 cell-specific transcription factor T-bet. In
addition, many genes required for cell-cycle progression were downregulated in
Th17 cells that lacked IL-23 signaling, showing that a major mechanism for IL-23 
in primary and memory Th17 cell responses operates via regulation of
proliferation-associated pathways.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23623497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Immunol. 2013 Jun 1;190(11):5764-70. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203403. Epub 2013
Apr 24.

Lysine 313 of T-box is crucial for modulation of protein stability, DNA binding, 
and threonine phosphorylation of T-bet.

Jang EJ(1), Park HR, Hong JH, Hwang ES.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Global Top 5 Research Program, Ewha Womans University,
Seoul 120-750, South Korea.

A T-box-containing protein expressed in T cells (T-bet) is a key transcription
factor involved in the regulation of Th cell differentiation. Although
T-bet-deficient CD4(+) T cells fail to produce IFN-<U+03B3> and typically differentiate 
into Th2 cells in vitro, ectopic overexpression of T-bet elevates IFN-<U+03B3> and
suppresses production of IL-2 and Th2 cytokines through different mechanisms.
Despite the importance of the T-bet protein level, the regulatory mechanisms that
control T-bet protein stability are largely unknown. In this study, we found that
T-bet underwent proteasomal degradation via ubiquitination at Lys-313. Despite
its robust accumulation following lysine mutation, T-bet(K313R) failed to
increase IFN-<U+03B3> production because of diminished DNA binding activity, as
demonstrated in the crystal structure of T-bet-DNA complex. Strikingly,
T-bet(K313R) entirely lost the ability to suppress IL-2 production and Th2 cell
development; this was due to loss of its interaction with NFAT1. We further
identified that the T-bet(K313R) reduced the phosphorylation of T-bet at Thr-302,
and that threonine phosphorylation was essential for T-bet interaction with NFAT1
and suppression of NFAT1 activity. Retroviral transduction of T-bet(T302A) into
T-bet-deficient cells restored IFN-<U+03B3> levels compared with those induced by
wild-type T-bet, but this mutant failed to inhibit IL-2 and Th2 cytokine
production. Collectively, these data show that Lys-313 in the T-box domain is
essential for controlling T-bet protein stability via ubiquitin-dependent
degradation, T-bet binding to the IFN-<U+03B3> promoter, and for the interaction with
and suppression of NFAT1. Thus, multiple posttranslational modifications of T-bet
are involved in fine-tuning cytokine production during Th cell development.

PMID: 23616576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Am J Pathol. 2013 May;182(5):1865-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.01.025.

Epstein-Barr virus-encoded miR-BART20-5p inhibits T-bet translation with
secondary suppression of p53 in invasive nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma.

Lin TC(1), Liu TY, Hsu SM, Lin CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan 
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

Nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma (NNL) is an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated lymphoma
derived from cytotoxic NK or T cells of the nasal mucosa. NNLs are noninvasive in
the earliest stage, and become invasive with disease progression. The EBV encodes
at least 44 miRNAs, whose functions in the pathogenesis of NNL are mostly
unknown. We evaluated the levels of 39 EBV-encoded miRNAs with quantitative
real-time RT-PCR in a series of 20 noninvasive NNLs and 20 invasive NNLs.
miR-BART20-5p was associated most strongly with invasion (P = 0.001), and lack of
T-bet, the master transcription factor for cytotoxic NK cells. However, we
identified T-bet (official symbol, TBX21) transcripts in T-bet-negative NNLs,
implying a block in the translation of T-bet by miR-BART20-5p. In co-transfection
experiments, miR-BART20-5p inhibited T-bet translation in both non-Hodgkin and
Hodgkin lymphoma cell lines. Endogenous mir-BART20-5p also inhibited translation 
of T-bet in EBV-infected YT lymphoma cells of NK-cell origin. Induction of T-bet 
in YT cells up-regulated p53, leading to increased sensitivity in response to
doxorubicin. Finally, YT cells transplanted into severe combined immunodeficiency
mice had an invasive behavior. Taken together, we conclude that EBV-encoded
miR-BART20-5p inhibits T-bet translation with secondary suppression of p53 in
invasive nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma. An antagomir to miR-BART20-5p might be an
effective therapeutic agent through induction of T-bet and p53.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23608226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Leuk Lymphoma. 2014 Jan;55(1):143-8. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2013.797082. Epub 2013
Jun 4.

Marginal zone lymphomas with monocytoid morphology express T-bet and are
associated with a low number of T cells in extranodal locations.

Lohneis P(1), Wienert S, Klauschen F, Ullrich A, Anagnostopoulos I, Jöhrens K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin , Berlin , Germany.

The presence of tumor cells with monocytoid morphology in marginal zone lymphoma 
(MZL) has been described previously. Reactive monocytoid B cells bear a distinct 
immunophenotype and typically express T-bet, which clearly distinguishes them
from nodal marginal zone B cells. The latter are positive for CD27 and negative
for T-bet. We analyzed 74 MZLs for the expression of T-bet and correlated these
results with the presence of monocytoid morphology. Expression of T-bet
correlated with the presence of monocytoid morphology in MZLs. In analogy to
reactive monocytoid B lymphocytes, we also found a significantly lower relative
amount of intratumoral T lymphocytes in extranodal MZL with monocytoid
morphology.

PMID: 23607257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(4):e1003293. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003293. Epub 2013 Apr
11.

IL-27 receptor signalling restricts the formation of pathogenic, terminally
differentiated Th1 cells during malaria infection by repressing IL-12 dependent
signals.

Villegas-Mendez A(1), de Souza JB, Lavelle SW, Gwyer Findlay E, Shaw TN, van
Rooijen N, Saris CJ, Hunter CA, Riley EM, Couper KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infection, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

The IL-27R, WSX-1, is required to limit IFN-<U+03B3> production by effector CD4<U+207A> T cells
in a number of different inflammatory conditions but the molecular basis of
WSX-1-mediated regulation of Th1 responses in vivo during infection has not been 
investigated in detail. In this study we demonstrate that WSX-1 signalling
suppresses the development of pathogenic, terminally differentiated (KLRG-1<U+207A>) Th1
cells during malaria infection and establishes a restrictive threshold to
constrain the emergent Th1 response. Importantly, we show that WSX-1 regulates
cell-intrinsic responsiveness to IL-12 and IL-2, but the fate of the effector
CD4<U+207A> T cell pool during malaria infection is controlled primarily through IL-12
dependent signals. Finally, we show that WSX-1 regulates Th1 cell terminal
differentiation during malaria infection through IL-10 and Foxp3 independent
mechanisms; the kinetics and magnitude of the Th1 response, and the degree of Th1
cell terminal differentiation, were comparable in WT, IL-10R1<U+207B>/<U+207B> and IL-10<U+207B>/<U+207B>
mice and the numbers and phenotype of Foxp3<U+207A> cells were largely unaltered in
WSX-1<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice during infection. As expected, depletion of Foxp3<U+207A> cells did not
enhance Th1 cell polarisation or terminal differentiation during malaria
infection. Our results significantly expand our understanding of how IL-27
regulates Th1 responses in vivo during inflammatory conditions and establishes
WSX-1 as a critical and non-redundant regulator of the emergent Th1 effector
response during malaria infection.

PMCID: PMC3623720
PMID: 23593003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Cell Metab. 2013 Apr 2;17(4):520-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.02.019.

Improved insulin sensitivity despite increased visceral adiposity in mice
deficient for the immune cell transcription factor T-bet.

Stolarczyk E(1), Vong CT, Perucha E, Jackson I, Cawthorne MA, Wargent ET, Powell 
N, Canavan JB, Lord GM, Howard JK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes and Nutritional Sciences, King's College London, London
SE1 9RT, UK.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2013 Apr 2;17(4):473-4.

Low-grade inflammation in fat is associated with insulin resistance, although the
mechanisms are unclear. We report that mice deficient in the immune cell
transcription factor T-bet have lower energy expenditure and increased visceral
fat compared with wild-type mice, yet paradoxically are more insulin sensitive.
This striking phenotype, present in young T-bet(-/-) mice, persisted with
high-fat diet and increasing host age and was associated with altered immune cell
numbers and cytokine secretion specifically in visceral adipose tissue. However, 
the favorable metabolic phenotype observed in T-bet-deficient hosts was lost in
T-bet(-/-) mice also lacking adaptive immunity (T-bet(-/-)xRag2(-/-)),
demonstrating that T-bet expression in the adaptive rather than the innate immune
system impacts host glucose homeostasis. Indeed, adoptive transfer of
T-bet-deficient, but not wild-type, CD4(+) T cells to Rag2(-/-) mice improved
insulin sensitivity. Our results reveal a role for T-bet in metabolic physiology 
and obesity-associated insulin resistance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3685808
PMID: 23562076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Immunol. 2013 May 1;190(9):4478-82. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203172. Epub 2013
Mar 29.

Cutting edge: the pathogenicity of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing Th17 cells is independent of
T-bet.

Duhen R(1), Glatigny S, Arbelaez CA, Blair TC, Oukka M, Bettelli E.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.

During the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the
proportion of pathogenic and myelin-specific cells within CNS-infiltrating
cytokine-producing Th cells is unknown. Using an IL-17A/IFN-<U+03B3> double reporter
mouse and I-A(b)/myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 38-49 tetramer, we show in
this study that IL-17(+)IFN-<U+03B3>(+) Th cells, which are expanded in the CNS during
EAE, are highly enriched in myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-specific T cells.
We further demonstrate that IL-23 is essential for the generation and expansion
of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing Th17 cells independently of the Th1-associated transcription
factors T-bet, STAT1, and STAT4. Furthermore, Th17 and IL-17(+)IFN-<U+03B3>(+) Th cells 
can induce CNS autoimmunity independently of T-bet. Whereas T-bet is crucial for 
Th1-mediated EAE, it is dispensable for Th17 cell-mediated autoimmunity. Our
results suggest the existence of different epigenetic programs that regulate
IFN-<U+03B3> expression in Th1 and Th17 cells.

PMCID: PMC3633668
PMID: 23543757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Immunol. 2013 May 1;190(9):4585-94. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300099. Epub 2013
Mar 27.

Id2-mediated inhibition of E2A represses memory CD8+ T cell differentiation.

Masson F(1), Minnich M, Olshansky M, Bilic I, Mount AM, Kallies A, Speed TP,
Busslinger M, Nutt SL, Belz GT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia.

The transcription factor inhibitor of DNA binding (Id)2 modulates T cell fate
decisions, but the molecular mechanism underpinning this regulation is unclear.
In this study we show that loss of Id2 cripples effector differentiation and
instead programs CD8(+) T cells to adopt a memory fate with increased
Eomesodermin and Tcf7 expression. We demonstrate that Id2 restrains CD8(+) T cell
memory differentiation by inhibiting E2A-mediated direct activation of Tcf7 and
that Id2 expression level mirrors T cell memory recall capacity. As a result of
the defective effector differentiation, Id2-deficient CD8(+) T cells fail to
induce sufficient Tbx21 expression to generate short-lived effector CD8(+) T
cells. Our findings reveal that the Id2/E2A axis orchestrates T cell
differentiation through the induction or repression of downstream transcription
factors essential for effector and memory T cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3631715
PMID: 23536629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Jun;33(6):1313-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.301437. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

Angiotensin II-induced vascular dysfunction depends on interferon-<U+03B3>-driven immune
cell recruitment and mutual activation of monocytes and NK-cells.

Kossmann S(1), Schwenk M, Hausding M, Karbach SH, Schmidgen MI, Brandt M, Knorr
M, Hu H, Kröller-Schön S, Schönfelder T, Grabbe S, Oelze M, Daiber A, Münzel T,
Becker C, Wenzel P.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Medical Clinic, Center for Thrombosis and Hemostasis, University Medical
Center of Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany.

Erratum in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Aug;33(8):e126.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Jun;33(6):1116-7.

OBJECTIVE: Immune cells contribute to angiotensin II (ATII)-induced vascular
dysfunction and inflammation. Interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>), an inflammatory cytokine
exclusively produced by immune cells, seems to be involved in ATII-driven
cardiovascular injury, but the actions and cellular source of IFN-<U+03B3> remain
incompletely understood.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: IFN-<U+03B3>(-/-) and Tbx21(-/-) mice were partially protected
from ATII-induced (1 mg/kg per day of ATII, infused subcutaneously by miniosmotic
pumps) vascular endothelial and smooth muscle dysfunction, whereas mice
overexpressing IFN-<U+03B3> showed constitutive vascular dysfunction. Absence of T-box
expressed in T cells (T-bet), the IFN-<U+03B3> transcription factor encoded by Tbx21,
reduced vascular superoxide and peroxynitrite formation and attenuated expression
of nicotinamide adenosine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase subunits as well as
inducible NO synthase, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, and interleukin-12 in 
aortas of ATII-infused mice. Compared with controls, IFN-<U+03B3>(-/-) and Tbx21(-/-)
mice were characterized by reduced ATII-mediated vascular recruitment of both
natural killer (NK)1.1(+) NK-cells as the major producers of IFN-<U+03B3> and
CD11b(+)Gr-1(low) interleukin-12 secreting monocytes. Selective depletion and
adoptive transfer experiments identified NK-cells as essential contributors to
vascular dysfunction and showed that T-bet(+)lysozyme M(+) myelomonocytic cells
were required for NK-cell recruitment into vascular tissue and local IFN-<U+03B3>
production.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide first evidence that NK-cells play an essential role in
ATII-induced vascular dysfunction. In addition, we disclose the T-bet-IFN-<U+03B3>
pathway and mutual monocyte-NK-cell activation as potential therapeutic targets
in cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 23520167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Clin Exp Allergy. 2013 Apr;43(4):434-42. doi: 10.1111/cea.12082.

Pre- and post-natal Lactobacillus reuteri supplementation decreases allergen
responsiveness in infancy.

Forsberg A(1), Abrahamsson TR, Björkstén B, Jenmalm MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Autoimmunity and Immune Regulation, Division of Clinical Immunology,
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Sweden.
anna.forsberg@liu.se

BACKGROUND: We have previously shown that Lactobacillus reuteri supplementation
from pregnancy week 36 and to the infant through the first year of life decreased
the prevalence of IgE-associated eczema at 2 years. The underlying immunological 
mechanisms are unknown, however.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the immunomodulatory effect of probiotic
supplementation on allergen- and mitogen-induced immune responses in children
until 2 years of age.
METHODS: Blood mononuclear cells were collected at birth, 6, 12 and 24 months
from 61 children (29 probiotic and 32 placebo treated) and cultured with
ovalbumin, birch and cat extract and Phytohaemagglutinin (PHA). Cytokine and
chemokine secretion was determined using an in-house multiplexed Luminex assay
and ELISA. Real-time PCR was performed to investigate the Ebi3, Foxp3, GATA-3 and
T-bet mRNA expression.
RESULTS: Probiotic treatment was associated with low cat-induced Th2-like
responses at 6 months (IL-5, P = 0.01, and IL-13, P = 0.009), with a similar
trend for IL-5 at 12 months (P = 0.09). Cat-induced IFN-<U+03B3> responses were also
lower after probiotic than after placebo treatment at 24 months (P = 0.007), with
similar findings for the anti-inflammatory IL-10 at birth (P = 0.001) and at 12
months (P = 0.009). At 24 months, Th2-associated CCL22 levels were lower in the
probiotic than in the placebo group after birch stimulation (P = 0.02), with a
similar trend after ovalbumin stimulation (P = 0.07). Lower CCL22 levels were
recorded at 12 and 24 months (P = 0.03 and P = 0.01) after PHA stimulation.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Lactobacillus reuteri supplementation
decreases allergen responsiveness and may enhance immunoregulatory capacity
during infancy. L. reuteri supplementation from week 36 and during the first year
of life significantly decreases IgE-associated eczema and lowers allergen and
mitogen responsiveness.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23517039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Immunol. 2013 Apr 15;190(8):4205-14. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202434. Epub 2013
Mar 18.

Altered T-bet dominance in IFN-<U+03B3>-decoupled CD4+ T cells with attenuated cytokine 
storm and preserved memory in influenza.

Dutta A(1), Miaw SC, Yu JS, Chen TC, Lin CY, Lin YC, Chang CS, He YC, Chuang SH, 
Yen MI, Huang CT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Chang Gung University
and Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kweishan, Taoyuan 33333, Taiwan.

Cytokine storm has been postulated as one of the major causes of mortality in
patients with severe respiratory viral infections such as influenza. With the
help of an influenza Ag- specific mouse experimental system, we report that
CD4(+) T cells contribute effector cytokines leading to lung inflammation in
acute influenza. Although virus can no longer be detected from tissues 14 d
postinfection, virus-derived Ag continues to drive a CD4(+) T cell response after
viral clearance. Ag-specific CD4(+) T cells proliferate and evolve into memory
CD4(+) T cells efficiently, but the production of effector cytokines is seriously
hampered during this phase. This decoupling of proliferation and effector
cytokine production doesn't appear in conjunction with increased suppression by
regulatory T cells or decreased induction of transcription factors. Rather,
GATA-3 and ROR-<U+03B3>t levels are elevated when compared with cells that have effector
cytokine production. T-bet dominance over GATA-3 and ROR-<U+03B3>t decreases with the
disarmament of effector cytokine production. Importantly, upon reinfection, these
decoupled cells produce elevated levels of IFN-<U+03B3> and were effective in virus
eradication. These results provide a mechanism through altered T-bet dominance to
dampen the cytokine storm without impeding the generation of memory T cells in
influenza virus infection.

PMID: 23509355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Cytokine. 2013 Apr;62(1):91-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.02.010. Epub 2013 Mar 13.

IFN-<U+03B3> suppresses permissive chromatin remodeling in the regulatory region of the 
Il4 gene.

Nishida J(1), Li Y, Zhuang Y, Huang Z, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Medicine, National Jewish
Health, Denver, CO 80206, USA.

In order to develop the most effective T helper type-1 (Th1) immunity, naïve
CD4(+) T cells must acquire the capacity to express IFN-<U+03B3> while silencing T
helper type-2 (Th2) cytokine-producing potential. An Il4 gene silencer has been
described. However, it is not completely understood how the silencer works. In
this study, we examine whether IFN-<U+03B3> can suppress permissive chromatin remodeling
of regulatory region of the Il4 gene. We demonstrate that IFN-<U+03B3> suppresses H3K4
dimethylation at the intronic enhancer region of the Il4 gene. The IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated
suppression of permissive chromatin remodeling is IFN-<U+03B3> receptor-, STAT1-, and
T-bet-dependent. Our study reveals a novel mechanism of how Th1 cells silence the
Il4 gene.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3615094
PMID: 23490416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Immunol. 2013 Apr 15;190(8):3977-84. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201730. Epub 2013
Mar 11.

IL-21 promotes CD8+ CTL activity via the transcription factor T-bet.

Sutherland AP(1), Joller N, Michaud M, Liu SM, Kuchroo VK, Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. asutherland@svi.edu.au

CD8(+) T cells are fundamental for immune-mediated clearance of viral infections 
and contribute to immune pathology in autoimmune diseases such as type 1
diabetes. To execute these functions, CD8(+) T cells must differentiate into
CTLs, a process that is precisely regulated by a variety of cytokines,
costimulatory molecules, and transcription factors. IL-21 is an IL-2 family
cytokine and a growth factor for multiple lymphocyte effector lineages, including
cytotoxic CD8(+) T cells. Recent studies demonstrate that loss of IL-21 signaling
results in reduced viral clearance in models of lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus infection, and also protection from type 1 diabetes in the NOD model. This 
is most likely the result of impaired CD8(+) CTL function in the absence of IL-21
signaling. Currently, the mechanisms by which IL-21 promotes CTL differentiation 
in CD8(+) T cells remain unclear, particularly the identity of the relevant
transcription factor(s). We show that IL-21 promotes CTL function in vitro and
killing of pancreatic islets in vivo via the use of transgenic mice expressing
IL-21 in pancreatic ß cells. We demonstrate that IL-21 induces the expression of 
the transcription factor T-bet in CD8(+) T cells, predominantly via STAT1, and
that T-bet is required for the induction of cytolytic molecules, including
perforin and granzyme B in response to IL-21. Finally, we show that IL-21-induced
CTL function is T-bet dependent, as T-bet deficiency results in defective
IL-21-dependent cytotoxicity in CD8(+) T cells in vitro and in vivo. Thus, IL-21 
drives CD8(+) CTL differentiation via the actions of the transcription factor
T-bet.

PMID: 23479229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 19;110(12):4691-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1220865110. Epub 2013 Mar 7.

Functionally distinct Gata3/Chd4 complexes coordinately establish T helper 2
(Th2) cell identity.

Hosokawa H(1), Tanaka T, Suzuki Y, Iwamura C, Ohkubo S, Endoh K, Kato M, Endo Y, 
Onodera A, Tumes DJ, Kanai A, Sugano S, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba
260-8670, Japan.

GATA binding protein 3 (Gata3) is a GATA family transcription factor that
controls differentiation of naïve CD4 T cells into T helper 2 (Th2) cells.
However, it is unknown how Gata3 simultaneously activates Th2-specific genes
while repressing those of other Th lineages. Here we show that chromodomain
helicase DNA-binding protein 4 (Chd4) forms a complex with Gata3 in Th2 cells
that both activates Th2 cytokine transcription and represses the Th1 cytokine
IFN-<U+03B3>. We define a Gata3/Chd4/p300 transcriptional activation complex at the Th2 
cytokine loci and a Gata3/Chd4-nucleosome remodeling histone deacetylase
repression complex at the Tbx21 locus in Th2 cells. We also demonstrate a
physiological role for Chd4 in Th2-dependent inflammation in an in vivo model of 
asthmatic inflammation. Thus, Gata3/Chd4 forms functionally distinct complexes,
which mediate both positive and negative gene regulation to facilitate Th2 cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3606997
PMID: 23471993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Nat Immunol. 2013 Apr;14(4):389-95. doi: 10.1038/ni.2545. Epub 2013 Mar 3.

The transcription factor T-bet is essential for the development of NKp46+ innate 
lymphocytes via the Notch pathway.

Rankin LC(1), Groom JR, Chopin M, Herold MJ, Walker JA, Mielke LA, McKenzie AN,
Carotta S, Nutt SL, Belz GT.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Aug;14(8):877.
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Apr;14(4):395.

NKp46+ innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) serve important roles in regulating the
intestinal microbiota and defense against pathogens. Whether NKp46+ ILCs arise
directly from lymphoid tissue-inducer (LTi) cells or represent a separate lineage
remains controversial. We report here that the transcription factor T-bet
(encoded by Tbx21) was essential for the development of NKp46+ ILCs but not of
LTi cells or nuocytes. Deficiency in interleukin 22 (IL-22)-producing NKp46+ ILCs
resulted in greater susceptibility of Tbx21-/- mice to intestinal infection.
Haploinsufficient T-bet expression resulted in lower expression of the signaling 
molecule Notch, and Notch signaling was necessary for the transition of LTi cells
into NKp46+ ILCs. Furthermore, NKp46+ ILCs differentiated solely from the CD4-
LTi population, not the CD4+ LTi population. Our results pinpoint the regulation 
of Notch signaling by T-bet as a distinct molecular pathway that guides the
development of NKp46+ ILCs.

PMCID: PMC4076532
PMID: 23455676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Immunol. 2013 Apr 1;190(7):3207-15. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201556. Epub 2013
Mar 1.

Differential localization of T-bet and Eomes in CD8 T cell memory populations.

McLane LM(1), Banerjee PP, Cosma GL, Makedonas G, Wherry EJ, Orange JS, Betts MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

In mice, two T-box transcription factors, T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) and 
eomesodermin (Eomes), drive the differentiation of CD8 T cell lineages; however, 
little is known regarding their role in human CD8 T cell differentiation. In this
study, we characterized T-bet and Eomes expression and localization within human 
CD8 memory T cell populations. We find that T-bet and Eomes are broadly expressed
in human memory CD8 T cells, with increasing levels of T-bet and Eomes strongly
correlating with differentiation from central memory to effector memory and
effector subpopulations. In resting T cells, T-bet levels directly correlate to
subcellular localization, with a higher propensity for nuclear expression of
T-bet within T-bet(hi) cells and predominantly cytoplasmic expression in
T-bet(lo) cells. In addition, Eomes is also localized to either the nucleus or
the cytoplasm. Upon TCR stimulation, the percentage of T cells that express T-bet
dramatically increases, whereas the percentage of cells expressing Eomes remains 
largely unchanged across all memory populations. Of interest, T-bet, but not
Eomes, relocalizes to the nucleus in the majority of cells across all populations
within 24 h post stimulation. These data indicate that T-bet and Eomes are likely
regulated at the level of subcellular localization, potentially via different
mechanisms. Together, these findings suggest a novel model for CD8 T cell
differentiation in humans that is based on the localization of T-bet and Eomes.

PMCID: PMC3608800
PMID: 23455505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Immunity. 2013 Apr 18;38(4):769-81. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.02.010. Epub 2013 
Feb 28.

Intraepithelial type 1 innate lymphoid cells are a unique subset of IL-12- and
IL-15-responsive IFN-<U+03B3>-producing cells.

Fuchs A(1), Vermi W, Lee JS, Lonardi S, Gilfillan S, Newberry RD, Cella M,
Colonna M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2013 Apr 18;38(4):630-2.

Mucosal innate lymphoid cell (ILC) subsets promote immune responses to pathogens 
by producing distinct signature cytokines in response to changes in the cytokine 
microenvironment. We previously identified human ILC3 distinguished by
interleukin-22 (IL-22) secretion. Here we characterized a human ILC1 subset that 
produced interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) in response to IL-12 and IL-15 and had a unique
integrin profile, intraepithelial location, hallmarks of TGF-ß imprinting, and a 
memory-activated phenotype. Because tissue-resident memory CD8(+) T cells share
this profile, intraepithelial ILC1 may be their innate counterparts. In mice,
intraepithelial ILC1 were distinguished by CD160 expression and required Nfil3-
and Tbx21-encoded transcription factors for development, but not IL-15
receptor-a, indicating that intraepithelial ILC1 are distinct from conventional
NK cells. Intraepithelial ILC1 were amplified in Crohn's disease patients and
contributed to pathology in the anti-CD40-induced colitis model in mice. Thus,
intraepithelial ILC1 may initiate IFN-<U+03B3> responses against pathogens but
contribute to pathology when dysregulated.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3634355
PMID: 23453631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Jun;93(6):825-36. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0912438. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Increased T-bet is associated with senescence of influenza virus-specific CD8 T
cells in aged humans.

Dolfi DV(1), Mansfield KD, Polley AM, Doyle SA, Freeman GJ, Pircher H, Schmader
KE, Wherry EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Department of Microbiology, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Comment in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Jun;93(6):819-21.

Aged individuals have increased morbidity and mortality following influenza and
other viral infections, despite previous exposure or vaccination. Mouse and human
studies suggest increased senescence and/or exhaustion of influenza
virus-specific CD8 T cells with advanced age. However, neither the relationship
between senescence and exhaustion nor the underlying transcriptional pathways
leading to decreased function of influenza virus-specific cellular immunity in
elderly humans are well-defined. Here, we demonstrate that increased percentages 
of CD8 T cells from aged individuals express CD57 and KLRG1, along with PD-1 and 
other inhibitory receptors, markers of senescence, or exhaustion, respectively.
Expression of T-box transcription factors, T-bet and Eomes, were also increased
in CD8 T cells from aged subjects and correlated closely with expression of CD57 
and KLRG1. Influenza virus-specific CD8 T cells from aged individuals exhibited
decreased functionality with corresponding increases in CD57, KLRG1, and T-bet, a
molecular regulator of terminal differentiation. However, in contrast to total
CD8 T cells, influenza virus-specific CD8 T cells had altered expression of
inhibitory receptors, including lower PD-1, in aged compared with young subjects.
Thus, our data suggest a prominent role for senescence and/or terminal
differentiation for influenza virus-specific CD8 T cells in elderly subjects.

PMCID: PMC4051188
PMID: 23440501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Toxicology. 2013 Apr 5;306:59-67. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.02.004. Epub 2013 Feb
14.

Maternal exposure to airborne particulate matter causes postnatal immunological
dysfunction in mice offspring.

Hong X(1), Liu C, Chen X, Song Y, Wang Q, Wang P, Hu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Fuzhou General Hospital, Fujian,
China. hxr0812@163.com

Evidence suggests that prenatal exposure to air pollution affects the ontogeny
and development of the fetal immune system. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effect of maternal exposure to airborne particulate matter (PM)
on immune function in postnatal offspring. Pregnant female ICR mice were
intralaryngopharyngeally administered with 30 µl of phosphate buffered solution
(the control group) or resuspended PM of Standard Reference Material 1649a at
0.09 (low), 0.28 (medium), 1.85 (high) or 6.92 (overdose) µg/µl once every three 
days from day 0 to 18 of pregnancy (n=8-10). Offspring were sacrificed on
postnatal day 30. Interleukin-4 and interferon-<U+03B3> levels in plasma and
splenocytes, splenic lymphocyte proliferation, and expressions of GATA-3 and
T-bet mRNA in the spleen were tested. The spleen and thymus were
histopathologically examined. The offspring of the medium, high and overdose
PM-exposed dams showed significantly suppressed splenocyte proliferation.
Decreased interferon-<U+03B3> and increased interleukin-4 levels in the blood and
splenocytes, and lowered T-bet and elevated GATA-3 mRNA expressions were found in
the spleen in the medium, high and overdose groups when compared with the control
or low dose group (P<0.05). Histopathology revealed prominent tissue damage in
the spleen and thymus in the overdose group. These results suggest that exposure 
of pregnant mice to PM modulates the fetal immune system, resulting in postnatal 
immune dysfunction by exacerbation of Thl/Th2 deviation. This deviation is
associated with altered T-bet and GATA-3 gene expressions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23416701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Immunotherapy. 2013 Feb;5(2):143-53. doi: 10.2217/imt.12.139.

Effect of immune modulation therapy on cardiac function and T-bet/GATA-3 gene
expression in aging male patients with chronic cardiac insufficiency.

Han LN(1), Guo SL, Li TL, Ding GL, Zhang YJ, Ma JL.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Geriatric Cardiology Internal Medicine, Chinese PLA
General Hospital, Number 28 Fuxing Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100853, China.

AIM: The aim of this study was to explore the role of immune modulation therapy
in regulating the imbalance of Th1/Th2, serum IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4 and the T-cell-specific
transcription factors T-bet/GATA-3 in peripheral blood in aging male patients
with chronic cardiac insufficiency (CCI).
PATIENTS & METHODS: In total, 156 participants were divided into three groups:
the CCI intervention group, which received regular therapy and thymopetidum (20
mg intramuscular injection, once every other day for 3 months; n = 70), the CCI
control group, which received regular therapy (n = 56) and 50 healthy individuals
older than 57 years of age, who served as normal controls.
RESULTS: Before therapy, in comparison with the control group, levels of left
ventricular end diastolic diameter, NT-proBNP, C-reactive protein (CRP), Th1,
Th1/Th2, IFN-<U+03B3>, and T-bet mRNA and T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA all increased, and the level
of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), 6MWT, Th2, IL-4, and GATA-3 mRNA
also decreased in both the CCI intervention and control groups. Linear
correlation analysis indicated that LVEF was inversely correlated with serum
NT-proBNP, CRP, Th1/Th2, IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA, and was positively
correlated with plasma IL-4. After 3 months of therapy, levels of left
ventricular end diastolic diameter, NT-proBNP, CRP, Th1, Th1/Th2, IFN-<U+03B3>, T-bet
mRNA and T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA decreased in the two CCI subgroups, but levels in the 
CCI intervention group were lower in comparison to the control group. Levels of
LVEF, 6MWT, Th2 and GATA-3 mRNA increased in the two CCI subgroups, while levels 
in the CCI intervention group were higher in comparison with the control group.
Plasma levels of IL-4 showed no change after treatment.
CONCLUSION: Immune modulation improved cardiac function of CCI patients and was
associated with amelioration of T-helper superficial transcription factor
polarization and its related cytokine imbalance. Immune modulation might be a new
treatment strategy for aging CCI patients.

PMID: 23413906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55074. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055074. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Transcriptome analysis of epigenetically modulated genome indicates signature
genes in manifestation of type 1 diabetes and its prevention in NOD mice.

Jayaraman S(1), Patel A, Jayaraman A, Patel V, Holterman M, Prabhakar B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
anue2468@uic.edu

Classic genetic studies implicated several genes including immune response genes 
in the risk of developing type 1 diabetes in humans. However, recent evidence
including discordant diabetes incidence among monozygotic twins suggested a role 
for epigenetics in disease manifestation. NOD mice spontaneously develop type 1
diabetes like humans and serve as an excellent model system to study the
mechanisms of type 1 diabetes as well as the efficacy of maneuvers to manipulate 
the disease. Using this preclinical model, we have recently demonstrated that
pharmacological inhibition of histone deacetylases can lead to histone
hyperacetylation, selective up-regulation of interferon-<U+03B3> and its transactivator 
Tbx21/Tbet, and amelioration of autoimmune diabetes. In the current study, we
show that chromatin remodeling can render splenocytes incapable of transferring
diabetes into immunodeficient NOD.scid mice. To elucidate the underlying
mechanisms of drug-mediated protection against type 1 diabetes, we performed
global gene expression profiling of splenocytes using high throughput microarray 
technology. This unbiased transcriptome analysis unraveled the exaggerated
expression of a novel set of closely related inflammatory genes in splenocytes of
acutely diabetic mice and their repression in mice cured of diabetes by chromatin
remodeling. Analysis of gene expression by qRT-PCR using RNA derived from spleens
and pancreata of cured mice validated the suppression of most of these genes,
indicating an inverse correlation between the high levels of these inflammatory
genes and protection against diabetes in NOD mice. In addition, higher-level
expression of genes involved in insulin sensitivity, erythropoiesis,
hemangioblast generation, and cellular redox control was evident in spleens of
cured mice, indicating their possible contribution to protection against type 1
diabetes. Taken together, these results are consistent with the involvement of
epistatic mechanisms in the manifestation of autoimmune diabetes and further
indicate the utility of chromatin remodeling in curing this complex autoimmune
disorder.

PMCID: PMC3559426
PMID: 23383062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Infect Immun. 2013 Apr;81(4):1256-66. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01209-12. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

5-Lipoxygenase activity increases susceptibility to experimental Paracoccidioides
brasiliensis infection.

Tristão FS(1), Rocha FA, Moreira AP, Cunha FQ, Rossi MA, Silva JS.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica e Imunologia, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão
Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.

Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) is a systemic mycosis caused by the thermodimorphic 
fungus Paracoccidioides brasiliensis. Leukotrienes and lipoxins are lipid
mediators produced after 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) activation that exhibit pro- and
anti-inflammatory roles, respectively. Here, we have investigated the
contribution of 5-LO enzymatic activity in PCM using an experimental model of P. 
brasiliensis infection. B6.129 wild-type (B6.129) and 5-LO-deficient (5-LO(-/-)) 
mice were intravenously inoculated with a virulent strain of P. brasiliensis
(Pb18), and the survival rate of the infected mice was investigated on different 
days after yeast infection. 5-LO(-/-) mice exhibited an increased survival rate
associated with a decreased number of CFU. The resistance of 5-LO(-/-) during PCM
was associated with augmented nitric oxide (NO) production and the formation of
compact granulomas. In addition, the absence of 5-LO was associated with a
diminished number of CD4(+) CD25(+) regulatory T cells, higher levels of gamma
interferon and interleukin-12, and increased T-bet (a T-box transcription factor 
that directs Th1 lineage commitment) mRNA levels in the lungs. Taken together,
our results show for the first time that 5-LO enzymatic activity increases
susceptibility to P. brasiliensis, suggesting that this pathway may be a
potential target for therapeutic intervention during PCM.

PMCID: PMC3639621
PMID: 23381993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Immunol. 2013 Mar 1;190(5):2199-207. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202256. Epub 2013
Jan 28.

IL-2 produced by CD8+ immune T cells can augment their IFN-<U+03B3> production
independently from their proliferation in the secondary response to an
intracellular pathogen.

Sa Q(1), Woodward J, Suzuki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Kentucky College of Medicine,
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Chronic infection with Toxoplasma gondii induces a potent resistance against
reinfection, and IFN-<U+03B3> production by CD8(+) T cells is crucial for the protective
immunity. However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate the secondary response 
remain to be elucidated. In the current study, we examined the role of IL-2 in
IFN-<U+03B3> production by CD8(+) immune T cells in their secondary responses using T.
gondii-specific CD8(+) T cell hybridomas and splenic CD8(+) immune T cells from
chronically infected mice. The majority (92%) of CD8(+) T cell hybridomas
produced large amounts of IFN-<U+03B3> only when a low amount (0.5 ng/ml) of exogenous
IL-2 was provided in combination with T. gondii Ags. Inhibition of cell
proliferation by mitomycin C did not affect the enhancing effect of IL-2 on the
IFN-<U+03B3> production, and significant increases in transcription factor T-bet
expression were associated with the IL-2-mediated IFN-<U+03B3> amplification. Splenic
CD8(+) immune T cells produced similar low levels of IL-2 in the secondary
response to T. gondii, and a blocking of IL-2 signaling by anti-IL-2Ra Ab or
inhibitors of JAK1 and JAK3 significantly reduced IFN-<U+03B3> production of the T
cells. This IL-2-mediated upregulation of IFN-<U+03B3> production was observed in
mitomycin C-treated CD8(+) immune T cells, thus independent from their cell
division. Therefore, endogenous IL-2 produced by CD8(+) immune T cells can play
an important autocrine-enhancing role on their IFN-<U+03B3> production in the secondary 
responses to T. gondii, suggesting an importance of induction of CD8(+) immune T 
cells with an appropriate IL-2 production for vaccine development.

PMCID: PMC3578122
PMID: 23359502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2012 Oct;37(5):357-62.

[Effects of acupoint injection of autoblood on expression of pulmonary
transcription factor GATA 3 and T-bet proteins and genes in asthma rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Mo L(1), Li JX, Kravitz J, Tang CZ, Guo ZK, Li PY, Guo FM.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Hospital of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, Foshan 528200, 
China. mollc@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of autoblood acupoint-injection (ABAI) on
expression levels of pulmonary transacting T-cell-specific transcription factor
GATA 3 (involving Th 2 cytokine expression), Th 1-specific T-box transcription
factor T-box expressed in T-cells (T-bet) proteins and genes in asthmatic rats so
as to explore its mechanisms underlying asthma relief.
METHODS: Forty-eight male SD rats were randomized into normal control (n = 8),
model (n = 10), saline acupoint-injection (SAI, n = 10), ABAI (n = 10), and
Dexamethasone (DXM, n = 10) groups. Asthma model was established during 28 days
by 10% Ovalbumin + 10% aluminium hydroxide solution injection (i. p.) and
vapourized 2% Ovalbumin inhaling for 14 days. For rats of the ABAI group, 0.4 mL 
autoblood was injected into the bilateral "Feishu" (BL 13) or "Shenshu" (BL 23)
alternately, once every other day for six times. For rats of the DXM group, 50%
DXM solution (0.5 mg/kg, i. p.) was given from the 17th day on after starting the
modeling, once every other day for 11 days. Pulmonary GATA 3 and T-bet protein
expression was detected by immunohistochemistry, and GATA 3 mRNA and T-bet mRNA
expression detected by real time-PCR.
RESULTS: In comparison with the normal group, pulmonary GATA 3 protein and mRNA
expression levels in the model group were up-regulated significantly (P < 0.01), 
while T-bet mRNA expression in the model group was down-regulated obviously (P < 
0.01). Compared to the model group, GATA 3 protein and mRNA expression levels
were down-regulated significantly in both ABAI and DXM groups (P < 0.01), while
T-bet protein expression in ABAI group and T-bet mRNA expression in both ABAI and
DXM groups were up-regulated significantly (P < 0.01, P < 0.05). No significant
differences were found between model and SAI groups, and between ABAI and DXM
groups in GATA 3 protein expression levels; and between ABAI and DXM groups in
GATA 3 mRNA expression levels; between normal and model groups, and between SAI
and ABAI groups in T-bet protein expression levels; between model and SAI groups 
and between ABAI and DXM groups in T-bet mRNA expression levels (P > 0.05). The
ratio of GATA 3 mRNA/T-bet mRNA expression was significantly higher in the model 
group than in the normal group (P < 0.01), while obviously lower in the SAI, ABAI
and DXM groups than in the model group (P < 0.05, P < 0.01). Additionally, the
ratios of GATA 3 mRNA/T-bet mRNA in ABAI and DXM groups were comparable (P >
0.05).
CONCLUSION: Autoblood acupoint injection is comparable to DXM intraperitoneal
injection in down-regulating asthma-induced increase of pulmonary GATA 3 protein 
and mRNA expression as well as ratio of GATA 3 mRNA/T-bet mRNA, and in
up-regulating asthma-induced decrease of T-bet mRNA expression in asthma rats,
which may contribute to their effects in relieving asthma.

PMID: 23342773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Immunol. 2013 Mar 1;190(5):2178-87. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201945. Epub 2013
Jan 21.

Critical role for all-trans retinoic acid for optimal effector and effector
memory CD8 T cell differentiation.

Allie SR(1), Zhang W, Tsai CY, Noelle RJ, Usherwood EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

A plethora of work implicates important effects of the vitamin A derivative
retinoic acid (RA) in myeloid differentiation, whereas fewer studies explore the 
role of RA in lymphoid cells. Most work on lymphoid cells has focused on the
influence of RA on CD4 T cells. Little information about the role of RA in CD8 T 
cell differentiation is available, and even less on cell-intrinsic effects in the
CD8 T cell. This study explores the role of RA in effector and memory
differentiation in a cell-intrinsic manner in the context of vaccinia virus
infection. We observed the loss of the short-lived effector cell phenotype
(reduced KLRG1(+), T-bet(hi), granzyme B(hi)), accompanied by an enhanced memory 
precursor phenotype at the effector (increased CD127(hi), IL-2(+)) and
contraction phases (increased CD127(hi), IL-2(+), eomesodermin(hi)) of the CD8
response in the absence of RA signaling. The lack of RA also increased the
proportion of central memory CD8s. Collectively, these results introduce a new
role for RA in CD8 T cell activation and differentiation. This new role may have 
significant implications for optimal vaccine design in which vitamin A
supplementation is used to augment effector responses, but it may be to the
detriment of the long-term central memory response.

PMCID: PMC3578118
PMID: 23338237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Nat Immunol. 2013 Mar;14(3):221-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.2534. Epub 2013 Jan 20.

Human type 1 innate lymphoid cells accumulate in inflamed mucosal tissues.

Bernink JH(1), Peters CP, Munneke M, te Velde AA, Meijer SL, Weijer K,
Hreggvidsdottir HS, Heinsbroek SE, Legrand N, Buskens CJ, Bemelman WA, Mjösberg
JM, Spits H.

Author information: 
(1)Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 Feb;13(2):67.

Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are effectors of innate immunity and regulators of
tissue modeling. Recently identified ILC populations have a cytokine expression
pattern that resembles that of the helper T cell subsets T(H)2, T(H)17 and
T(H)22. Here we describe a distinct ILC subset similar to T(H)1 cells, which we
call 'ILC1'. ILC1 cells expressed the transcription factor T-bet and responded to
interleukin 12 (IL-12) by producing interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>). ILC1 cells were
distinct from natural killer (NK) cells as they lacked perforin, granzyme B and
the NK cell markers CD56, CD16 and CD94, and could develop from ROR<U+03B3>t(+) ILC3
under the influence of IL-12. The frequency of the ILC1 subset was much higher in
inflamed intestine of people with Crohn's disease, which indicated a role for
these IFN-<U+03B3>-producing ILC1 cells in the pathogenesis of gut mucosal inflammation.

PMID: 23334791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Clin Immunol. 2013 May;33(4):809-16. doi: 10.1007/s10875-013-9864-7. Epub 2013 
Jan 19.

Imbalanced expression of T-bet and T cell immunoglobulin mucin-3 in patients with
aplastic anaemia.

Shan NN(1), Hu Y, Liu X, Wang X, Yuan D, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, 324 Jing Wu Rd, Jinan, Shandong, 250021, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Activated T helper (Th)-1 CD4+ cells and their mediators are
essential for pathogenesis processes in aplastic anaemia (AA). Recently, T-cell
immunoglobulin and mucin domain 3 (Tim-3) molecules, a Th1-specific type 1
membrane protein, have been suggested to be important regulators of both Th1
proliferation and the development of tolerance. Moreover, T-box expressed in T
cells (T-bet) is a major T cell transcription factor that regulates the
expression of Th1 cytokine genes and plays a crucial role in T cell
differentiation. The function of Tim-3 and its association with T-bet in the
pathophysiology of AA remain unclear.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Plasma IL-18, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-4 levels were measured in patients
with newly diagnosed AA (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>29), AA in remission (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>22) and healthy subjects
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>30) via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). CD4+ Tim-3+ cells were
evaluated via flow cytometry and expressed as a percentage of the total number of
CD4+ cells. Using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
mRNA expression analysis the expression levels of Tim-3, IL-18, IFN-<U+03B3> and T-box
(T-bet) were examined in all subjects.
RESULTS: Tim-3 was expressed on CD4+T cells. The percentages of Tim-3 cells
identified in newly diagnosed patients were significantly deceased compared with 
the controls. Meanwhile T-bet, IL-18 and IFN-<U+03B3> levels were significantly elevated
in patients, which resulted in an increased ratio of T-bet/Tim-3 expression
levels in patients with active disease. During the remission stages, the levels
of these cytokines were comparable with those observed in the healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the imbalanced expression of Tim-3 and
T-bet may play a role in the pathogenesis and course of AA, and the
downregulation of T-bet/Tim-3 may represent a reasonable therapeutic strategy for
AA treatment.

PMID: 23334427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Nature. 2013 Feb 14;494(7436):261-5. doi: 10.1038/nature11813. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

A T-bet gradient controls the fate and function of CCR6-ROR<U+03B3>t+ innate lymphoid
cells.

Klose CS(1), Kiss EA, Schwierzeck V, Ebert K, Hoyler T, d'Hargues Y, Göppert N,
Croxford AL, Waisman A, Tanriver Y, Diefenbach A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Freiburg,
Hermann-Herder-Strasse 11, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 Feb;13(2):67.

At mucosal surfaces, the immune system should not initiate inflammatory immune
responses to the plethora of antigens constantly present in the environment, but 
should remain poised to unleash a potent assault on intestinal pathogens. The
transcriptional programs and regulatory factors required for immune cells to
switch from homeostatic (often tissue-protective) function to potent
antimicrobial immunity are poorly defined. Mucosal retinoic-acid-receptor-related
orphan receptor-<U+03B3>t-positive (ROR<U+03B3>t(+)) innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are emerging 
as an important innate lymphocyte population required for immunity to intestinal 
infections. Various subsets of ROR<U+03B3>t(+) ILCs have been described but the
transcriptional programs controlling their specification and fate remain largely 
unknown. Here we provide evidence that the transcription factor T-bet determines 
the fate of a distinct lineage of CCR6(-)ROR<U+03B3>t(+) ILCs. Postnatally emerging
CCR6(-)ROR<U+03B3>t(+) ILCs upregulated T-bet and this was controlled by cues from the
commensal microbiota and interleukin-23 (IL-23). In contrast, CCR6(+)ROR<U+03B3>t(+)
ILCs, which arise earlier during ontogeny, did not express T-bet. T-bet
instructed the expression of T-bet target genes such as interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and 
of the natural cytotoxicity receptor NKp46. Mice genetically lacking T-bet showed
normal development of CCR6(-)ROR<U+03B3>t(+) ILCs, but they could not differentiate into
NKp46-expressing ROR<U+03B3>t(+) ILCs (that is, IL-22-producing natural killer (NK-22)
cells) and failed to produce IFN-<U+03B3>. The production of IFN-<U+03B3> by T-bet-expressing
CCR6(-)ROR<U+03B3>t(+) ILCs was essential for the release of mucus-forming glycoproteins
required to protect the epithelial barrier during Salmonella enterica infection. 
Salmonella infection also causes severe enterocolitis that is at least partly
driven by IFN-<U+03B3>. Mice deficient for T-bet or depleted of ILCs developed only mild
enterocolitis. Thus, graded expression of T-bet in CCR6(-)ROR<U+03B3>t(+) ILCs
facilitates the differentiation of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing CCR6(-)ROR<U+03B3>t(+) ILCs required 
to protect the epithelial barrier against Salmonella infections. Co-expression of
T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t, which is also found in subsets of IL-17-producing T-helper
(T(H)17) cells, may be an evolutionarily conserved transcriptional program that
originally developed as part of the innate defence against infections but that
also confers an increased risk of immune-mediated pathology.

PMID: 23334414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Nov 20;92(43):3079-84.

[FLT3 signaling manipulates conventional dendritic cells to regulate acute lung
injury].

[Article in Chinese]

Dong L(1), Xu JY, Liu J, Lu XM, Yang Y, Qiu HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Nanjing Zhongda Hospital, Southeast
University, Nanjing 210009, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of FLT3 signaling on the accumulation and
maturation of pulmonary conventional dendritic cells (cDCs) and determine whether
or not the inhibition of FLT3 signaling may attenuate acute lung
inflammation/injury (ALI).
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were pretreated separately with FLT3-ligand (FLT3L) and
lestaurtinib for 5 days. Murine model of ALI was subsequently induced by an
intra-tracheal instillation of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and lung specimens were
harvested 24 hours later. The accumulation and maturation status of pulmonary
cDCs were assessed by flow cytometry. Lung myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity was
measured to evaluate the infiltration of neutrophils. The ratio between
transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA was determined to estimate the
balance of Th1/Th2 response. Lung injury was estimated by lung wet weight/body
weight ratio (LWW/BW) and histopathological assessment.
RESULTS: LPS challenge resulted in rapid accumulation and maturation of pulmonary
cDCs. FLT3L pretreatment further stimulated the accumulation and maturation of
pulmonary cDCs, leading to a marked deterioration of LWW/BW and lung
histopathological changes. Meanwhile, the lung MPO activity and T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA
ratio were boosted by the administration of FLT3L. In contrast, the lestaurtinib 
pretreatment inhibited the accumulation and maturation of pulmonary cDCs, leading
to a significant improvement of LWW/BW and lung histopathological changes. The
administration of lestaurtinib also suppressed the lung MPO activity and
T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA ratio in the lung.
CONCLUSIONS: FLT3 signaling attenuates ALI by regulating the accumulation and
maturation of pulmonary cDCs, indicating a potential pharmacotherapy for ALI.

PMID: 23328383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Reprod Sci. 2013 Jun;20(6):699-709. doi: 10.1177/1933719112466297. Epub 2013 Jan 
10.

Modulation of the expression of the transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in
immortalized human endometrial stromal cells (HESCs) by sex steroid hormones and 
cAMP.

Lu Y(1), Bocca S, Anderson S, Wang H, Manhua C, Beydoun H, Oehninger S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Jones Institute for Reproductive 
Medicine, Norfolk, Virginia, USA.

T-bet and GATA-3 are known to regulate cytokine expression in T lymphocytes, and 
cytokines have been implicated in endometrial regulation and implantation.
Previous work showed that female steroid hormones modulate the expression of
T-bet in endometrial epithelial cells, suggesting a mechanism for local immune
regulation in the human endometrium. We hypothesized that stromal cells are
involved in immune regulation, as they have been shown to exert paracrine effects
on other endometrial cells and compartments and also secrete cytokines. The
objective of this study was to examine the modulation of the gene expression of
T-bet and GATA-3, and of the cytokines interferon <U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and interleukin 4
(IL-4), by female steroid hormones, in human endometrial stromal cells (HESC) in 
long-term cultures (30 days) mimicking the normal menstrual cycle. T-bet and
GATA-3 messenger RNA (mRNA) expression was detected by real-time polymerase chain
reaction, and intracellular protein production was demonstrated by
immunoblotting. In addition, secretion of IL-4 and IL-15 was measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. T-bet and IL-4 mRNA expression increased and
GATA-3 decreased under decidualization conditions; IFN-<U+03B3> was not detected.
Secretion of IL-15 increased during decidualization, and IL-15 upregulated T-bet 
gene expression. In conclusion, gene expression of T-bet and GATA-3 by
endometrial stromal cells is under hormonal conditions mimicking decidualization,
and the results are consistent with an autocrine regulatory mechanism of IL-15
secretion and T-bet expression.

PMID: 23308012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Immunol Cell Biol. 2013 Feb;91(2):173-83. doi: 10.1038/icb.2012.74. Epub 2013 Jan
8.

CD134/CD137 dual costimulation-elicited IFN-<U+03B3> maximizes effector T-cell function 
but limits Treg expansion.

St Rose MC(1), Taylor RA, Bandyopadhyay S, Qui HZ, Hagymasi AT, Vella AT, Adler
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
CT 06030-3710, USA.

T-cell tolerance to tumor antigens represents a major hurdle in generating tumor 
immunity. Combined administration of agonistic monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to
the costimulatory receptors CD134 plus CD137 can program T-cells responding to
tolerogenic antigen to undergo expansion, and effector T-cell differentiation,
and also elicits tumor immunity. Nevertheless, CD134 and CD137 agonists can also 
engage inhibitory immune components. To understand how immune stimulatory versus 
inhibitory components are regulated during CD134 plus CD137 dual costimulation
(DCo), the current study utilized a model where DCo programs T-cells encountering
a highly tolerogenic self-antigen to undergo effector differentiation. IFN-<U+03B3> was 
found to have a pivotal role in maximizing the function of effector T-cells,
while simultaneously limiting the expansion of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) Tregs. In
antigen-responding effector T-cells, IFN-<U+03B3> operates via a direct cell-intrinsic
mechanism to cooperate with IL-2 to program maximal expression of granzyme B.
Simultaneously, IFN-<U+03B3> limits expression of the IL-2 receptor alpha chain (CD25)
and IL-2 signaling through a mechanism that does not involve T-bet-mediated
repression of IL-2. IFN-<U+03B3> also limited CD25 and Foxp3 expression on bystanding
CD4(+)Foxp3(+) Tregs, and limited the potential of these Tregs to expand. These
effects could not be explained by the ability of IFN-<U+03B3> to limit IL-2
availability. Taken together, during DCo IFN-<U+03B3> interacts with IL-2 through
distinct mechanisms to program maximal expression of effector molecules in
antigen-responding T-cells, while simultaneously limiting Treg expansion.

PMCID: PMC3570742
PMID: 23295363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2012 Dec;34(6):563-6. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2012.06.005.

[Regulatory effects of cyclosporin A and tacrolimus on the immunological gene
expressions in renal transplant recipients].

[Article in Chinese]

Wen J(1), Ji ZG, Niu JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, PUMC Hospital, CAMS and PUMC, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the change of Th immunological gene in renal transplant
recipients after the treatment of cyclosporine (CsA) and tacrolimus (FK506).
METHODS: The peripheral blood lymphacytes just before and 24 hours after CsA and 
FK506 treatment were isolated. The total RNA of them were reverse-transcripted
and examined by real-time quantity PCR array. The results were analyzed by
bioinformatic methods.
RESULTS: The TLR4, CEBPB, IL4R, IL1R1,IL18R1,and IL1R2 genes were remarkably
upregulated, whereas IL-2, CCL5, CD27, CCR5, CCR4, CD4, RPL13A, TGFB3, CD86,
CCR3, STAT1, NFATC2IP, IL23A, IL15, IRF4, and TFCP2 were downregulated 24 hours
after CsA treatment. The IL18, IL7, PTPRC, TNFSF4, SPP1, GFI1, TLR4, IL13RA1,
TNF, INHBA, LAG3, IL13, IL1R1, SOCS5, IL10, YY1, TBX21, FASLG, IL18R1, and IL1R2 
genes were remarkably upregulated, whereas IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-6,CCR5, CD4,
CD27, CD40LG, IL15, CCR3, CD86, CCR4, and IRF4 were obviously downregulated 24
hours after FK506 treatment.
CONCLUSION: CsA and FK506 exert their therapeutic effectiveness by regulating the
expressions of a series of target genes.

PMID: 23286399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Rare Dis. 2013 Nov 6;1:e26764. doi: 10.4161/rdis.26764. eCollection 2013.

NOTCH signaling in immune-mediated bone marrow failure of aplastic anemia.

Minter LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences; University of Massachusetts
Amherst; Amherst, MA USA.

Severe aplastic anemia is a rare bone marrow failure disease with the majority of
cases caused by aberrant immune destruction of blood progenitors. Although the
Th1-mediated pathology of aplastic anemia is well-described, the molecular
mechanisms that drive disease progression remain ill-defined. The NOTCH signaling
pathway mediates Th1 differentiation in the presence of polarizing cytokines, an 
action requiring enzymatic processing of NOTCH receptors by <U+03B3>- secretase. We used
a mouse model of aplastic anemia to demonstrate that expression both of
intracellular NOTCH1 (NOTCH1(IC)) and T-BET, a key transcription factor
regulating Th1 differentiation, were increased in T cells in the spleen and bone 
marrow during active disease. Conditionally deleting NOTCH1 or administering
<U+03B3>-secretase inhibitors (GSI) in vivo, attenuated disease and rescued mice from
lethal bone marrow failure. In peripheral T cells from patients with untreated
aplastic anemia, NOTCH1(IC) was significantly elevated and was detected at the
TBX21 promoter, showing NOTCH1 directly regulates the gene encoding T-BET.
Treating patients' cells ex vivo with GSI lowered NOTCH1(IC) levels, decreased
the level of NOTCH1 detectable at the TBX21 promoter, and also decreased T-BET
expression, indicating NOTCH1 signaling is responsive to GSI during active
disease. Collectively, these results identify NOTCH1 signaling as a primary
driver of Th1-mediated pathogenesis in aplastic anemia and may represent a novel 
target for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC3932944
PMID: 25003012  [PubMed]


327. Clin Dev Immunol. 2012;2012:949821. doi: 10.1155/2012/949821. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Downregulation of Hlx closely related to the decreased expressions of T-bet and
Runx3 in patients with gastric cancer may be associated with a pathological event
leading to the imbalance of Th1/Th2.

Xu Y(1), Gao J, Su Z, Dai X, Li Y, Liu Y, Chen J, Tong J, Zhang Y, Wu C, Zheng D,
Wang S, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang 212013, China.

T-bet plays an important role in immunoregulation; it induces the differentiation
of Th1 together with the homeobox transcription factor gene Hlx. Recent studies
show that T-bet and Th1-associated factors are critical in regulating tumor
development. However, the contributions of Hlx in the occurrence and development 
of cancer remain unknown. In this study, the Hlx, T-bet, Runx3, and IFN-<U+03B3> were
measured in PBMC from patients with gastric cancer and the correlation between
Hlx and T-bet or IFN-<U+03B3> was assessed. The expression levels of Hlx, T-bet, and
IFN-<U+03B3> were significantly decreased, and there was a positive correlation between 
Hlx and T-bet or IFN-<U+03B3>. In addition, the Runx3 expression was also downregulated 
with the lower T-bet mRNA level. These results suggested that the decreased Hlx
expression was closely associated with T-bet and Runx3 downregulations and may
contribute to the development of gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3514004
PMID: 23243425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Immunol. 2013 Jan 15;190(2):712-22. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201837. Epub 2012
Dec 14.

NK cell maturation and function in C57BL/6 mice are altered by caloric
restriction.

Clinthorne JF(1), Beli E, Duriancik DM, Gardner EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

NK cells are a heterogenous population of innate lymphocytes with diverse
functional attributes critical for early protection from viral infections. We
have previously reported a decrease in influenza-induced NK cell cytotoxicity in 
6-mo-old C57BL/6 calorically restricted (CR) mice. In the current study, we
extend our findings on the influence of CR on NK cell phenotype and function in
the absence of infection. We demonstrate that reduced mature NK cell subsets
result in increased frequencies of CD127(+) NK cells in CR mice, skewing the
function of the total NK cell pool. NK cells from CR mice produced TNF-a and
GM-CSF at a higher level, whereas IFN-<U+03B3> production was impaired following IL-2
plus IL-12 or anti-NK1.1 stimulation. NK cells from CR mice were highly
responsive to stimulation with YAC-1 cells such that CD27(-)CD11b(+) NK cells
from CR mice produced granzyme B and degranulated at a higher frequency than
CD27(-)CD11b(+) NK cells from ad libitum fed mice. CR has been shown to be a
potent dietary intervention, yet the mechanisms by which the CR increases life
span have yet to be fully understood. To our knowledge, these findings are the
first in-depth analysis of the effects of caloric intake on NK cell phenotype and
function and provide important implications regarding potential ways in which CR 
alters NK cell function prior to infection or cancer.

PMCID: PMC4080414
PMID: 23241894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Nat Commun. 2012;3:1268. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2260.

T-bet and GATA3 orchestrate Th1 and Th2 differentiation through lineage-specific 
targeting of distal regulatory elements.

Kanhere A(1), Hertweck A, Bhatia U, Gökmen MR, Perucha E, Jackson I, Lord GM,
Jenner RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity and UCL Cancer Institute, University
College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

T-bet and GATA3 regulate the CD4+ T cell Th1/Th2 cell fate decision but little is
known about the interplay between these factors outside of the murine Ifng and
Il4/Il5/Il13 loci. Here we show that T-bet and GATA3 bind to multiple distal
sites at immune regulatory genes in human effector T cells. These sites display
markers of functional elements, act as enhancers in reporter assays and are
associated with a requirement for T-bet and GATA3. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that both factors bind distal sites at Tbx21 and that T-bet directly activates
its own expression. We also show that in Th1 cells, GATA3 is distributed away
from Th2 genes, instead occupying T-bet binding sites at Th1 genes, and that
T-bet is sufficient to induce GATA3 binding at these sites. We propose these
aspects of T-bet and GATA3 function are important for Th1/Th2 differentiation and
for understanding transcription factor interactions in other T cell lineage
decisions.

PMCID: PMC3535338
PMID: 23232398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Transplantation. 2013 Jan 15;95(1):54-62. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e318276d358.

A color-coded reporter model to study the effect of immunosuppressants on CD8+
T-cell memory in antitumor and alloimmune responses.

Rovira J(1), Sabet-Baktach M, Eggenhofer E, Lantow M, Koehl GE, Schlitt HJ,
Campistol JM, Geissler EK, Kroemer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors possess anticancer
properties potentially useful in reducing posttransplantation malignancy. Besides
controlling tumor-sensitive proliferative and angiogenic effects, mTOR influences
transcription factors T-bet and Eomesodermin (Eomes) in CD8 cytotoxic T cells
(Tc), which are key in rejecting tumors, and allografts.
METHODS: To study the role of mTOR in tumor and transplant immunity in an
antigen-specific way, we used T-cell receptor transgenic B6.OTI recipients,
B6.OVA.TG donors, and OVA-B16F10 melanoma cells. For tracking color-coded OTI-Tc 
cells associated with antitumor and alloimmunity in vivo, CD8-OTI transgenic
reporter mice were created by crossbreeding DsRed-expressing B6.Nagy mice with
B6.OTI mice.
RESULTS: The role of mTOR in regulating the differentiation and function of
alloreactive Tc cells in vitro was explored by stimulating OTI-Tc cells with
ovalbumin-transgenic antigen-presenting cells in the presence of rapamycin or
tacrolimus. Rapamycin, but not tacrolimus, induced a pro-antitumor phenotypic
shift from CD62LCD44 effector memory Tc cells to CD62LCD44 central memory Tc
cells, which featured up-regulated levels of T-bet and Eomes and preserved levels
of interferon-<U+03B3> and perforin. For future investigations, an in vivo model was
established whereby DsRedOTI-Tc cells adoptively transferred into B6 mice bearing
either a ovalbumin-transgenic mouse skin transplant or OVA-B16F10 tumor could be 
traced by fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis as effector or memory Tc
cells in transplant and tumor tissues.
CONCLUSION: mTOR, but not calcineurin, inhibition spares antitumoral memory Tc
cells by distinctively regulating T-bet and Eomes. This finding is now testable
in a new tumor transplant model, which incorporates DsRedOTI-Tc cell tracing,
opening the way to study the differential effects of immunosuppressants in
posttransplantation malignancy.

PMID: 23222894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Jan 15;19(2):336-46. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-3314.
Epub 2012 Dec 4.

Tumoral lymphocytic infiltration and expression of the chemokine CXCL10 in breast
cancers from the Ontario Familial Breast Cancer Registry.

Mulligan AM(1), Raitman I, Feeley L, Pinnaduwage D, Nguyen LT, O'Malley FP,
Ohashi PS, Andrulis IL.

Author information: 
(1)Keenan Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute of St. Michael's
Hospital, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

PURPOSE: Breast carcinomas, including basal and hereditary cases, often present
with a prominent tumoral lymphocytic infiltrate. Chemokines could play a role in 
attracting these cells and contribute to tumor progression. We explored tumoral
expression of CXCL10 and determined the relationship between CXCL10 and
lymphocytic infiltrate in a cohort of breast cancers.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using tissue microarrays of 364 breast tumors, we evaluated 
expression of CXCL10 and its receptor, CXCR3, in relation to histopathologic
features, biomarkers, and lymphocyte markers. In addition, we overexpressed
CXCL10 and CXCR3 in MCF7 breast cancer cells and monitored T-lymphocyte migration
and invasion.
RESULTS: Forty-five percent of tumors expressed CXCL10, and a significant
association was found with CXCR3 and lymphocytic infiltrate. Further
characterization of the lymphocytic infiltrate revealed an association with
CXCL10 expression for peritumoral CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes. CD8+ intratumoral
lymphocytes, FOXP3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs), and T-BET+ T(H)1 cells were
associated with BRCA1 and basal tumors. Conditioned media from MCF7 cells
overexpressing both CXCL10 and CXCR3 increased T-lymphocyte migration and
invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that CXCL10 may act in a paracrine manner,
affecting the tumor microenvironment, and in an autocrine manner, acting on the
tumor cells themselves and may play a role in tumor invasiveness and progression.
The CXCL10-CXCR3 axis can serve as a potential target in BRCA1 and basal breast
cancers, which present with a prominent lymphocytic infiltrate and a poor
prognosis. Clin Cancer Res; 19(2); 336-46. ©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3548938
PMID: 23213058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Exp Med. 2012 Dec 17;209(13):2331-8. doi: 10.1084/jem.20122097. Epub 2012 Dec
3.

Distinct requirements for T-bet in gut innate lymphoid cells.

Sciumé G(1), Hirahara K, Takahashi H, Laurence A, Villarino AV, Singleton KL,
Spencer SP, Wilhelm C, Poholek AC, Vahedi G, Kanno Y, Belkaid Y, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch,
National Institute of Arthritis, Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 Feb;13(2):67.

Interleukin (IL)-22-producing innate lymphoid cells (ILCs; ILC22) comprise a
heterogeneous population of cells that are dependent on the transcription factor 
retinoid-related orphan <U+03B3>t (ROR<U+03B3>t) and are critical for barrier function of the
intestinal mucosa. A distinct ILC22 subset expresses the natural cytotoxicity
receptor NKp46 (NKp46+ ILC22); however, the factors that contribute to the
generation of this population versus other subsets are largely unknown. Herein,
we show that T-bet (encoded by Tbx21) was highly expressed in NKp46+ ILC22, a
feature shared by all NKp46+ cells present in the intestine but not by other
IL-22-producing populations. Accordingly, the absence of T-bet resulted in loss
of NKp46+ ILC22 in the intestinal lamina propria. The residual NKp46+ ILC22
present in Tbx21(-/-) mice showed a marked reduction of Ror<U+03B3>t expression and
impairment in IL-22 production. Generation and functions of gut NK1.1+ cells were
also altered. Bone marrow chimera experiments revealed a cell-intrinsic
requirement for T-bet in these subsets and competitive reconstitution experiments
revealed roles for T-bet in multiple ILC subsets. Thus, T-bet has a general
importance for ILC in the gut and plays a selective and critical role in the
generation of NKp46+ ILC22.

PMCID: PMC3526352
PMID: 23209316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 1;288(5):3048-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.361709. Epub 2012
Dec 3.

Proviral integration site for Moloney murine leukemia virus (PIM) kinases promote
human T helper 1 cell differentiation.

Tahvanainen J(1), Kyläniemi MK, Kanduri K, Gupta B, Lähteenmäki H, Kallonen T,
Rajavuori A, Rasool O, Koskinen PJ, Rao KV, Lähdesmäki H, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi, 20520
Turku, Finland.

The differentiation of human primary T helper 1 (Th1) cells from naïve precursor 
cells is regulated by a complex, interrelated signaling network. The
identification of factors regulating the early steps of Th1 cell polarization can
provide important insight in the development of therapeutics for many
inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. The serine/threonine-specific proviral
integration site for Moloney murine leukemia virus (PIM) kinases PIM1 and PIM2
have been implicated in the cytokine-dependent proliferation and survival of
lymphocytes. We have established that the third member of this family, PIM3, is
also expressed in human primary Th cells and identified a new function for the
entire PIM kinase family in T lymphocytes. Although PIM kinases are expressed
more in Th1 than Th2 cells, we demonstrate here that these kinases positively
influence Th1 cell differentiation. Our RNA interference results from human
primary Th cells also suggest that PIM kinases promote the production of IFN<U+03B3>,
the hallmark cytokine produced by Th1 cells. Consistent with this, they also seem
to be important for the up-regulation of the critical Th1-driving factor, T box
expressed in T cells (T-BET), and the IL-12/STAT4 signaling pathway during the
early Th1 differentiation process. In summary, we have identified PIM kinases as 
new regulators of human primary Th1 cell differentiation, thus providing new
insights into the mechanisms controlling the selective development of human Th
cell subsets.

PMCID: PMC3561529
PMID: 23209281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Resuscitation. 2013 Jun;84(6):848-53. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2012.11.023.
Epub 2012 Nov 29.

Expression imbalance of transcription factors GATA-3 and T-bet in
post-resuscitation myocardial immune dysfunction in a porcine model of cardiac
arrest.

Gu W(1), Li CS, Yin WP, Hou XM, Zhang J, Zhang D, Guo Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: This study investigated whether an imbalance in Th1/Th2 cells is
involved in the post-resuscitation myocardial immune dysfunction.
METHODS: 26 Wuzhishan miniature pigs were randomly divided into return of
spontaneous circulation (ROSC) group (n=20) and sham-operated group (n=6), 20
pigs were subjected to 8min of electrically induced cardiac arrest, After
successful ROSC, the 16 surviving pigs were randomly assigned to be sacrificed
(n=8 per group) at 12 and 24h after ROSC, respectively. CD4(+) and CD8(+)
lymphocyte subsets were determined by flow cytometry, interleukin (IL)-4 and
interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> in the myocardium were measured by ELISA, and protein and mRNA
levels of GATA-3 and T-bet were detected in the myocardium by Western blotting
and quantitative real-time PCR in the post-ROSC group (n=8 per group) at 12 and
24h after ROSC and sham-operated group (n=6) at 24h after ROSC, respectively.
RESULTS: CD4(+) lymphocyte subsets were significantly lower in the post-ROSC
group compared with the sham-operated group (P<0.05) at 12 and 24h after ROSC.
The levels of myocardium IFN-<U+03B3> were markedly increased, while IL-4 was
significantly decreased in the post-ROSC group compared with the sham-operated
group (P<0.05) at 12 and 24h after ROSC. Protein expression and mRNA levels of
T-bet were markedly increased in the myocardium of pigs in the post-ROSC group
compared with the sham-operated group (P<0.05) at 12 and 24h after ROSC, while
GATA-3 was significantly reduced (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The myocardial immune dysfunction induced by the change in expression
levels of the transcription factors GATA-3 and T-bet may be involved in the
process of post-resuscitation myocardial injury in a porcine model of cardiac
arrest.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23200999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Immunity. 2012 Dec 14;37(6):1061-75. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.08.024. Epub 2012
Nov 29.

Th22 cells are an important source of IL-22 for host protection against
enteropathogenic bacteria.

Basu R(1), O'Quinn DB, Silberger DJ, Schoeb TR, Fouser L, Ouyang W, Hatton RD,
Weaver CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Dec 14;37(6):952-4.

Interleukin-22 (IL-22) is central to host protection against bacterial infections
at barrier sites. Both innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) and T cells produce IL-22.
However, the specific contributions of CD4(+) T cells and their developmental
origins are unclear. We found that the enteric pathogen Citrobacter rodentium
induced sequential waves of IL-22-producing ILCs and CD4(+) T cells that were
each critical to host defense during a primary infection. Whereas IL-22
production by ILCs was strictly IL-23 dependent, development of IL-22-producing
CD4(+) T cells occurred via an IL-6-dependent mechanism that was augmented by,
but not dependent on, IL-23 and was dependent on both transcription factors T-bet
and AhR. Transfer of CD4(+) T cells differentiated with IL-6 in the absence of
TGF-ß ("Th22" cells) conferred complete protection of infected IL-22-deficient
mice whereas transferred Th17 cells did not. These findings establish Th22 cells 
as an important component of mucosal antimicrobial host defense.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3678257
PMID: 23200827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Science. 2012 Nov 30;338(6111):1220-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1229620.

Progenitor and terminal subsets of CD8+ T cells cooperate to contain chronic
viral infection.

Paley MA(1), Kroy DC, Odorizzi PM, Johnnidis JB, Dolfi DV, Barnett BE, Bikoff EK,
Robertson EJ, Lauer GM, Reiner SL, Wherry EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Institute for Immunology, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 Jan;13(1):3.

Chronic infections strain the regenerative capacity of antiviral T lymphocyte
populations, leading to failure in long-term immunity. The cellular and molecular
events controlling this regenerative capacity, however, are unknown. We found
that two distinct states of virus-specific CD8(+) T cells exist in chronically
infected mice and humans. Differential expression of the T-box transcription
factors T-bet and Eomesodermin (Eomes) facilitated the cooperative maintenance of
the pool of antiviral CD8(+) T cells during chronic viral infection. T-bet(hi)
cells displayed low intrinsic turnover but proliferated in response to persisting
antigen, giving rise to Eomes(hi) terminal progeny. Genetic elimination of either
subset resulted in failure to control chronic infection, which suggests that an
imbalance in differentiation and renewal could underlie the collapse of immunity 
in humans with chronic infections.

PMCID: PMC3653769
PMID: 23197535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Feb;34(2):433-42. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.11.005.
Epub 2012 Nov 24.

Clonal growth of carp (Cyprinus carpio) T cells in vitro: long-term proliferation
of Th2-like cells.

Yamaguchi T(1), Katakura F, Someya K, Dijkstra JM, Moritomo T, Nakanishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fish Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Nihon
University, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan.

Carp kidney leukocytes co-cultured with a supporting cell layer resulted in
proliferation of polyclonal CD4(+) aßT cells as described previously. These
bulk-cultured T cells expressed transcripts for both T helper 1 cells (Th1)
master regulator (T-bet) and T helper 2 cells (Th2) master regulator (GATA-3). To
identify the Th subsets in bulk-cultured T cells, single cells were picked up
from the bulk culture, proliferated, and characterized. The majority of the
clones displayed characteristics consistent with CD4(+) aßT cell identity. These 
clones expressed both TCRa and TCRß, but could not produce a TCR<U+03B3>d heterodimer
since they typically only expressed either TCR<U+03B3> or TCRd. These clones also
expressed the TCR co-receptor genes CD4-1 or CD4-2, whereas they did not express 
CD8a or CD8ß. In addition, GATA-3 was expressed whereas T-bet was not. Among
these clones, one clone (KoThL5) continued to proliferate on the supporting cells
and was successively transferred for more than 10 months and 90-100 passages. To 
characterize the KoThL5 cells by their cytokine production profile, they were
stimulated with PHA and investigated by real-time RT-PCR. mRNA expression of
Th2-related cytokine (IL-4/13B) was only enhanced in KoThL5 cells whereas both
Th1-related cytokine (IFN<U+03B3>) and Th2-related cytokines (IL-4/13A and IL-4/13B)
were significantly enhanced in bulk-cultured T cells. Taken together, KoThL5
cells share some features with mammalian Th2 cells. This is the first study to
describe in vitro cultures of teleost cell with Th2-like features. The KoThL5
cell line has considerable potential for addressing questions concerning the
properties of teleost Th2 cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23182723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Cell. 2012 Nov 21;151(5):981-93. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.09.044.

STATs shape the active enhancer landscape of T cell populations.

Vahedi G(1), Takahashi H, Nakayamada S, Sun HW, Sartorelli V, Kanno Y, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch,
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1930, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2012 Nov 21;151(5):929-31.

Signaling pathways are intimately involved in cellular differentiation, allowing 
cells to respond to their environment by regulating gene expression. Although
enhancers are recognized as key elements that regulate selective gene expression,
the interplay between signaling pathways and actively used enhancer elements is
not clear. Here, we use CD4(+) T cells as a model of differentiation, mapping the
activity of cell-type-specific enhancer elements in T helper 1 (Th1) and Th2
cells. Our data establish that STAT proteins have a major impact on the
activation of lineage-specific enhancers and the suppression of enhancers
associated with alternative cell fates. Transcriptome analysis further supports a
functional role for enhancers regulated by STATs. Importantly, expression of
lineage-defining master regulators in STAT-deficient cells fails to fully recover
the chromatin signature of STAT-dependent enhancers. Thus, these findings point
to a critical role of STATs as environmental sensors in dynamically molding the
specialized enhancer architecture of differentiating cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3509201
PMID: 23178119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Int J Immunogenet. 2013 Jun;40(3):222-9. doi: 10.1111/iji.12018. Epub 2012 Nov
23.

Glucocorticoid receptor BclI polymorphism associates with immunomodulatory
response to stress hormone in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Xiang L(1), Marshall GD Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Behavioral Immunology Research, Division of Clinical Immunology 
and Allergy, Department of Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center,
Jackson, MS 39216, USA. lxiang@umc.edu

Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) variants have been found to be associated with
stress-related disorders. Our previous in vivo study revealed that the CC allele 
of GR BclI single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) was more common in the
high-stress group, which had lower levels of both regulatory T cells (Treg) and
Th1 cytokine. The current study was to investigate the associations between GR
BclI polymorphism and immunomodulatory response to stress hormone in vitro in
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Blood samples were collected
from 18 normal volunteers including 9 subjects with BclI polymorphism GG allele
and 9 with wild-type (WT) CC allele. PBMC were cultured with 10(-8) m
dexamethasone (DEX), which mimics the plasma cortisol level observed during
periods of psychological stress for 24 h and 11 days. Gene expressions of
transcription factors, stress hormone and cytokine receptors were analysed by
real-time RT-PCR. FoxP3 mRNA was significantly altered in the BclI WT (decreased 
at 24 h and increased at 11 days) but not in the GG allele. GR mRNA was
up-regulated at 24 h and down-regulated at 11 days in CC alleles (P < 0.01 and P 
< 0.05), rather than in GG alleles. The expression of ß-2 adrenergic receptor
(ß2AR) was increased at 24 h in both CC and GG alleles (P < 0.01 and P < 0.001), 
but decreased significantly at 11 days in only GG alleles. Expression of T-bet
and GATA-3 was altered simultaneously in 24-h culture with DEX from both groups. 
The BclI polymorphism of GR identifies different immunomodulatory responses to
corticosteroids, which may explain, at least in part, the variability in
individual sensitivity to stressors.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3602222
PMID: 23176645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49252. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049252. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans GroEL protein promotes conversion of human 
CD4+ T cells into IFN<U+03B3> IL10 producing Tbet+ Th1 cells.

Saygili T(1), Akincilar SC, Akgül B, Nalbant A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Gene Regulation Laboratory, Department of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, Izmir Institute of Technology, Urla Izmir, Turkey.

One of the heat shock family protein (Hsp) expressing bacteria is the gram
negative, periodontal pathogen Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (Aa). A.
actinomycetemcomitans' Hsp is a 64-kDa GroEL-protein, which has been shown to
influence the host cells. In this study we used recombinant A.
actinomycetemcomitans GroEL (rAaGroEL) protein as a model antigen to study
GroEL-mediated T cell immune response. Human peripheral mononuclear cells
(PBMCs), when stimulated with recombinant rAaGroEL, expressed early activation
marker CD69 and IL-2R (CD25). CD25 and CD69 expressions were higher in CD4+ T
cells compared to CD8+ T cells. rAaGroEL-responding CD4+ T cells expressed IL-10,
IFN<U+03B3> and TNFa cytokines. Interestingly, there were also IL-10 and IFN<U+03B3> double
cytokine producing CD4+ T cells. Additionally, IFN<U+03B3> expressing CD4+ T cells were 
also T-bet positive. Altogether the results suggest that rAaGroEL protein affects
CD4+ T cells to differentiate into IFN<U+03B3> IL10-secreting T-bet+ Th1 cells.

PMCID: PMC3495765
PMID: 23152883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Jan;5(1):64-79. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201201544. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

Regulatory T-lymphocytes mediate amyotrophic lateral sclerosis progression and
survival.

Henkel JS(1), Beers DR, Wen S, Rivera AL, Toennis KM, Appel JE, Zhao W, Moore DH,
Powell SZ, Appel SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston,
TX, USA. jhenkel@tmhs.org

Erratum in
    EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Feb;5(2):326.

In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) mice, regulatory T-lymphocytes (Tregs) are
neuroprotective, slowing disease progression. To address whether Tregs and FoxP3,
a transcription factor required for Treg function, similarly influence
progression rates of ALS patients, T-lymphocytes from patients were assessed by
flow cytometry. Both numbers of Tregs and their FoxP3 protein expressions were
reduced in rapidly progressing ALS patients and inversely correlated with
progression rates. The mRNA levels of FoxP3, TGF-ß, IL4 and Gata3, a Th2
transcription factor, were reduced in rapidly progressing patients and inversely 
correlated with progression rates. Both FoxP3 and Gata3 were accurate indicators 
of progression rates. No differences in IL10, Tbx21, a Th1 transcription factor
or IFN-<U+03B3> expression were found between slow and rapidly progressing patients. A
3.5-year prospective study with a second larger cohort revealed that early
reduced FoxP3 levels were indicative of progression rates at collection and
predictive of future rapid progression and attenuated survival. Collectively,
these data suggest that Tregs and Th2 lymphocytes influence disease progression
rates. Importantly, early reduced FoxP3 levels could be used to identify rapidly 
progressing patients.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of 
EMBO.

PMCID: PMC3569654
PMID: 23143995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Immunol. 2012 Dec 1;189(11):5277-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200808. Epub 2012
Nov 2.

IFN-<U+03B3> limits Th9-mediated autoimmune inflammation through dendritic cell
modulation of IL-27.

Murugaiyan G(1), Beynon V, Pires Da Cunha A, Joller N, Weiner HL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

IL-9-producing Th9 cells have been associated with autoimmune diseases, such as
experimental autoimmune encephalitis. However, the factors that negatively
regulate Th9 cells during autoimmune inflammation are unclear. In this article,
we show that IFN-<U+03B3> inhibits Th9 differentiation both in vitro and in vivo. This
suppressive activity was dependent on the transcription factor STAT-1. In
addition to its direct inhibitory effect on Th9 differentiation, IFN-<U+03B3> suppressed
Th9 cells through the induction of IL-27 from dendritic cells. In vitro,
treatment of naive CD4(+) T cells with IL-27 suppressed the development of Th9
cells, which was partially dependent on the transcription factors STAT-1 and
T-bet. Moreover, IL-27 treatment completely abrogated the encephalitogenicity of 
Th9 cells in the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis model. Thus, our
results identify a previously unknown mechanism by which IFN-<U+03B3> limits
Th9-mediated autoimmune inflammation through dendritic cell modulation of IL-27.

PMCID: PMC3504131
PMID: 23125412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Clin Exp Immunol. 2012 Dec;170(3):310-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2012.04668.x.

Defects in the vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)/VPAC system during early
stages of the placental-maternal leucocyte interaction impair the maternal
tolerogenic response.

Fraccaroli L(1), Grasso E, Hauk V, Cortelezzi M, Calo G, Pérez Leirós C, Ramhorst
R.

Author information: 
(1)Immunopharmacology Laboratory, School of Sciences, University of Buenos Aires 
and National Research Council (IQUIBICEN-CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Successful embryo implantation occurs followed by a local inflammatory/T helper
type 1 (Th1) response, subsequently redirected towards a tolerogenic predominant 
profile. The lack of control of this initial local inflammatory response may be
an underlying cause of early pregnancy complications as recurrent spontaneous
abortions (RSA). Considering that vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) mediates
anti-inflammatory and tolerogenic effects in several conditions we hypothesized
that VIP might contribute to tolerance towards trophoblast antigens during the
early interaction of maternal leucocytes and trophoblast cells. In this study we 
investigated VIP/VPAC system activity and expression on maternal peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) after interaction with immortalized trophoblast cells
(Swan-71 cell line) as an in-vitro model of feto-maternal interaction, and we
analysed whether it modulates maternal regulatory T cell (T(reg))/Th1 responses. 
We also investigated the contribution of the endogenous VIP/VPAC system to RSA
pathogenesis. VIP decreased T-bet expression significantly, reduced monocyte
chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) and nitrite production in co-cultures of PBMCs from
fertile women with trophoblast cells; while it increased the frequency of CD4(+) 
CD25(+) forkhead box protein 3 (Foxp3)(+) cells, transforming growth factor
(TGF)-ß expression and interleukin (IL)-10 secretion. These effects were
prevented by VIP-specific antagonist. Interestingly, PBMCs from RSA patients
displayed significantly higher T-bet expression, lower T(reg) frequency and lower
frequency of VIP-producer CD4 lymphocytes after the interaction with trophoblast 
cells. Moreover, the patients displayed a significantly lower frequency of
endometrial CD4(+) VIP(+) cells in comparison with fertile women. VIP showed a
Th1-limiting and T(reg) -promoting response in vitro that would favour early
pregnancy outcome. Because RSA patients displayed defects in the VIP/VPAC system,
this neuropeptide could be a promising candidate for diagnostic biomarker or
surrogate biomarker for recurrent spontaneous abortions.

© 2012 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC3518891
PMID: 23121672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Inhal Toxicol. 2012 Nov;24(13):918-27. doi: 10.3109/08958378.2012.731093.

Involvement of TLR2 and TLR4 and Th1/Th2 shift in inflammatory responses induced 
by fine ambient particulate matter in mice.

Zhao C(1), Liao J, Chu W, Wang S, Yang T, Tao Y, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing,
China.

Erratum in
    Inhal Toxicol. 2013 Feb;25(3):178.

Epidemiologic studies have reported the association between fine particles
(aerodynamic diameter = 2.5 µm; PM2.5) and health effects, but the immunological 
mechanisms are not clear. To investigate the dose and time-dependent role of
toll-like receptor (TLR) and Th1/Th2 shift in local and systemic inflammation
induced by PM2.5, mice were subjected to intratracheal instillation of 2.5, 5, or
10<U+2009>mg/kg PM2.5 in this study. After 24<U+2009>h, 72<U+2009>h, 7 days, and 14 days, mice were
sacrificed to measure TLR2 and TLR4 expressions and Th1/Th2 related cytokines in 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and peripheral blood. Histopathological
changes in lung were also examined. Inflammatory infiltration and macrophages
with engulfed particles were found by lung histopathology after PM2.5 exposure.
TLR4 positive cells decreased in BALF but increased in blood at 24<U+2009>h after the
exposure. The low percentage of TLR4 positive cells continued to day 14 in BALF, 
but recovered at day 7 and decreased further to lower than the control value at
day 14 in blood. TLR2 positive cell changed similar to TLR4 in BALF on the dose
effects. In BALF at 24<U+2009>h after the exposure, the Th2 related cytokines IL-5 and
IL-10 increased dose-dependently; and in blood, the Th2 related cytokines IL-4,
IL-5, and IL-10 also increased. These results suggest that acute exposure of
PM2.5 leads to acute inflammatory responses locally and systemically in mice.
TLR2 and TLR4 are involved in this process and PM2.5 can drive a Th2-biased
immune response.

PMID: 23121301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2013 Aug;39(4):793-805. doi: 10.1007/s10695-012-9741-y.
Epub 2012 Oct 30.

Molecular cloning of grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idellus) T-bet and GATA-3, and 
their expression profiles with IFN-<U+03B3> in response to grass carp reovirus (GCRV)
infection.

Wang L(1), Shang N, Feng H, Guo Q, Dai H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China.

Both T-bet and GATA-3, Th1/Th2 lineage-specific transcription factors, play
important roles in the development of T cells and Th1/Th2 differentiation. In
this study, T-bet and GATA-3 genes were cloned from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon 
idellus). The putative primary structure of the polypeptide deduced from the cDNA
sequence of grass carp T-bet contained 608 aa, which possessed a T-box DNA
binding domain. The putative primary structure of the polypeptide deduced from
the cDNA sequence of grass carp GATA-3 contained 396 aa, which possessed two
consensus zinc finger domains (C-X(2)-C-X(17)-C-X(2)-C). The YxKxHxxxRP motif,
KRRLSA and LMEKs/n sequences were also conserved in this GATA-3. Phylogenetic
analysis indicated that grass carp T-bet and GATA-3 group with their known
counterparts with zebrafish T-bet and GATA-3 as the closest neighbor,
respectively. RT-qPCR results showed that grass carp T-bet gene was highly
expressed in head kidney, followed by spleen, and low expressed in gill, liver,
kidney, and intestine, while GATA-3 gene was highly expressed in intestine,
followed by spleen, and low expressed in gill, liver, kidney, and head kidney.
Grass carp is one of the "four important domestic fish" in China and often
infected by grass carp reovirus (GCRV). As yet, there is no evidence that T-bet
and GATA-3 (Th1/Th2 subsets) are involved in anti-virus immune of teleost fish.
In this study, by RT-qPCR, we analyzed the expression dynamics of grass carp
T-bet and GATA-3 genes with IFN-<U+03B3> gene in response to GCRV infection for the
first time. The expression dynamics showed that three genes might be crucially
modulated by in vivo GCRV infection: (1) GCRV mainly induced a T-bet expression
profile comparing to the GATA-3 expression, while the higher expression profiles 
of IFN-<U+03B3> correlated with the up-regulation of T-bet; (2) T-bet/IFN-<U+03B3> and GATA-3
expression changes suggest that in GCRV-infected grass carp, the common immune
state of head kidney further heightens, whereas the common physiological state of
intestine transforms to an anti-virus immune state. From this finding, we realize
that GCRV mainly induces a Th1 response, and Th1 cell-mediated recognition
mechanisms play very important roles in anti-virus cellular immune of grass carp.

PMID: 23108805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Biol Chem. 2012 Dec 7;287(50):41684-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.385443. Epub 2012
Oct 24.

IL-36<U+03B3>/IL-1F9, an innate T-bet target in myeloid cells.

Bachmann M(1), Scheiermann P, Härdle L, Pfeilschifter J, Mühl H.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmazentrum Frankfurt/ZAFES, University Hospital, Goethe-University
Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

By concerted action in dendritic (DC) and T cells, T-box expressed in T cells
(T-bet, Tbx21) is pivotal for initiation and perpetuation of Th1 immunity.
Identification of novel T-bet-regulated genes is crucial for further
understanding the biology of this transcription factor. By combining siRNA
technology with genome-wide mRNA expression analysis, we sought to identify new
T-bet-regulated genes in predendritic KG1 cells activated by IL-18. One gene
robustly dependent on T-bet was IL-36<U+03B3>, a recently described novel IL-1 family
member. Promoter analysis revealed a T-bet binding site that, along with a <U+03BA>B
site, enables efficient IL-36<U+03B3> induction. Using knock-out animals, IL-36<U+03B3>
reliance on T-bet was extended to murine DC. IL-36<U+03B3> expression by human myeloid
cells was confirmed using monocyte-derived DC and M1 macrophages. The latter
model was employed to substantiate dependence of IL-36<U+03B3> on endogenous T-bet in
human primary cells. Ectopic expression of T-bet likewise mediated IL-36<U+03B3>
production in HaCaT keratinocytes that otherwise lack this transcription factor. 
Additional experiments furthermore revealed that mature IL-36<U+03B3> has the capability
to establish an inflammatory gene expression profile in human primary
keratinocytes that displays enhanced mRNA levels for TNFa, CCL20, S100A7,
inducible NOS, and IL-36<U+03B3> itself. Data presented herein shed further light on
involvement of T-bet in innate immunity and suggest that IL-36<U+03B3>, besides IFN<U+03B3>,
may contribute to functions of this transcription factor in immunopathology.

PMCID: PMC3516718
PMID: 23095752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46082. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046082. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

MicroRNA-155 modulates Treg and Th17 cells differentiation and Th17 cell function
by targeting SOCS1.

Yao R(1), Ma YL, Liang W, Li HH, Ma ZJ, Yu X, Liao YH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Immunology, Institute of Cardiology, Union
Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

MicroRNA (miR)-155 is a critical player in both innate and adaptive immune
responses. It can influence CD4(+) T cell lineage choice. To clarify the role of 
miR-155 in CD4(+) CD25(+) regulatory T (Treg)/T helper (Th)17 cell
differentiation and function, as well as the mechanism involved, we performed
gain-and loss-of-function analysis by transfection pre-miR-155 and anti-miR-155
into purified CD4(+) T cells. The results showed that miR-155 positively
regulated both Treg and Th17 cell differentiation. It also induced the release of
interleukin (IL)-17A by Th17 cells, but not the release of IL-10 and transforming
growth factor (TGF)-ß1 by Treg cells. Furthermore, we found that miR-155 reacted 
through regulating Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription 
(JAK/STAT) rather than TGF-ß/mothers against decapentaplegic homolog (SMAD)
signaling pathway in the process of Treg and Th17 cells differentiation. This may
because suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS)1, the important negative
regulator of JAK/STAT signaling pathway, was the direct target of miR-155 in this
process, but SMAD2 and SMAD5 were not. Therefore, we demonstrated that miR-155
enhanced Treg and Th17 cells differentiation and IL-17A production by targeting
SOCS1.

PMCID: PMC3473054
PMID: 23091595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2013 Mar;62(3):553-61. doi: 10.1007/s00262-012-1358-6.
Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Higher numbers of T-bet(+) intratumoral lymphoid cells correlate with better
survival in gastric cancer.

Chen LJ(1), Zheng X, Shen YP, Zhu YB, Li Q, Chen J, Xia R, Zhou SM, Wu CP, Zhang 
XG, Lu BF, Jiang JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biological Treatment, The Third Affiliated Hospital of
Soochow University, Changzhou, Jiangsu, China. clj_sz@163.com

In the present study, we studied the expression of T-bet, a key marker for type 1
immune responses, within the tumor microenvironment of gastric cancer, and
analyzed its association with clinicopathological parameters. One hundred and
fifty-two archival paraffin-embedded gastric tumor tissues were collected, and
the expression of T-bet in these cancer tissue specimens was examined by
immunohistochemistry. T-bet(+) tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in some
gastric cancer tissues were further characterized by flow cytometric analysis.
The density of T-bet(+) TILs in gastric cancer tissues in relation to patient's
clinicopathological parameters and postoperative prognosis has been analyzed.
Herein, we have found significant increases in T-bet(+) lymphocytes in tumor
tissues as compared with normal stomach tissues, gastritis tissues or gastric
polyp specimens. T-bet(+) cells mainly consisted of CD4(+), CD8(+) and CD56(+)
TILs. In addition, lower numbers of T-bet(+) TILs were associated with poor
clinicopathological parameters such as invasion to muscular layer, larger tumor
size and advanced cancer stages. Moreover, patients with higher numbers of
T-bet(+) TILs have longer disease-free survival and overall survival. Thus, our
study supports the idea that tumor growth elicits spontaneous type 1 cellular
immune responses and tumor progression is associated with suppression of
antitumor immunity. T-bet expression within tumor can serve as a prognostic
indicator for gastric cancer and a potential biomarker for immunotherapy.

PMID: 23090288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Immunol. 2012 Dec 1;189(11):5119-28. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201482. Epub 2012
Oct 15.

p27(Kip1) negatively regulates the magnitude and persistence of CD4 T cell
memory.

Jatzek A(1), Tejera MM, Singh A, Sullivan JA, Plisch EH, Suresh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Much is known about the differentiation of naive T cells into distinct lineages
of effector cells, but the molecular mechanisms underlying the generation and
maintenance of CD4 T cell memory are poorly characterized. Our studies ascribe a 
novel role for the cell cycle regulator p27(Kip1) as a prominent negative
regulator of the establishment and long-term maintenance of Th1 CD4 T cell
memory. We demonstrate that p27(Kip1) might restrict the differentiation and
survival of memory precursors by increasing the T-bet/Bcl-6 ratio in effector CD4
T cells. By promoting apoptosis and contraction of effector CD4 T cells by
mechanisms that are at least in part T cell intrinsic, p27(Kip1) markedly limits 
the abundance of memory CD4 T cells. Furthermore, we causally link
p27(Kip1)-dependent apoptosis to the decay of CD4 T cell memory, possibly by
repressing the expression of <U+03B3>-chain receptors and the downstream effector of the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, Tcf-1. We extend these findings by showing that 
the antagonistic effects of p27(Kip1) on CD4 T cell memory require its
cyclin-dependent kinase-binding domain. Collectively, these findings provide key 
insights into the mechanisms underlying the governance of peripheral CD4 T cell
homeostasis and identify p27(Kip1) as a target to enhance vaccine-induced CD4 T
cell memory.

PMCID: PMC3504176
PMID: 23071285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Blood. 2012 Nov 29;120(23):4552-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-417733. Epub 2012
Oct 11.

CD8 T cells induce T-bet-dependent migration toward CXCR3 ligands by
differentiated B cells produced during responses to alum-protein vaccines.

Serre K(1), Cunningham AF, Coughlan RE, Lino AC, Rot A, Hub E, Moser K, Manz R,
Ferraro A, Bird R, Toellner KM, Demengeot J, MacLennan IC, Mohr E.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Immune Regulation, University of
Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham, United Kingdom. karine@kserre.net

Antibody-forming cells (AFCs) expressing the chemokine receptor CXCR3 are
recruited to sites of inflammation where they help clear pathogens but may
participate in autoimmune diseases. Here we identify a mechanism that induces
CXCR3 expression by AFC and germinal center (GC) B cells. This happens when CD8 T
cells are recruited into CD4 T cell-dependent B-cell responses.
Ovalbumin-specific CD4 T cells (OTII) were transferred alone or with
ovalbumin-specific CD8 T cells (OTI) and the response to subcutaneous
alum-precipitated ovalbumin was followed in the draining lymph nodes. OTII cells 
alone induce T helper 2-associated class switching to IgG1, but few AFC or GC B
cells express CXCR3. By contrast, OTI-derived IFN-<U+03B3> induces most responding GC B 
cells and AFCs to express high levels of CXCR3, and diverse switching to IgG2a,
IgG2b, with some IgG1. Up-regulation of CXCR3 by GC B cells and AFCs and their
migration toward its ligand CXCL10 are shown to depend on B cells' intrinsic
T-bet, a transcription factor downstream of the IFN-<U+03B3>R signaling. This model
clarifies how precursors of long-lived AFCs and memory B cells acquire CXCR3 that
causes their migration to inflammatory foci.

PMID: 23065152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Immunity. 2012 Oct 19;37(4):674-84. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.09.008. Epub 2012 
Oct 11.

The transcription factor T-bet regulates intestinal inflammation mediated by
interleukin-7 receptor+ innate lymphoid cells.

Powell N(1), Walker AW, Stolarczyk E, Canavan JB, Gökmen MR, Marks E, Jackson I, 
Hashim A, Curtis MA, Jenner RG, Howard JK, Parkhill J, MacDonald TT, Lord GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Immunobiology, Division of Transplantation
Immunology and Mucosal Biology, King's College London, UK.

Mice lacking the transcription factor T-bet in the innate immune system develop
microbiota-dependent colitis. Here, we show that interleukin-17A
(IL-17A)-producing IL-7Ra(+) innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) were potent promoters
of disease in Tbx21(-/-)Rag2(-/-) ulcerative colitis (TRUC) mice. TNF-a produced 
by CD103(-)CD11b(+) dendritic cells synergized with IL-23 to drive IL-17A
production by ILCs, demonstrating a previously unrecognized layer of cellular
crosstalk between dendritic cells and ILCs. We have identified Helicobacter
typhlonius as a key disease trigger driving excess TNF-a production and promoting
colitis in TRUC mice. Crucially, T-bet also suppressed the expression of IL-7R, a
key molecule involved in controlling intestinal ILC homeostasis. The importance
of IL-7R signaling in TRUC disease was highlighted by the dramatic reduction in
intestinal ILCs and attenuated colitis following IL-7R blockade. Taken together, 
these data demonstrate the mechanism by which T-bet regulates the complex
interplay between mucosal dendritic cells, ILCs, and the intestinal microbiota.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3540260
PMID: 23063332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Nov;12(11):799-804. doi: 10.1038/nri3321. Epub 2012 Oct 12.

Master regulators or lineage-specifying? Changing views on CD4+ T cell
transcription factors.

Oestreich KJ(1), Weinmann AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Box 357650, 1959 NE
Pacific Street, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

There is an emerging body of research demonstrating that the co-expression of key
lineage-specifying transcription factors, commonly referred to as 'master
regulators', affects the functional capabilities and flexibility of CD4(+) T cell
subsets. Here, we discuss how the natural co-expression of these
lineage-specifying transcription factors has challenged the concept that the
expression of a single 'master regulator' strictly establishes an absolute CD4(+)
T cell phenotype. Instead, it is becoming clear that the interplay between the
lineage-specifying (or lineage-defining) transcription factors, including T-bet, 
GATA3, ROR<U+03B3>t, BCL-6 and FOXP3, contributes to the fate and flexibility of CD4(+) 
T cell subtypes. This in turn has led to the realization that CD4(+) T cell
phenotypes are more diverse than previously recognized.

PMCID: PMC3584691
PMID: 23059426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Clin Immunol. 2013 Feb;33(2):436-45. doi: 10.1007/s10875-012-9810-0. Epub 2012 
Sep 30.

Expression of IL-27, Th1 and Th17 in patients with aplastic anemia.

Du HZ(1), Wang Q, Ji J, Shen BM, Wei SC, Liu LJ, Ding J, Ma DX, Wang W, Peng J,
Hou M.

Author information: 
(1)Laiwu Central Hospital of Xinwen Mining Industry Group, Laiwu, Shandong,
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Aplastic anemia (AA) is an autoimmune disease and interleukin-27
(IL-27) is an important cytokine involved in the pathogenesis of autoimmune
diseases. To date there have been no reports concerning the intrinsic association
among IL-27 and Thelper (Th) 1 and Th17 cells in AA.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to assay IL-27, 
interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) and IL-17 levels, flow cytometry to measure the
percentages of Th1 and Th17 cells among peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs), real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the 
mRNA levels of IL-27, IFN-<U+03B3>, T-bet and IL-17 and retinoid related orphan receptor
gamma (ROR<U+03B3>t) in PBMCs were performed. In addition, the effect of exogenous
rhIL-27 on the differentiation of T cells into Th1 and Th17 cells was
investigated in vitro.
RESULTS: Plasma and mRNA levels of IL-27 in PBMCs from AA patients were
significantly higher than those in healthy controls. A positive correlation was
found between plasma levels of IL27 and IFN-<U+03B3>. The proportions of Th1 and Th17
cells accompanied by the mRNA expression of ROR<U+03B3>t and T-bet were significantly
higher in AA patients than in healthy controls. Plasma levels of IL-27 correlated
positively with frequencies of Th1 cells in AA patients. Exogenous rhIL-27 could 
significantly upregulate the frequency of Th1 cells and the mRNA levels of T-bet 
and IFN-<U+03B3> and the application of rhIL-27 in vitro could inhibit the expression of
ROR<U+03B3>t mRNA.
CONCLUSION: The upregulation of IL-27 might cause Th1 differentiation and immune 
disorders in AA patients. Blocking the expression of IL-27 could therefore be a
reasonable therapeutic strategy for AA.

PMID: 23054344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Arthritis Res Ther. 2012 Oct 4;14(5):R208. doi: 10.1186/ar4046.

Dendritic cells provide a potential link between smoking and inflammation in
rheumatoid arthritis.

Kazantseva MG, Highton J, Stamp LK, Hessian PA.

INTRODUCTION: Smoking increases the risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
and affects the severity of established RA. Smoking can impact on Th17 lymphocyte
differentiation and function through activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
(AHR), a process with implications for the pathogenic mechanisms in RA that
involve the cytokine, interleukin (IL)-17A. The objective of this study was to
establish any effect of smoking on the inflammatory tissue lesions of rheumatoid 
arthritis via the AHR and IL-17A.
METHODS: Twenty synovial and eighteen subcutaneous nodule tissue samples from 31 
patients with RA were studied. Patient smoking status at the time of tissue
collection was established. Expression of AHR, CYP1A1, AHRR, IL6, IL17A, IL17F,
IL22, IL23, IL23R, IFNG, TBX21, IDO1 and FOXP3 genes were assessed in tissues and
cultured cells using real-time PCR. Two-colour immunofluorescence was used to
co-localise AHR and CYP1A1 protein in synovial tissues. The response of monocytes
and monocyte-derived dendritic cells (mo-DCs) to the AHR agonist, benzo(a)pyrene 
(BaP) was compared in vitro.
RESULTS: AHR gene expression was demonstrated in rheumatoid synovial tissues and 
nodules with significantly greater expression in synovia. Expression was not
influenced by smoking in either tissue. Evidence of AHR activation, indicated by 
CYP1A1 and AHRR gene expression, was found only in synovia from patients who
smoked. However, IL17A gene expression was lower in synovia from smokers. TBX21
and FOXP3 expression was not affected by smoking. Within the synovial tissues of 
smokers the principal cell type with evidence of AHR activation was a subset of
synovial DCs. This observation was consistent with the sensitivity of human
mo-DCs to BaP stimulation demonstrated in vitro. Exposure to BaP affected mo-DC
function as demonstrated by decreased IL6 expression induced by PolyI:C, without 
affecting indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase (IDO)1 expression.
CONCLUSION: Our findings show that one effect of smoking on inflamed rheumatoid
synovial tissue involves activation of the AHR pathway. A subset of synovial DCs 
is important in the response to cigarette smoke. The potential for smoking to
affect DC behaviour in joint tissues has relevance to both early and late phases 
of RA pathogenesis and warrants further investigation.

PMCID: PMC3580520
PMID: 23036591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46241. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046241. Epub 2012 Sep 27.

Differential effects of IL-12 on Tregs and non-Treg T cells: roles of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-2
and IL-2R.

Zhao J(1), Zhao J, Perlman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United States
of America.

Complex interactions between effector T cells and Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells
(Treg) contribute to clinical outcomes in cancer, and autoimmune and infectious
diseases. Previous work showed that IL-12 reversed Treg-mediated suppression of
CD4(+)Foxp3(-) T cell (Tconv) proliferation. We and others have also shown that
Tregs express T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> at sites of Th1 inflammation and that IL-12 induces
IFN-<U+03B3> production by Tregs in vitro. To investigate whether loss of
immunosuppression occurs when IFN-<U+03B3> is expressed by Tregs we treated mouse
lymphocyte cultures with IL-12. IFN-<U+03B3> expression did not decrease the ability of 
Tregs to suppress Tconv proliferation. Rather, IL-12 treatment decreased Treg
frequency and Foxp3 levels in Tregs. We further showed that IL-12 increased IL-2R
expression on Tconv and CD8 T cells, diminished its expression on Tregs and
decreased IL-2 production by Tconv and CD8 T cells. Together, these IL-12
mediated changes favored the outgrowth of non-Tregs. Additionally, we showed that
treatment with a second cytokine, IL-27, decreased IL-2 expression without
augmenting Tconv and CD8 T cell proliferation. Notably, IL-27 only slightly
modified levels of IL-2R on non-Treg T cells. Together, these results show that
IL-12 has multiple effects that modify the balance between Tregs and non-Tregs
and support an important role for relative levels of IL-2R but not for IFN-<U+03B3>
expression in IL-12-mediated reversal of Treg immunosuppression.

PMCID: PMC3459844
PMID: 23029447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2012 Jul;47(7):884-9.

[Immunoregulatory effect of artesunate on allergic contact dermatitis and its
mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Li T(1), Chen H, Liu XG, Zhou YX, Bai SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Logistics University of the Chinese People's Armed
Police Force, Tianjin 300162, China.

This study is to elucidate the immunoregulation mechanisms of artesunate (AST) on
allergic contact dermatitis (ACD). Pharmacodynamics analyses, HE staining,
semi-quantitative RT-PCR and Western blotting were used to explore the effects of
AST on the related cytokines, transcription factor and signaling molecule of ACD 
respectively. The results indicated that topical administration of AST not only
reduced the increase of ear swelling, spleen index and inflammatory cells
infiltration in ACD mice, but also inhibited remarkably the expression of
IFN-gamma, T-bet and NF-kappaB p65. It's suggested that AST could exhibit
suppressive effects on inflammatory response and immune function of ACD, which
indicates the possibility of developing AST as a novel immunoregulatory agent in 
the treatment of ACD and other immune-related diseases.

PMID: 22993852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Immunity. 2012 Sep 21;37(3):511-23. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.06.014. Epub 2012 
Sep 13.

The cytokines interleukin 27 and interferon-<U+03B3> promote distinct Treg cell
populations required to limit infection-induced pathology.

Hall AO(1), Beiting DP, Tato C, John B, Oldenhove G, Lombana CG, Pritchard GH,
Silver JS, Bouladoux N, Stumhofer JS, Harris TH, Grainger J, Wojno ED, Wagage S, 
Roos DS, Scott P, Turka LA, Cherry S, Reiner SL, Cua D, Belkaid Y, Elloso MM,
Hunter CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Sep 21;37(3):443-4.

Interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) promotes a population of T-bet(+) CXCR3(+) regulatory T
(Treg) cells that limit T helper 1 (Th1) cell-mediated pathology. Our studies
demonstrate that interleukin-27 (IL-27) also promoted expression of T-bet and
CXCR3 in Treg cells. During infection with Toxoplasma gondii, a similar
population emerged that limited T cell responses and was dependent on IFN-<U+03B3> in
the periphery but on IL-27 at mucosal sites. Transfer of Treg cells ameliorated
the infection-induced pathology observed in Il27(-/-) mice, and this was
dependent on their ability to produce IL-10. Microarray analysis revealed that
Treg cells exposed to either IFN-<U+03B3> or IL-27 have distinct transcriptional
profiles. Thus, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-27 have different roles in Treg cell biology and
IL-27 is a key cytokine that promotes the development of Treg cells specialized
to control Th1 cell-mediated immunity at local sites of inflammation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3477519
PMID: 22981537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44338. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044338. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Dietary resveratrol prevents the development of food allergy in mice.

Okada Y(1), Oh-oka K, Nakamura Y, Ishimaru K, Matsuoka S, Okumura K, Ogawa H,
Hisamoto M, Okuda T, Nakao A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Yamanashi Faculty of Medicine Chuo,
Yamanashi, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Resveratrol is a bioactive polyphenol enriched in red wine that
exhibits many beneficial health effects via multiple mechanisms. However, it is
unclear whether resveratrol is beneficial for the prevention of food allergy.
This study investigated whether resveratrol inhibited the development of food
allergy by using a mouse model of the disease.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Mice fed standard diet or standard diet plus
resveratrol were sensitized by intragastric administration of ovalbumin (OVA) and
mucosal adjuvant cholera toxin (CT). Several manifestations of food allergy were 
then compared between the mice. The effects of resveratrol on T cells or
dendritic cells were also examined by using splenocytes from OVA-specific T
cell-receptor (TCR) transgenic DO11.10 mice or mouse bone marrow-derived
dendritic cells (BMDCs) in vitro. We found that mice fed resveratrol showed
reduced OVA-specific serum IgE production, anaphylactic reaction, and OVA-induced
IL-13 and IFN-ã production from the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) and spleens in 
comparison to the control mice, following oral sensitization with OVA plus CT. In
addition, resveratrol inhibited OVA plus CT-induced IL-4, IL-13, and IFN-ã
production in splenocytes from DO11.10 mice associated with inhibition of GATA-3 
and T-bet expression. Furthermore, resveratrol suppressed the OVA plus CT-induced
CD25 expression and IL-2 production in DO11.10 mice-splenocytes in association
with decreases in CD80 and CD86 expression levels. Finally, resveratrol
suppressed CT-induced cAMP elevation in association with decreases in CD80 and
CD86 expression levels in BMDCs.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Ingestion of resveratrol prevented the development of a
food allergy model in mice. Given the in vitro findings, resveratrol might do so 
by inhibiting DC maturation and subsequent early T cell activation and
differentiation via downregulation of CT-induced cAMP activation in mice. These
results suggest that resveratrol may have potential for prophylaxis against food 
allergy.

PMCID: PMC3433457
PMID: 22962611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Immunity. 2012 Sep 21;37(3):501-10. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.05.031. Epub 2012 
Sep 6.

T-bet(+) Treg cells undergo abortive Th1 cell differentiation due to impaired
expression of IL-12 receptor ß2.

Koch MA(1), Thomas KR, Perdue NR, Smigiel KS, Srivastava S, Campbell DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Sep 21;37(3):443-4.

Foxp3(+) regulatory T (Treg) cells limit inflammatory responses and maintain
immune homeostasis. Although comprised of several phenotypically and functionally
distinct subsets, the differentiation of specialized Treg cell populations within
the periphery is poorly characterized. We demonstrate that the development of
T-bet(+) Treg cells that potently inhibit T helper 1 (Th1) cell responses was
dependent on the transcription factor STAT1 and occurred directly in response to 
interferon-<U+03B3> produced by effector T cells. Additionally, delayed induction of the
IL-12Rß2 receptor component after STAT1 activation helped ensure that Treg cells 
do not readily complete STAT4-dependent Th1 cell development and lose their
ability to suppress effector T cell proliferation. Thus, we define a pathway of
abortive Th1 cell development that results in the specialization of peripheral
Treg cells and demonstrate that impaired expression of a single cytokine receptor
helps maintain Treg cell-suppressive function in the context of inflammatory Th1 
cell responses.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3501343
PMID: 22960221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. APMIS. 2012 Oct;120(10):808-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2012.02906.x. Epub 2012 
Apr 11.

Modulation of FLT3 signaling targets conventional dendritic cells to attenuate
acute lung injury.

Dong L(1), He HL, Lu XM, Yang Y, Qiu HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Zhong-Da Hospital, Southeast University,
Nanjing, China.

Conventional dendritic cells (cDCs) have been reported to participate in the
pathophysiology of acute lung injury (ALI). Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3)
signaling represents a highly specific pathway for the manipulation of cDCs in
vivo. The purpose of this study was to clarify the effect of FLT3 signaling on
the accumulation and maturation of pulmonary cDCs, and whether inhibition of FLT3
signaling may attenuate acute lung inflammation and lung injury. C57BL/6 mice
were pretreated with FLT3-ligand (FLT3L) and lestaurtinib separately for five
consecutive days. A murine model of ALI was subsequently generated by
intra-tracheal instillation of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and lung specimens were
harvested 24 h later. Flow cytometry was conducted to measure the accumulation
and maturation of pulmonary cDCs. IL-6, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-4, MPO activity and
transcription factor T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA ratio were quantified to evaluate lung
inflammation. Lung injury was estimated by lung wet weight/body weight ratio
(LWW/BW) and histopathological analysis. LPS challenge resulted in rapid
accumulation and maturation of pulmonary cDCs. FLT3L pretreatment further
stimulated the accumulation and maturation of pulmonary cDCs, leading to a
markedly increased LWW/BW and aggravated lung histopathology. Meanwhile, lung MPO
activity, T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA ratio and concentrations of IL-6 and IFN-<U+03B3> were
elevated by FLT3L administration. In contrast, lestaurtinib pretreatment
inhibited the accumulation and maturation of pulmonary cDCs, leading to a
significantly decreased LWW/BW and improved lung histopathology. Lestaurtinib
administration also suppressed lung MPO activity, T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA ratio and
production of IL-6 and IFN-<U+03B3>. Our findings show that FLT3 signaling ameliorates
ALI by regulating the accumulation and maturation of pulmonary cDCs, suggesting
an innovative pharmacotherapy for ALI.

© 2012 The Authors APMIS © 2012 APMIS.

PMID: 22958289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 26;287(44):36896-904. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.409516. Epub
2012 Sep 4.

Adiponectin induces pro-inflammatory programs in human macrophages and CD4+ T
cells.

Cheng X(1), Folco EJ, Shimizu K, Libby P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Abundant experimental and clinical data support a modulatory role for adiponectin
in inflammation, dysmetabolism, and disease. Because the activation of cells
involved in innate and adaptive immunity contributes to the pathogenesis of
diseases such as atherosclerosis and obesity, this study investigated the role of
adiponectin in human macrophage polarization and T cell differentiation.
Examination of the adiponectin-induced transcriptome in primary human macrophages
revealed that adiponectin promotes neither classical (M1) nor alternative (M2)
macrophage activation but elicits a pro-inflammatory response that resembles M1
more closely than M2. Addition of adiponectin to polyclonally activated CD4(+) T 
lymphocytes did not affect cell proliferation but induced mRNA expression and
protein secretion of interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and interleukin (IL)-6. Adiponectin
treatment of CD4(+) T cells increased phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and signal transducer and activation of transcription
(STAT) 4 and augmented T-bet expression. Inhibition of p38 with SB203580
abrogated adiponectin-induced IFN-<U+03B3> production, indicating that adiponectin
enhances T(H)1 differentiation through the activation of the p38-STAT4-T-bet
axis. Collectively, our results demonstrate that adiponectin can induce
pro-inflammatory functions in isolated macrophages and T cells, concurring with
previous observations that adiponectin induces a limited program of inflammatory 
activation that likely desensitizes these cells to further pro-inflammatory
stimuli.

PMCID: PMC3481292
PMID: 22948153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Immunol Res. 2013 Mar;55(1-3):210-6. doi: 10.1007/s12026-012-8365-8.

TLR7 drives accumulation of ABCs and autoantibody production in autoimmune-prone 
mice.

Rubtsov AV(1), Rubtsova K, Kappler JW, Marrack P.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, CO 80206, USA.
rubtsova@njhealth.org

Although autoantibodies are the hallmarks of most autoimmune diseases, the
mechanisms by which autoreactive B cells are generated and accumulate are still
poorly understood. Overexpression of Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) that recognizes 
single-stranded RNAs has been implicated in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
although the cellular mechanism by which this receptor drives the disease is
unknown. We recently identified a population of CD11c(+) age-associated B cells
(ABCs) which is driven by TLR7 signaling, secretes autoantibodies and appears in 
autoimmune-prone mice by the time of onset of autoimmunity. Mice lacking the Mer 
receptor develop autoantibodies and splenomegaly similar to other mouse models of
SLE. Here, we show that Mer(-/-) mice that lack TLR7 fail to develop
anti-chromatin IgG antibodies, perhaps because they also fail to develop ABCs.
Moreover, depletion of CD11c(+) ABCs from Mer(-/-) mice leads to rapid reduction 
in autoantibodies. Together, these data strongly suggest that ABCs and/or their
descendants are the primary source of autoantibodies in Mer(-/-) mice and that
TLR7 signaling is crucial for accumulation of ABCs and development of
autoantibodies. These data demonstrate for the first time that TLR7, and not
TLR9, is responsible for generation of anti-chromatin IgG antibodies in Mer(-/-) 
mice.

PMCID: PMC3935605
PMID: 22945807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Blood. 2012 Oct 18;120(16):3237-45. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-420182. Epub 2012 
Aug 31.

Endogenous antigen presentation impacts on T-box transcription factor expression 
and functional maturation of CD8+ T cells.

Smith C(1), Elhassen D, Gras S, Wynn KK, Dasari V, Tellam J, Tey SK, Rehan S, Liu
YC, Rossjohn J, Burrows SR, Khanna R.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Centre for Vaccine Development and Tumour Immunology Laboratory,
Department of Immunology, Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane,
Australia.

T-box transcription factors T-bet (Tbx21) and Eomesodermin (Eomes) are critical
players in CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocyte effector function and differentiation,
but how the expression of these transcription factors is regulated remains poorly
defined. Here we show that dominant T cells directed toward human CMV, expressing
significantly higher levels of T-bet with graded loss of Eomes expression
(T-bet(hi)Eomes(hi/lo)), are more efficient in recognizing endogenously processed
peptide-major histocompatibility complexes (pMHC) compared with subdominant
virus-specific T cells expressing lower levels of T-bet and high levels of Eomes 
(T-bet(int)Eomes(hi)). Paradoxically, the T-bet(hi)Eomes(hi/lo) dominant
populations that efficiently recognized endogenous antigen demonstrated lower
intrinsic avidity for pMHC, whereas T-bet(int)Eomes(hi) subdominant populations
were characterized by higher pMHC avidity and less efficient recognition of
virus-infected cells. Importantly, differential endogenous viral antigen
recognition by CMV-specific CD8(+) T cells also correlated with the
differentiation status and expression of perforin, granzyme B and K. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that the expression of T-bet correlates with clonal expansion,
differentiation status, and expression of perforin, granzyme B and K in
antigen-specific T cells. These findings illustrate how endogenous viral antigen 
presentation during persistent viral infection may influence the transcriptional 
program of virus-specific T cells and their functional profile in the peripheral 
blood of humans.

PMID: 22942184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Scand J Immunol. 2012 Dec;76(6):559-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2012.02773.x.

NK cells inhibit T-bet-deficient, autoreactive Th17 cells.

Wu W(1), Shi S, Ljunggren HG, Cava AL, Van Kaer L, Shi FD, Liu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Tianjin Neurologic Institute, Tianjin Medical
University General Hospital, Tianjin, China.

The differentiation and maintenance of Th17 cells require a unique cytokine
milieu and activation of lineage-specific transcription factors. This process
appears to be antagonized by the transcription factor T-bet, which controls the
differentiation of Th1 cells. Considering that T-bet-deficient (T-bet(-/-) ) mice
are largely devoid of natural killer (NK) cells due to a defect in the terminal
maturation of these cells, and because NK cells can influence the differentiation
of T helper cells, we investigated whether the absence of NK cells in
T-bet-deficient mice contributes to the augmentation of autoreactive Th17 cell
responses. We show that the loss of T-bet renders the transcription factors Rorc 
and STAT3 highly responsive to activation by stimuli provided by NK cells.
Furthermore, reconstitution of T-bet(-/-) mice with wild-type NK cells inhibited 
the development of autoreactive Th17 cells through NK cell-derived production of 
IFN-<U+03B3>. These results identify NK cells as critical regulators in the development 
of autoreactive Th17 cells and Th17-mediated pathology.

© 2012 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2012 Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3600979
PMID: 22928727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Neuroimmunol. 2012 Nov 15;252(1-2):83-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2012.07.014.
Epub 2012 Aug 24.

The switch between relapse and remission in multiple sclerosis: continuous
inflammatory response balanced by Th1 suppression and neurotrophic factors.

Gurevich M(1), Achiron A.

Author information: 
(1)Multiple Sclerosis Center, Sheba Medical Center, Israel.
gurevich@sheba.health.gov.il

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is characterized in most patients by a
relapsing-remitting disease course. However, the trigger of relapse and the
transformation that switches relapse into remission are not clearly understood.
To evaluate the key molecular pathways operating in MS relapse and remission we
performed peripheral blood gene-expression profiling in 123 MS patients either in
relapse (n=34) or remission (n=89) and in comparison with 41 matched healthy
subjects using Affymetrix microarray technology. Our findings suggest that the
relapsing-remitting pattern of MS is an ongoing process where inflammation is
persistently active in the background of a changing magnitude of processes
associated with TBX21-mediated immune suppression and activation of BDNF-related 
neuroprotection.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22921736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Clin Exp Allergy. 2012 Jun;42(6):891-900. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2012.04003.x.

Reduced T-bet in addition to enhanced STAT6 and GATA3 expressing T cells
contribute to human allergen-induced late responses.

Eifan AO(1), Furukido K, Dumitru A, Jacobson MR, Schmidt-Weber C, Banfield G,
Durham SR, Nouri-Aria KT.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Clinical Immunology, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: T-bet and GATA-3 are transcriptional factors involved in Th1 and Th2 
cell differentiation, although their concomitant roles at protein levels in
target organs during human allergic disease have not been assessed.
OBJECTIVES: We investigated the expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in nasal and
cutaneous models of Th2 (grass-pollen allergen) and a cutaneous model of Th1
(PPD) responses in man.
METHODS: Nasal biopsies were obtained at 8 h and skin biopsies at 8 and 48 h
after allergen and PPD challenges, respectively, from 10 allergic rhinitics and 6
non-atopic controls. T cells were assessed using immunofluorescence microscopy.
RESULTS: There were increases in CD3(+)STAT6(+)cells (P = 0.01 for nose and skin)
and CD3(+)GATA3(+)cells (P = 0.03 for skin) in response to allergen compared with
diluent in allergics. When compared with non-atopics after allergen challenge the
difference between the two groups was also significant for CD3(+)STAT6(+)
(P = 0.001 and 0.03) and for CD3(+)GATA3(+)cells (P = 0.04 and 0.001) for nose
and skin respectively. Following PPD challenge CD3(+)STAT4(+)cells and
CD3(+)T-bet(+)cells increased in both groups compared with diluent (P = 0.02 and 
0.03 for both TFs), whereas only CD3(+)T-bet(+) cells were significantly greater 
in non-atopics compared with allergics (P = 0.04). The ratio of GATA3(+):T-bet(+)
T cells in allergen-induced responses was significantly greater in the allergics 
(P = 0.008 and 0.01 nose and skin respectively), whereas the ratio of
T-bet:GATA3(+)T cells was significantly higher in the non-atopics during
PPD-induced responses (P = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Dysregulation of Th1 transcription may
contribute to heightened expression of STAT6 and GATA3 leading to exaggerated
Th2-driven manifestations of allergic disease.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22909160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 Jan;24(1):240-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2012.05.010. Epub
2012 Aug 15.

The role of T-bet in obesity: lack of T-bet causes obesity in male mice.

Kim KY(1), Jeong HJ, Kim HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

The association of T helper (Th) 1 cells with obesity is well documented in both 
animals and humans. The T-box transcription factor (T-bet) is known as the
transcription factor that is responsible for the development of Th1 cells.
However, the role of T-bet in obesity has never been elucidated. The present
study aimed to investigate the regulatory function of T-bet on obesity in mice.
Th1 cytokine levels were decreased, whereas Th2 cytokine level and GATA-3
messenger RNA (mRNA) expression were increased in T-bet knockout (KO) mice. T-bet
KO male mice induced obesity as a result of increased body weight and food
efficiency despite the fact that they feed a control diet. T-bet KO mice have an 
increase in weight of white adipose tissue and levels of triacylglyceride and
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Interestingly, the expression levels of
energy expenditure-related genes were decreased in T-bet KO mice. Both T-bet KO
male and female mice had impaired glucose tolerance. In white adipose tissue,
leptin, the increase in peroxisome proliferator receptor-<U+03B3> and
CAAT/enhancer-binding protein a mRNA expressions in T-bet KO mice was more than
that in wild-type mice. Furthermore, we found that the level of interleukin
(IL)-6 mRNA expression in white adipose tissue was elevated in T-bet KO mice but 
not IL-1ß and tumor necrosis factor-a. IL-6 mRNA expression was increased in
adipocyte fraction and stromal vascular fraction in white adipose tissue of T-bet
KO mice. Taken together, our results reveal that T-bet may affect obesity through
the regulation of IL-6 expression in adipocytes of white adipose tissue.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22901686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Dec;42(12):3267-79. doi: 10.1002/eji.201142158. Epub 2012 Sep
26.

Nitric oxide inhibits the accumulation of CD4+CD44hiTbet+CD69lo T cells in
mycobacterial infection.

Pearl JE(1), Torrado E, Tighe M, Fountain JJ, Solache A, Strutt T, Swain S,
Appelberg R, Cooper AM.

Author information: 
(1)Trudeau Institute Inc, Saranac Lake, NY 12983, USA.

Animals lacking the inducible nitric oxide synthase gene (nos2(-/-)) are less
susceptible to Mycobacterium avium strain 25291 and lack nitric oxide-mediated
immunomodulation of CD4(+) T cells. Here we show that the absence of nos2 results
in increased accumulation of neutrophils and both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells
within the M. avium containing granuloma. Examination of the T-cell phenotype in 
M. avium infected mice demonstrated that CD4(+)CD44(hi) effector T cells
expressing the Th1 transcriptional regulator T-bet (T-bet(+)) were specifically
reduced by the presence of nitric oxide. Importantly, the T-bet(+) effector
population could be separated into CD69(hi) and CD69(lo) populations, with the
CD69(lo) population only able to accumulate during chronic infection within
infected nos2(-/-) mice. Transcriptomic comparison between CD4(+)CD44(hi)CD69(hi)
and CD4(+)CD44(hi)CD69(lo) populations revealed that CD4(+)CD44(hi)CD69(lo) cells
had higher expression of the integrin itgb1/itga4 (VLA-4, CD49d/CD29). Inhibition
of Nos2 activity allowed increased accumulation of the CD4(+)
CD44(hi)T-bet(+)CD69(lo) population in WT mice as well as increased expression of
VLA-4. These data support the hypothesis that effector T cells in mycobacterial
granulomata are not a uniform effector population but exist in distinct subsets
with differential susceptibility to the regulatory effects of nitric oxide.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3664054
PMID: 22890814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Inflamm Res. 2012 Dec;61(12):1369-78. doi: 10.1007/s00011-012-0538-3. Epub 2012
Aug 8.

Blockage of nerve growth factor modulates T cell responses and inhibits allergic 
inflammation in a mouse model of asthma.

Shi Y(1), Jin Y, Guo W, Chen L, Liu C, Lv X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmacy,
Jilin University, 130021 Changchun, China.

OBJECTIVE: Blockage of nerve growth factor (NGF) by anti-NGF antibodies can
inhibit allergic airway hyper-responsiveness in mice. This study was aimed at
determining the mechanisms underlying the action of anti-NGF in vivo.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were sensitized with ovalbumin (OVA) and treated with
anti-NGF. At 1 day after the last challenge, their airway responsiveness and
inflammation were examined and the levels of cytokine and transcription factor
mRNA transcripts in the lungs and cytokines in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
were determined. The frequency of different functional T cells and the levels of 
serum OVA-specific antibodies were measured.
RESULTS: OVA challenge induced severe airway resistance, inflammation, higher
levels of IL-4, TNFa, IL-17A, TGFß, GATA-3 and ROR<U+03B3>T expression and increased Th2
and Th17 cells and IgE responses, but decreased IFN<U+03B3> and IL-10 responses, T-bet
and Foxp3 expression and Th1 and Tregs. Treatment with anti-NGF significantly
reduced allergic airway resistance and inflammation, up-regulated IFN<U+03B3>, IL-10,
TGFß, T-bet, and Foxp3 expression, increased Th1 and Tregs, but down-regulated
IL-4, TNFa, IL-17A, ROR<U+03B3>T and GATA-3 expression and reduced Th2 and Th17 cells,
accompanied by increased serum IgG2a.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-NGF inhibits allergic airway inflammation by modulating the
balance of pro- and anti-asthmatic T cell responses in the lungs of mice.

PMID: 22871964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 1;189(5):2084-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200774. Epub 2012 Jul
30.

Cutting edge: influence of Tmevpg1, a long intergenic noncoding RNA, on the
expression of Ifng by Th1 cells.

Collier SP(1), Collins PL, Williams CL, Boothby MR, Aune TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2014 Jan 1;192(1):533.

The majority of the genome is noncoding and was thought to be nonfunctional.
However, it is now appreciated that transcriptional control of protein coding
genes resides within these noncoding regions. Thousands of genes encoding long
intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) have been recently identified throughout the
genome, which positively or negatively regulate transcription of neighboring
target genes. Both TMEVPG1 and its mouse ortholog encode lincRNAs and are
positioned near the IFN-<U+03B3> gene (IFNG). In this study, we show that transcription 
of both mouse and human TMEVPG1 genes is Th1 selective and dependent on Stat4 and
T-bet, transcription factors that drive the Th1 differentiation program. Ifng
expression is partially restored in Stat4-/-Tbx21-/- cells through coexpression
of T-bet and Tmevpg1, and Tmevpg1 expression contributes to, but alone is not
sufficient to, drive Th1-dependent Ifng expression. Our results suggest that
TMEVPG1 belongs to the general class of lincRNAs that positively regulate gene
transcription.

PMCID: PMC3424368
PMID: 22851706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2012;30(3):552-62. doi: 10.1159/000341437. Epub 2012 Jul
23.

Intrauterine undernourishment alters TH1/TH2 cytokine balance and attenuates lung
allergic inflammation in wistar rats.

Landgraf MA(1), Landgraf RG, Silva RC, Semedo P, Câmara NO, Fortes ZB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Imunologia dos Transplantes, Departamento de Imunologia,
Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

IL-4 produced by Th2 cells can block cytokine production by Th1 cells, and Th1
IFN-<U+03B3> is known to counterregulate Th2 immune response, inhibiting allergic
eosinophilia. As intrauterine undernutrition can attenuate lung inflammation, we 
investigated the influence of intrauterine undernourishment on the Th1/Th2
cytokine balance and allergic lung inflammation. Intrauterine undernourished
offspring were obtained from dams fed 50% of the nourished diet of their
counterparts and were immunized at 9 weeks of age. We evaluated the cell counts
and cytokine protein expression in the bronchoalveolar lavage, mucus production
and collagen deposition, and cytokine gene expression and transcription factors
in lung tissue 21 days after ovalbumin immunization. Intrauterine
undernourishment significantly reduced inflammatory cell airway infiltration,
mucus secretion and collagen deposition, in rats immunized and challenged.
Intrauterine undernourished rats also exhibited an altered cytokine expression
profile, including higher TNF-a and IL-1ß expression and lower IL-6 expression
than well-nourished rats following immunization and challenge. Furthermore, the
intrauterine undernourished group showed reduced ratios of the IL-4/IFN-<U+03B3> and the
transcription factors GATA-3/T-Bet after immunization and challenge. We suggest
that the attenuated allergic lung inflammation observed in intrauterine
undernourished rats is related to an altered Th1/Th2 cytokine balance resulting
from a reduced GATA-3/T-bet ratio.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22832079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40865. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040865. Epub 2012 Jul 17.

Signal 3 cytokines as modulators of primary immune responses during infections:
the interplay of type I IFN and IL-12 in CD8 T cell responses.

Keppler SJ(1), Rosenits K, Koegl T, Vucikuja S, Aichele P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene,
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Signal 3 cytokines, such as IL-12 or type I IFN, support expansion and
differentiation of CD8 T cells in vivo. If and how these two signal 3 cytokines
compensate each other in T cell activation during different infections is so far 
unknown. Using CD8 T cells lacking receptors for IL-12, type I IFN or both, we
show that the expansion of CD8 T cells depends on type I IFN (LCMV infection),
type I IFN and IL-12 (Listeria and vesicular stomatitis virus infection) or is
largely independent of the two cytokines (vaccinia virus infection). Furthermore,
we show that CD8 T cells lacking IL-12 and type I IFN signals are impaired in
cytokine production and cytolytic activity in the context of VSV and Listeria
infection. These effector CD8 T cells fail to express KLRG1, thereby exhibiting a
memory-like phenotype which correlated with lower expression of the transcription
factor T-bet and higher expression of Eomes. This indicates that the variable
interplay of both signal 3 cytokines is mandatory for cell fate decision of CD8 T
cells in the context of different infections. Furthermore our results demonstrate
that the pathogen-induced overall inflammatory milieu and not the antigen load
and/or the quality of antigen presentation critically determine the signal 3
dependence of CD8 T cells.

PMCID: PMC3398954
PMID: 22815848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Neuroscience. 2012 Sep 27;221:140-50. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.07.013.
Epub 2012 Jul 16.

Valproic acid ameliorates inflammation in experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis rats.

Zhang Z(1), Zhang ZY, Wu Y, Schluesener HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Third Military Medical University of PLA, Gaotanyan
Main Street 30, Chongqing 400038, People's Republic of China.
zhangzhiren@yahoo.com

Valproic acid (VPA) is a short-chain branched fatty acid with anti-inflammatory, 
neuro-protective and axon remodeling effects. Here we have studied effects of VPA
in gpMBP(68-84)-induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Both
preventive (from Day 0 to Day 18) and therapeutic (from Day 7 to Day 18 or from
Day 9 to Day 19) VPA (500 mg/kg, intra-gastric) administration to EAE rats once
daily greatly reduced the severity and duration of EAE, and suppressed mRNA
levels of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>), tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), interleukin-1ß
(IL-1ß) and IL-17, matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9), inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) and transcription factor T-bet, but increased levels of IL-4 mRNA
in EAE spinal cords. Furthermore, preventive VPA treatment greatly attenuated
accumulation of macrophages and lymphocytes in EAE spinal cords. VPA treatment
altered the cytokine milieu of lymph nodes, modulating the Th profile from Th1
and Th17 to a profile of Th2 and regulatory T cells. In addition, in vitro study 
showed that VPA inhibited non-specific lymphocyte proliferation in a
dose-dependent manner. In summary, our data demonstrated that VPA could suppress 
systemic and local inflammation to improve outcome of EAE, suggesting that VPA
might be a candidate for treatment of multiple sclerosis.

Copyright © 2012 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22800566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 1;72(17):4351-60. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0579. Epub
2012 Jul 12.

CXCR3+ T regulatory cells selectively accumulate in human ovarian carcinomas to
limit type I immunity.

Redjimi N(1), Raffin C, Raimbaud I, Pignon P, Matsuzaki J, Odunsi K, Valmori D,
Ayyoub M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Institut de
Cancérologie de l'Ouest, Nantes-Saint Herblain, France.

Antitumor type I T-cell responses involving IFN-<U+03B3> production are critical to
control cancer, but the efficacy of this response is limited by a variety of
immunosuppressive mechanisms that promote tumoral immune escape. One critical
mechanism involves the accumulation of FOXP3(+) T regulatory cells (Treg), a
class of suppressive T cells that prevent excessive tissue destruction caused by 
unchecked immune responses. Recent studies have revealed that FOXP3(+) Treg
include distinct subsets specifically controlling over the corresponding effector
subset. In particular, CXCR3(+) Treg have been described as a subset specialized 
in the control of type I T-cell responses in vivo. Here, we show that CXCR3(+)
Treg are highly enriched in human ovarian carcinomas, particularly in solid tumor
masses, where they represent the majority of Treg. Tumor-associated CXCR3(+.)
Treg coexpress T-bet but do not secrete IFN-<U+03B3> ex vivo and suppress proliferation 
and IFN-<U+03B3> secretion of T effectors. In addition, they coexpress Helios,
suggesting that they originate from natural Treg. Finally, we show that the
proportion of CXCR3(+) Treg at tumor sites is directly correlated with that of
CXCR3(+) T effectors, consistent with expression of CXCR3 ligands. Together, our 
findings support the concept that natural CXCR3(+) T-bet(+) Treg selectively
accumulate in ovarian tumors to control type I T-cell responses, resulting in the
collateral limitation of efficient antitumor immunity.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22798340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40146. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040146. Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Tim-3 negatively regulates cytotoxicity in exhausted CD8+ T cells in HIV
infection.

Sakhdari A(1), Mujib S, Vali B, Yue FY, MacParland S, Clayton K, Jones RB, Liu J,
Lee EY, Benko E, Kovacs C, Gommerman J, Kaul R, Ostrowski MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
ali.sakhdari@utoronto.ca

Cytotoxic CD8(+) T cells (CTLs) contain virus infections through the release of
granules containing both perforin and granzymes. T cell 'exhaustion' is a
hallmark of chronic persistent viral infections including HIV. The inhibitory
regulatory molecule, T cell Immunoglobulin and Mucin domain containing 3 (Tim-3) 
is induced on HIV-specific T cells in chronic progressive infection. These Tim-3 
expressing T cells are dysfunctional in terms of their capacities to proliferate 
or to produce cytokines. In this study, we evaluated the effect of Tim-3
expression on the cytotoxic capabilities of CD8(+) T cells in the context of HIV 
infection. We investigated the cytotoxic capacity of Tim-3 expressing T cells by 
examining 1) the ability of Tim-3(+) CD8(+) T cells to make perforin and 2) the
direct ability of Tim-3(+) CD8(+) T cells to kill autologous HIV infected CD4(+) 
target cells. Surprisingly, Tim-3(+) CD8(+) T cells maintain higher levels of
perforin, which was mainly in a granule-associated (stored) conformation, as well
as express high levels of T-bet. However, these cells were also defective in
their ability to degranulate. Blocking the Tim-3 signalling pathway enhanced the 
cytotoxic capabilities of HIV specific CD8(+) T cells from chronic progressors by
increasing; a) their degranulation capacity, b) their ability to release
perforin, c) their ability to target activated granzyme B to HIV antigen
expressing CD4(+) T cells and d) their ability to suppress HIV infection of
CD4(+) T cells. In this latter effect, blocking the Tim-3 pathway enhances the
cytotoxcity of CD8(+) T cells from chronic progressors to the level very close to
that of T cells from viral controllers. Thus, the Tim-3 receptor, in addition to 
acting as a terminator for cytokine producing and proliferative functions of
CTLs, can also down-regulate the CD8(+) T cell cytotoxic function through
inhibition of degranulation and perforin and granzyme secretion.

PMCID: PMC3390352
PMID: 22792231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012 Oct;343(1):125-33. doi: 10.1124/jpet.112.194100. Epub 
2012 Jul 6.

Inhibiting glycogen synthase kinase-3 decreases
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced interferon-<U+03B3>-mediated skin
inflammation.

Hsieh CY(1), Chen CL, Tsai CC, Huang WC, Tseng PC, Lin YS, Chen SH, Wong TW, Choi
PC, Lin CF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) facilitates interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> signaling.
Because IFN-<U+03B3> is involved in inflammatory skin diseases, such as psoriasis, the
aim of this study was to investigate the pathogenic role of GSK-3 in
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-induced IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated ear skin
inflammation. TPA (3 µg per ear) induced acute skin inflammation in the ears of
C57BL/6 mice, including edema, infiltration of granulocytes but not T cells, and 
IFN-<U+03B3> receptor 1-mediated deregulation of intercellular adhesion molecule 1
(CD54). TPA/IFN-<U+03B3> induced GSK-3 activation, which in turn activated signal
transducer and activator of transcription 1. Inhibiting GSK-3 pharmacologically, 
by administering 6-bromoindirubin-3'-oxime (1.5 µg per ear), and genetically,
with lentiviral-based short-hairpin RNA, reduced TPA-induced acute skin
inflammation but not T-cell infiltration. It is noteworthy that inhibiting GSK-3 
decreased TPA-induced IFN-<U+03B3> production and the nuclear translocation of T-box
transcription factor Tbx21, a transcription factor of IFN-<U+03B3>, in CD3-positive T
cells. In chronic TPA-induced skin inflammation, inhibiting GSK-3 attenuated
epidermis hyperproliferation and dermis angiogenesis. These results demonstrate
the dual role of GSK-3 in TPA-induced skin inflammation that is not only to
facilitate IFN-<U+03B3> signaling but also to regulate IFN-<U+03B3> production. Inhibiting
GSK-3 may be a potential treatment strategy for preventing such effects.

PMID: 22773863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. BMC Immunol. 2012 Jul 7;13:36.

Adjuvant effect of docetaxel on the immune responses to influenza A H1N1 vaccine 
in mice.

Chen J(1), Yuan L, Fan Q, Su F, Chen Y, Hu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Animal Sciences, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310058, China.

BACKGROUND: Vaccination remains one of the most effective approaches to prevent
the spread of infectious diseases. Immune responses to vaccination can be
enhanced by inclusion of adjuvant in a vaccine. Paclitaxel extracted from the
bark of the Pacific yew tree Taxus brevifola was previously demonstrated to have 
adjuvant property. Compared to paclitaxel, docetaxel is another member of taxane 
family, and is more soluble in water and easier to manipulate in medication. To
investigate the adjuvant effect of this compound, we measured the immune
responses induced by co-administration of a split inactivated influenza H1N1
vaccine antigen with docetaxel.
RESULTS: When co-administered with docetaxel, lower dose antigen (equivalent to
10 ng HA) induced similar levels of IgG and IgG isotypes as well as HI titers to 
those induced by higher dose antigen (equivalent to 100 ng HA). Docetaxel
promoted splenocyte responses to H1N1 antigen, ConA and LPS, mRNA expressions of 
cytokines (IFN-gamma, IL-12, IL-4 and IL-10) and T-bet/GATA-3 by splenocytes. The
enhanced immunity was associated with up-expressed microRNAs (miR-155, miR-150
and miR-146a) in docetaxel-stimulated RAW264.7 cells. Docetaxel promoted similar 
IgE level to but alum promoted significantly higher IgE level than the control.
CONCLUSION: Docetaxel has adjuvant effect on the influenza H1N1 vaccine by
up-regulation of Th1/Th2 immune responses. Considering its unique vaccine
adjuvant property as well as the safe record as an anti-neoplastic agent
clinically used in humans during a long period, docetaxel should be further
studied for its use in influenza vaccine production.

PMCID: PMC3447692
PMID: 22769233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jul;28(7):680-3.

[Immune regulation of T-bet adjuvant on Ag85B DNA vaccine against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen LP(1), Zhang RB, Hu D, Wu J, Zhang JF, Wu HX, Li X, Niu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical School, Anhui
University of Science and Technology, Huainan 232001, China. lory457@126.com

AIM: To construct a novel Ag85B DNA vaccine based on the genetic adjuvant of
T-bet known as Th1 transcription factor and to research the immunoregulation
function of the DNA complex vaccine.
METHODS: Ag85B gene and T-bet gene were amplified by RT-PCR, and cloned into
pcDNA3.1 plasmid to construct recombinant plasmids pcDNA3-Ag85B and pcDNA3-T-bet,
respectively. The recombinant plasmids were transfected into RAW264.7 cells using
Lipofectamine(TM); 2000 reagent to detect the expressions of Ag85B and T-bet
proteins by Western blotting. BALB/c mice were immunized by three intramuscular
inoculations with pcDNA3.1-FLAG-T-bet in combination with pcDNA3.1-FLAG-Ag85B.
Two weeks after the last immunization, the anti-Ag85B antibody titres in sera
were tested by ELISA. Meanwhile, spleen lymphocyte suspension was cultured in the
context of Ag85B, and then the secretion of cytokines in the culture fluid was
tested by ELISA.
RESULTS: Plasmid proteins were successfully expressed in a dose-dependent manner.
Additionally, T-bet/Ag85B complex not only induced obviously higher IgG2a titre
with the lower IgG1, but also stimulated the increased secretion of IFN-<U+03B3> and
IL-2 with the concomitant repression of IL-4 and IL-10.
CONCLUSION: T-bet can enhance Ag85B-specific IgG2a antibody response and convert 
T cell subsets to a Th1-predominant immune response.

PMID: 22768853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2012 Apr;37(2):125-30.

[Effect of moxibustion pretreatment of Guanyuan (CV 4), etc. on expression of
leukocytic T-box transcription factor expressed in T cells and GATA-3 mRNA in
athletes undergoing heavy load training].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao M(1), Wu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai University of Sports, Shanghai 200438, China. gaoming688@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of moxibustion pretreatment on the expression of
leukocytic T-box transcription factor expressed in T cells (T-bet) mRNA and
trans-acting T-cell-specific transcription factor GATA-3 mRNA in athletes
undergoing heavy load training, so as to study its mechanism underlying
prevention of imbalance of immune function.
METHODS: Twelve male middle-long distance running athletes were equally
randomized into control group and treatment group. The althelets in the treatment
group accepted alternate moxibustion pretreatment of Guanyuan (CV 12) + bilateral
Zusanli (ST 36) or Guanyuan (CV 12) + bilateral Sanyinjiao (SP 6) for 30 min,
once a day for 4 weeks, and beginning from the 1st day of the heavy load training
on till the end of the modulatory training. The althletes of the control group
were asked to conduct simple heavy load running training. Leukocytes in the
collected venous blood samples were acquired following erythrocyte lysis,
centrifugation and removal of the supernatant. The expression levels of
leukocytic T-bet mRNA and GATA-3 mRNA were detected before, 3 weeks after the
heavy load running training and 1 week after the adjustment training.
RESULTS: In comparison with pre-training, the expression levels of leukocytic
T-bet mRNA were increased slightly after heavy load running training (7.24%,
16.84%) and after adjustment training (4.52%, 14.8%) in both control and
treatment groups (P > 0.05). After heavy load running training, the expression
levels of leukocytic GATA-3 mRNA were dow-regulated mildly (13.14%, 34.04%) in
both control and treatment groups (P > 0.05), but upregulated considerably in the
control group (59.12%, P < 0.05) rather than in the treatment group (-17.02%, P >
0.05). The GATA-3 mRNA expression level of the treatment group was significantly 
lower than that of the control group (P < 0.05). The ratios of leukocytic T-bet
mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA were increased by 13.58% and 75.16% after heavy load running
training and decreased by 29.63% and increased by 35.4%, respectively after
adjustment training in the control and treatment groups in comparison with
pre-training. No significant differences were found between two groups in the
expression levels of T-bet mRNA and the ratios of T-bet mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA at the 3
time-points, and in the expression levels of GATA-3 mRNA before and after heavy
load running training (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Moxibustion pretreatment can inhibit the expression of leukocytic
GATA-3 mRNA after adjustment training in the middle-long distance heavy load
running athletes, which may contribute to its effect in regulating imbalance of
Th 1/Th 2 after heavy load training.

PMID: 22764598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Sep;42(9):2305-10. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242391. Epub 2012 Jul 
25.

Type-1 immunity drives early lethality in scurfy mice.

Suscovich TJ(1), Perdue NR, Campbell DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, Washington 98101, USA.

Foxp3(+) regulatory T (Treg) cells modulate the functions of multiple immune cell
types, and loss of Treg cells causes lethal, CD4(+) T-cell-dependent multiorgan
autoimmune disease in both mice and humans. However, how different effector
T-cell subets contribute to the severe autoimmunity observed in the absence of
Treg cells remains controversial. We found that although expanded populations of 
Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells can be detected in scurfy (sf) mice, Th1 cells
predominate. Moreover, using a genetic approach, we found that sf mice with
deficiencies in type-1 immunity (sf × Ifngr1(-/-), sf × Tbx21(-/-), and sf ×
Ifngr1(-/-)/Tbx21(-/-)) have an extended lifespan that is associated with altered
cytokine production and attenuated cutaneous and hepatic inflammation. By
contrast, sf mice deficient in type-2 immune responses (sf × Stat6(-/-)) display 
a significantly reduced lifespan with increased hepatic inflammation, but
decreased dermatitis. These data indicate that Th1 cells and their associated
cytokines drive early immunopathology in Foxp3-deficient sf mice, highlighting
the essential role of Treg cells in restraining Th1-cell-mediated autoimmunity.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3816117
PMID: 22740092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;15(6):618-21.

[Association of T helper cell 1 cytokines expressions with prognosis of gastric
cancer patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Li HJ(1), Shen ZB, Sun YH, Liu FL, Wang HS, Chen WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of the expressions of Th1 cytokines in 
gastric cancer tissue and the prognosis of patients with gastric cancer after
radical resection.
METHODS: Fifty-eight patients with gastric cancer treated at the Zhongshan
Hospital of Fudan University were retrospectively analyzed. The expressions of
Th1 cytokines mRNA were detected in tumor tissues by real-time polymerase chain
reaction(RT-PCR) method in Th1 cells including TRAV10, IRF1, TBX21, CD3Z, GZMB,
GATA3, and IFNG. Association of Th1 cytokines mRNA expressions and prognosis was 
evaluated.
RESULTS: The median follow up was 42.5(1-64) months. The 1-year survival rate was
84.5% and the 3-year survival rate was 72.4%. Univariate Cox regression analysis 
showed that lymph node metastasis, distant metastasis, TNM staging,
lymphovascular invasion, GNLY mRNA expression, and the overall expression level
of the 8 types of Th1 cells were associated with the prognosis of patients with
gastric cancer(all P<0.05). The 3-year survival was 86.2% in patients with
increased expression of mRNA and 58.6% in those with decreased expression. The
3-year survival was 79.6% in patients with any increase in the 8 Th1 cytokines
and 33.3% in those with consistent downregulation of the 8 cytokines.
Multivariate Cox analysis showed that lymph node metastasis and the overall
expression level of 8 Th1 cytokines were independent risk factors associated with
the prognosis of patients with gastric cancer in this cohort(both P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The mRNA expression of GNLY is associated with the prognosis of
patients with gastric cancer but is not an independent risk factor. The
combination of mRNA expressions of the eight cytokines is an independent
prognostic factor.

PMID: 22736136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Blood. 2012 Jun 21;119(25):6175-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-416800.

Dasatinib enhances the expansion of CD56+CD3- NK cells from cord blood.

Tanaka J, Sugita J, Shiratori S, Shigematsu A, Imamura M.

PMID: 22730528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2012;159(3):287-96. doi: 10.1159/000338289. Epub 2012
Jun 21.

House dust mite-specific immunotherapy alters the basal expression of T
regulatory and FceRI pathway genes.

Pevec B(1), Radulovic Pevec M, Stipic Markovic A, Batista I, Rijavec M, Silar M, 
Kosnik M, Korosec P.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Hospital Sveti Duh, Zagreb, Croatia. branko.pevec @ gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Regulatory T (Treg) cells and IgE-mediated signaling pathways could
play important roles in the induction of allergen tolerance during house dust
mite-specific subcutaneous immunotherapy (HDM-SCIT). Our aim was to compare the
basal expression levels of Treg, T helper 1 (Th1) and Th2 transcription factors
and components involved in IgE-mediated signaling in healthy subjects with those 
in HDM-allergic patients both untreated and successfully treated with HDM-SCIT.
METHODS: Thirty-nine HDM-allergic patients who completed a 3- to 5-year course of
mite extract SCIT, 20 mite-allergic controls and 25 healthy controls participated
in this study. The efficacy of SCIT was monitored using skin-prick tests (SPTs), 
total immunoglobulin E (tIgE), specific IgE (sIgE), sIgG(4), nasal challenge and 
visual analog scale (VAS) scores at several time points. The mRNA levels of
forkhead box protein 3 (FOXP3), T-BET, GATA-3, FceRI, spleen tyrosine kinase
(Syk), phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K) and SH2 domain-containing inositol
phosphatase (SHIP) were quantified by real-time RT-PCR using nonstimulated whole 
blood samples.
RESULTS: Decreased wheal sizes and VAS scores, negative challenges and increased 
sIgG(4) levels indicated that SCIT was effective in the treated patients. Basal
expression levels of FOXP3 and GATA-3 decreased and T-BET levels increased in
both treated patients and in healthy controls compared to untreated patients. The
IgE-mediated pathway kinases Syk and PI3K exhibited reduced expression, whereas
SHIP phosphatase levels were elevated in both treated patients and healthy
controls relative to untreated patients. The expression levels of FceRI were not 
significantly altered.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunotherapy using HDM extracts results in a modification of the
basal expression levels of several IgE-related signaling factors and induces a
highly significant upregulation of Th1-response and downregulation of
Th2-response transcription factors. Interestingly, this therapy also appears to
reduce the basal expression of FOXP3.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22722803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Immunol. 2012 Jul 15;189(2):659-68. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102727. Epub 2012
Jun 15.

Autocrine IFN-<U+03B3> promotes naive CD8 T cell differentiation and synergizes with
IFN-a to stimulate strong function.

Curtsinger JM(1), Agarwal P, Lins DC, Mescher MF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Autocrine IFN-<U+03B3> signaling is important for CD4 differentiation to Th1 effector
cells, but it has been unclear whether it contributes to CD8 T cell
differentiation. We show in this paper that naive murine CD8 T cells rapidly and 
transiently produce low levels of IFN-<U+03B3> upon stimulation with Ag and B7-1, with
production peaking at ~8 h and declining by 24 h. The autocrine IFN-<U+03B3> signals for
upregulation of expression of T-bet and granzyme B and induces weak cytolytic
activity and effector IFN-<U+03B3> production. IFN-a acts synergistically with IFN-<U+03B3> to 
support development of strong effector functions, whereas IL-12 induces high
T-bet expression and strong function in the absence of IFN-<U+03B3> signaling. Thus,
IFN-<U+03B3> is not only an important CD8 T cell effector cytokine, it is an
autocrine/paracrine factor whose contributions to differentiation vary depending 
on whether the response is supported by IL-12 or type I IFN.

PMCID: PMC3392455
PMID: 22706089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol. 2012;22(3):180-7.

Cellulose sulfate suppresses immunoglobulin E production by murine B lymphocytes 
in vitro.

Morioke S(1), Hiragun T, Yanase Y, Uchida K, Suzuki H, Iwamoto K, Hide M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Division of Molecular Medical Science, Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Immunoglobulin (Ig) E plays an important role in the pathogenesis of 
allergic diseases such as atopic dermatitis and allergic asthma.We previously
reported that a sulfate polysaccharide, fucoidan, suppressed IgE production by
murine B cells in vitro. However, the mechanism by which fucoidan suppresses IgE 
production remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: We incorporated sulfate groups into cellulose and studied their
biological characteristics in vitro to explore the possibility of converting
biologically neutral polysaccharides to active reagents with antiallergic
functions.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Cellulose was chemically processed using
N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and DMF-sulfurtrioxide and recovered as cellulose
sulfate with a molecular weight of around 10 kDa. We then studied the effect of
cellulose sulfate on IgE production from B cells, IgE class-switching, and
populations of IgE-secreting B cells prepared from murine spleen. We also
investigated the effects of sulfated cellulose on the production of interleukin
(IL) 4 and interferon (IFN) gamma and the expression of T-bet mRNA by splenic T
cells. The cytotoxicity of cellulose sulfate was also examined.
RESULTS: Cellulose sulfate suppressed IgE production in B cells stimulated with
IL-4 and anti-CD40 antibody by inhibiting IgE class-switch recombination and
decreasing the number of IgE-secreting B cells in vitro. Moreover, both cellulose
sulfate and fucoidan suppressed IL-4 production and enhanced IFN-gamma production
by murine T cells stimulated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies, despite the 
decrease in T-bet mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Cellulose gains an antiallergic effect on B cells and T cells with
the addition of sulfate groups.

PMID: 22697007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Immunol. 2012 Jul 15;189(2):832-40. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200854. Epub 2012
Jun 8.

Twist1 regulates Ifng expression in Th1 cells by interfering with Runx3 function.

Pham D(1), Vincentz JW, Firulli AB, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

A transcription factor network that includes STAT4, T-bet, and Runx3 promotes the
differentiation of Th1 cells and inflammatory immune responses. How additional
transcription factors regulate the function of Th1 cells has not been defined. In
this study we show that the negative regulatory factor Twist1 decreases
expression of T-bet, Runx3, and IL-12Rß2 as it inhibits IFN-<U+03B3> production. Ectopic
expression of Runx3, but not T-bet or IL-12Rß2, compensates for the effects of
Twist1 on IFN-<U+03B3> production, and Twist1 regulation of Ifng depends on complex
formation with Runx3. Twist1 decreases Runx3 and T-bet binding at the Ifng locus,
and it decreases chromatin looping within the Ifng locus. These data define an
IL-12/STAT4-induced negative regulatory loop that impacts multiple components of 
the Th1 transcriptional network and provide further insight into regulation of
Th1 differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3392532
PMID: 22685315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Mar;26(6):270-3.

[Expression of Th1/th2 transcription factors and cytokines in laryngeal squamous 
cell carcinoma and its clinical significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Deng G(1), Yang C, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology,Chinese and Western Medicine Hospital of
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
430030, China. dgang2000@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the differentiation of Th1/Th2 on the levels of transcription
factors and cytokines production in patients with laryngeal squamous cell
carcinoma in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). In addition, the relation
of p53 and T-bet, GATA3 expression was discussed for understanding the role of
T-bet and GATA3 in metastasis.
METHOD: The gene expression of Th1/Th2 type transcription factors T-bet, GATA3
and cytokines IFN-gamma, IL-4 were determined by RT-PCR and realtime RT-PCR from 
49 patients with laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma and 30 normal controls. The
expression of p53 was analyzed by immunohistochemistry.
RESULT: Predominant expression of Th2 type cytokines was detected in 49 laryngeal
squamous cell carcinoma patients. The expression rates of T-bet, GATA3, IFN-gamma
and IL-4 was 42.86% (21/49), 71.43% (35/49), 26.53% (13/49), 63.27% (33/49)
respectively. The expression rates of T-bet and IFN-gamma in patients were lower 
than in control group (P < 0.05), but the results of GATA3 and IL-4 were opposite
(P < 0.05). The similar results were obtained by realtime PCR. The expression of 
p53 in patients was accompanied with lower expression of T-betmRNA and higher
expression of GATA3mRNA.
CONCLUSION: There is predominant expression of Th2 type transcription factors and
cytokines in PBMC of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma patients. T-bet and GATA3 
can be used as reference indicators for the metastasis of laryngeal squamous cell
carcinoma.

PMID: 22675937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Immunol. 2012 Jul 15;189(2):721-31. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103015. Epub 2012
Jun 6.

Polar opposites: Erk direction of CD4 T cell subsets.

Chang CF(1), D'Souza WN, Ch'en IL, Pages G, Pouyssegur J, Hedrick SM.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0377, USA.

Effective immune responses depend upon appropriate T cell differentiation in
accord with the nature of an infectious agent, and the contingency of
differentiation depends minimally on TCR, coreceptor, and cytokine signals. In
this reverse genetic study, we show that the MAPK Erk2 is not essential for T
cell proliferation in the presence of optimum costimulation. Instead, it has
opposite effects on T-bet and Gata3 expression and, hence, on Th1 and Th2
differentiation. Alternatively, in the presence of TGF-ß, the Erk pathway
suppresses a large program of gene expression, effectively limiting the
differentiation of Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells. In the latter case, the
mechanisms involved include suppression of Gata3 and Foxp3, induction of Tbx21,
phosphorylation of Smad2,3, and possibly suppression of Socs2, a positive inducer
of Stat5 signaling. Consequently, loss of Erk2 severely impeded Th1
differentiation while enhancing the development of Foxp3(+)-induced T regulatory 
cells. Selected profiles of gene expression under multiple conditions of T cell
activation illustrate the opposing consequences of Erk pathway signaling.

PMCID: PMC3392534
PMID: 22675204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Pediatr Transplant. 2012 Aug;16(5):501-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-3046.2012.01723.x.
Epub 2012 Jun 4.

Immunohistochemical phenotyping of the inflammatory infiltrate in de novo
autoimmune hepatitis after liver transplantation in children.

Hadic N(1), Quaglia A, Cotoi C, Hussain MJ, Brown N, Vergani D, Mieli-Vergani G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child Health, King's College Medical School at King's College
Hospital, Denmark Hill, London, UK. nedim.hadzic@kcl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Pediatr Transplant. 2012 Aug;16(5):402-3.

We have investigated the inflammatory infiltrate in post-transplant dn-AIH, a
form of late insidious graft rejection, focusing on transcription factors
defining effector and T-regs, using an antigen retrieval immunohistochemical
method on archived liver tissue, and compared it with ACR and classical AIH.
Paraffin-embedded liver biopsies from pediatric patients with dn-AIH (n = 10),
ACR (n = 10), and AIH (n = 13) were selected randomly and stained using
antibodies directed to CD4, CD8, T-bet (marker of Th1 polarization), GATA-3
(marker of Th2 polarization), FOXP3 (marker for T regulatory cells), IL-17, CD56 
(NK cells), and perforin. Portal and lobular lymphocytic infiltrate was assessed 
semi-quantitatively. Prominent CD4, CD8, and T-bet positivity were present in
both the lobular and portal infiltrate of all three conditions. Overall T-bet
score of lobular inflammation in the dn-AIH group was lower than in the ACR and
AIH groups (p = 0.02). In contrast, most samples showed absent or minimal GATA-3 
positivity. FOXP3, CD56, IL-17, and perforin staining of mild to moderate
severity were present in all three groups in both the portal and lobular
infiltrate. A Th1 polarization of the inflammatory infiltrate characterizes
dn-AIH, but also ACR and AIH.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22672703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(5):e1002715. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002715. Epub 2012 May
17.

Gammaherpesvirus latency accentuates EAE pathogenesis: relevance to Epstein-Barr 
virus and multiple sclerosis.

Casiraghi C(1), Shanina I, Cho S, Freeman ML, Blackman MA, Horwitz MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) has been identified as a putative environmental trigger 
of multiple sclerosis (MS), yet EBV's role in MS remains elusive. We utilized
murine gamma herpesvirus 68 (<U+03B3>HV-68), the murine homolog to EBV, to examine how
infection by a virus like EBV could enhance CNS autoimmunity. Mice latently
infected with <U+03B3>HV-68 developed more severe EAE including heightened paralysis and
mortality. Similar to MS, <U+03B3>HV-68EAE mice developed lesions composed of CD4 and
CD8 T cells, macrophages and loss of myelin in the brain and spinal cord.
Further, T cells from the CNS of <U+03B3>HV-68 EAE mice were primarily Th1, producing
heightened levels of IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet accompanied by IL-17 suppression, whereas a 
Th17 response was observed in uninfected EAE mice. Clearly, <U+03B3>HV-68 latency
polarizes the adaptive immune response, directs a heightened CNS pathology
following EAE induction reminiscent of human MS and portrays a novel mechanism by
which EBV likely influences MS and other autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC3355105
PMID: 22615572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Neuroimmunol. 2012 Aug 15;249(1-2):112-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2012.04.019. 
Epub 2012 May 20.

Type 1 immune response in progressive multiple sclerosis.

Frisullo G(1), Plantone D, Marti A, Iorio R, Damato V, Nociti V, Patanella AK,
Bianco A, Batocchi AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Catholic University of Sacred Heart Rome, Rome,
Italy.

The aim of the study was to evaluate the type-1 immune response by analyzing
T-bet expression in circulating T and B cells in Primary Progressive (PP) and
Secondary Progressive (SP) Multiple Sclerosis (MS) patients. We found higher
percentages of circulating CD4+T-bet+ and CD8+T-bet+ T cells in SPMS and PPMS
than in remitting-relapsing MS patients and controls. Moreover, in SPMS, we
observed a positive correlation between the percentages of circulating CD4+T-bet+
or CD8+T-bet+ T cells and disease severity. The increased percentages of Th1 and 
Tc1 cells suggest that MS progressive forms, unlike RRMS, are characterized by a 
permanent peripheral type-1 immune activation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22613700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Immunity. 2012 Jun 29;36(6):921-32. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.04.006. Epub 2012 
May 17.

Gene deregulation and chronic activation in natural killer cells deficient in the
transcription factor ETS1.

Ramirez K(1), Chandler KJ, Spaulding C, Zandi S, Sigvardsson M, Graves BJ, Kee
BL.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Immunology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60615, USA.

Multiple transcription factors guide the development of mature functional natural
killer (NK) cells, yet little is known about their function. We used global gene 
expression and genome-wide binding analyses combined with developmental and
functional studies to unveil three roles for the ETS1 transcription factor in NK 
cells. ETS1 functions at the earliest stages of NK cell development to promote
expression of critical transcriptional regulators including T-BET and ID2, NK
cell receptors (NKRs) including NKp46, Ly49H, and Ly49D, and signaling molecules 
essential for NKR function. As a consequence, Ets1(-/-) NK cells fail to
degranulate after stimulation through activating NKRs. Nonetheless, these cells
are hyperresponsive to cytokines and have characteristics of chronic stimulation 
including increased expression of inhibitory NKRs and multiple
activation-associated genes. Therefore, ETS1 regulates a broad gene expression
program in NK cells that promotes target cell recognition while limiting
cytokine-driven activation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3389314
PMID: 22608498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Clin Periodontol. 2012 Jul;39(7):608-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-051X.2012.01886.x.
Epub 2012 May 14.

Experimental arthritis exacerbates Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans-induced 
periodontitis in mice.

Queiroz-Junior CM(1), Madeira MF, Coelho FM, de Oliveira CR, Cândido LC, Garlet
GP, Teixeira MM, de Souza Dda G, Silva TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery and Pathology, Faculdade de Odontologia,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

AIM: This study aimed to investigate whether chronic antigen-induced arthritis
(AIA) influences infection-induced periodontitis (PD) in mice and whether PD
modifies the clinical course of AIA. The contribution of anti-TNF-a therapy was
also evaluated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The PD was induced in C57BL/6 mice by oral infection with 
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans. AIA was induced after infection.
Anti-TNF-a and chlorhexidine therapies were used to investigate the role of TNF-a
and oral infection on PD and AIA interaction. Maxillae, knee joints, lymph nodes 
and serum samples were used for histomorphometric, immunoenzymatic and/or real
time-PCR analyses.
RESULTS: Antigen-induced arthritis exacerbated alveolar bone loss triggered by PD
infection. In contrast, PD did not influence AIA in the evaluated time-points. PD
exacerbation was associated with enhanced production of IFN-<U+03B3> in maxillae and
expression of the Th1 transcription factor tBET in submandibular lymph nodes.
Increased serum levels of IL-6 and C-reactive protein were also detected.
Anti-TNF-a and antiseptic therapies prevented the development and exacerbation of
infectious-PD. Anti-TNF-a therapy also resulted in reduced expression of IFN-<U+03B3>,
TNF-a and IL-17 in maxillae.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, the current results indicate that the exacerbation of
infection-induced PD by arthritis is associated with an alteration in lymphocyte 
polarization pattern and increased systemic immunoreactivity. This process was
ameliorated by anti-TNF-a and antiseptic therapies.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22582749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Aug;6(2):361-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.905. Epub 2012 May 8.

Lentivirally overexpressed T-bet regulates T-helper cell lineage commitment in
chronic hepatitis B patients.

Liu X(1), Tang Z, Zhang Y, Hu J, Li D, Zang G, Yu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University, Shanghai 200233, PR China.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is commonly considered to occur as a
result of disturbance of the immune system. T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) is
an essential transcription factor for T helper (Th) cell differentiation and
function. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of T-bet
overexpression on Th cell differentiation and the possible mechanism in chronic
hepatitis B (CHB) patients. CD4+ T cells from the peripheral blood of 23 CHB
patients, 8 acute hepatitis B (AHB) patients and 10 healthy controls were
isolated. T-bet mRNA expression of CD4+ T cells was detected by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The T-bet DNA fragment was subcloned
into the pGC-FU vector containing GFP to generate a recombinant lentiviral
vector, pGC-FU-T-bet, while a no-load pGC-FU vector was used as the negative
control. After transduction into CD4+ T cells from another 22 CHB patients, the
induction of Th1- and Th2-type cytokines was assayed by an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and RT-PCR and western blot analysis were used to
measure the mRNA and transcription levels of H2.0-like homeobox (HLX1), GATA-3
and STAT-6. T-bet mRNA expression in CD4+ T cells from AHB patients was enhanced 
compared with CHB patients and healthy controls. Th1-type cytokines and HLX1
expression was upregulated, while Th2-type cytokines and GATA-3 and STAT-6
expression was repressed after lentiviral introduction of T-bet. In conclusion,
lentivirally overexpressed T-bet regulates Th cell lineage commitment in CHB
patients, which may be mediated by regulating HLX1, GATA-3 and STAT-6 expression.

PMID: 22580570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Nat Immunol. 2012 May 6;13(6):604-11. doi: 10.1038/ni.2294.

Divergent transcriptional programming of class-specific B cell memory by T-bet
and RORa.

Wang NS(1), McHeyzer-Williams LJ, Okitsu SL, Burris TP, Reiner SL,
McHeyzer-Williams MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

Antibody class defines function in B cell immunity, but how class is propagated
into B cell memory remains poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that memory B
cell subsets unexpectedly diverged across antibody class through differences in
the effects of major transcriptional regulators. Conditional genetic deletion of 
the gene encoding the transcription factor T-bet selectively blocked the
formation and antigen-specific response of memory B cells expressing
immunoglobulin G2a (IgG2a) in vivo. Cell-intrinsic expression of T-bet regulated 
expression of the transcription factor STAT1, steady-state cell survival and
transcription of IgG2a-containing B cell antigen receptors (BCRs). In contrast,
the transcription factor RORa and not T-bet was expressed in IgA(+) memory B
cells, with evidence that knockdown of RORa mRNA expression and chemical
inhibition of transcriptional activity also resulted in lower survival and BCR
expression of IgA(+) memory B cells. Thus, divergent transcriptional regulators
dynamically maintain subset integrity to promote specialized immune function in
class-specific memory B cells.

PMCID: PMC3362691
PMID: 22561605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Jul;6(1):100-4. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.893. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

Chrysin attenuates allergic airway inflammation by modulating the transcription
factors T-bet and GATA-3 in mice.

Du Q(1), Gu X, Cai J, Huang M, Su M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210011, PR China.

Chrysin, a flavonoid obtained from various natural sources, has been reported to 
possess anti-inflammatory, antitumor, antioxidant and anti-allergic activities.
However, its anti-inflammatory and immunoregulatory activities in asthma animal
models are poorly understood. In the present study, we examined the effects of
chrysin on airway inflammation and the possible mechanisms through which it acts 
in a murine model of allergic asthma. BALB/c mice sensitized and challenged to
ovalbumin (OVA) were administered intragastrically with chrysin at a dose of 50
mg/kg daily. Chrysin significantly suppressed OVA-induced airway
hyperresponsiveness (AHR) to acetylcholine chloride (Ach). Chrysin administration
significantly inhibited the total inflammatory cell and eosinophil counts in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and total immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels in
serum. Histological examination of lung tissue demonstrated that chrysin
significantly attenuated allergen-induced lung eosinophilic inflammation and
mucus-producing goblet cells in the airway. In addition, chrysin triggered a
switch of the immune response to allergens towards a T-helper type 1 (Th1)
profile by modulating the transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in allergic
mice. These data suggest that chrysin exhibits anti-inflammatory and
immunoregulatory properties and provides new insights into the
immunopharmacological role of chrysin in terms of its effects in a murine model
of asthma.

PMID: 22552848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Jul;6(1):139-44. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.883. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

T-bet acts as a powerful adjuvant in Ag85B DNA-based vaccination against
tuberculosis.

Hu D(1), Wu J, Zhang R, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Immunology, Medical School and Institute of Infection
and Immunity, Anhui University of Science and Technology, Huainan, Anhui 232001, 
PR China.

Owing to the limitations of traditional Bacillus Calmette-Guerin vaccines and the
low efficacy of DNA vaccines expressing single antigens of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, there is a pressing requirement for adjuvants capable of
strengthing the immunogenicity and effectiveness of these vaccines against
tuberculosis (TB). T-bet (TBX21) is a transcription factor, which controls the
optimal development of type-1 immune responses responsible for the potent
protection of vaccines against TB. However, little is known about the efficiency 
of the TB vaccine combined with T-bet. In this study, we report an approach to
intensify the immunogenicity of Ag85B DNA-based vaccines using T-bet as an
adjuvant. Balb/c mice were immunized by 3 intramuscular inoculations with
pcDNA3.1-FLAG-T-bet in combination with pcDNA3.1-FLAG-Ag85B, and the immune
responses were compared with those induced by vaccination with Ag85B DNA alone.
We found that pcDNA3.1-T-bet-Ag85B not only induced evidently higher IgG2a
antibody responses, but also increased the production of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and
interleukin (IL)-2 with the concomitant repression of IL-4 and IL-10 compared
with pcDNA3.1-Ag85B alone or the empty vector. Thus, plasmid DNA coding for T-bet
enhanced Ag85B-specific immune responses and shifted them to a predominant
Th1-type immune response. In conclusion, T-bet is an efficacious Th1-inducing
adjuvant in the context of the Ag85B DNA-based vaccination, and could also prove 
to be a promising candidate for DNA vaccine development against TB.

PMID: 22552442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Blood. 2012 Jun 14;119(24):5758-68. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-415364. Epub 2012 
Apr 27.

Rapid development of exhaustion and down-regulation of eomesodermin limit the
antitumor activity of adoptively transferred murine natural killer cells.

Gill S(1), Vasey AE, De Souza A, Baker J, Smith AT, Kohrt HE, Florek M, Gibbs KD 
Jr, Tate K, Ritchie DS, Negrin RS.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA 94305, USA.

Natural killer (NK) cells are potent anti-viral and antitumor "first responders" 
endowed with natural cytotoxicity and cytokine production capabilities. To date, 
attempts to translate these promising biologic functions through the adoptive
transfer of NK cells for the treatment of cancer have been of limited benefit.
Here we trace the fate of adoptively transferred murine NK cells and make the
surprising observation that NK cells traffic to tumor sites yet fail to control
tumor growth or improve survival. This dysfunction is related to a rapid
down-regulation of activating receptor expression and loss of important effector 
functions. Loss of interferon (IFN)<U+03B3> production occurs early after transfer,
whereas loss of cytotoxicity progresses with homeostatic proliferation and tumor 
exposure. The dysfunctional phenotype is accompanied by down-regulation of the
transcription factors Eomesodermin and T-bet, and can be partially reversed by
the forced overexpression of Eomesodermin. These results provide the first
demonstration of NK-cell exhaustion and suggest that the NK-cell first-response
capability is intrinsically limited. Further, novel approaches may be required to
circumvent the described dysfunctional phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3382935
PMID: 22544698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Nat Immunol. 2012 Apr 29;13(6):587-95. doi: 10.1038/ni.2286.

TGF-ß and retinoic acid induce the microRNA miR-10a, which targets Bcl-6 and
constrains the plasticity of helper T cells.

Takahashi H(1), Kanno T, Nakayamada S, Hirahara K, Sciumè G, Muljo SA, Kuchen S, 
Casellas R, Wei L, Kanno Y, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis,
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Jun;12(6):397.

Distinct CD4(+) T cell subsets are critical for host defense and
immunoregulation. Although these subsets can act as terminally differentiated
lineages, they have been increasingly noted to demonstrated plasticity. MicroRNAs
are factors that control T cell stability and plasticity. Here we report that
naturally occurring regulatory T cells (T(reg) cells) had high expression of the 
microRNA miR-10a and that miR-10a was induced by retinoic acid and transforming
growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) in inducible T(reg) cells. By simultaneously targeting
the transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 and the corepressor Ncor2, miR-10a attenuated
the phenotypic conversion of inducible T(reg) cells into follicular helper T
cells. We also found that miR-10a limited differentiation into the T(H)17 subset 
of helper T cells and therefore represents a factor that can fine-tune the
plasticity and fate of helper T cells.

PMCID: PMC3499969
PMID: 22544395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Genes Immun. 2012 Jul;13(5):421-30. doi: 10.1038/gene.2012.10. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

Unique contribution of IRF-5-Ikaros axis to the B-cell IgG2a response.

Fang CM(1), Roy S, Nielsen E, Paul M, Maul R, Paun A, Koentgen F, Raval FM,
Szomolanyi-Tsuda E, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

IRF-5 is a transcription factor activated by toll like receptor (TLR)7 and TLR9
during innate immune responses. IRF-5 activates not only Type I IFN, but also
inflammatory cytokines. Most importantly, a genetic variation in the IRF-5 gene
shows a strong association with autoimmune diseases such as Lupus. Here, we
report that IRF5-deficient mice have attenuated IgG2a/c responses to
T-cell-dependent and -independent antigens and to polyoma virus infection. This
defect is due to the intrinsic deletion of IRF-5 in B cells, as SCID mice
reconstituted with Irf5-/- B cells show a decrease in IgG2a/c expression after
viral infection compared with mice that received wild-type B cells. Irf5-/-B
cells in vitro have diminished TLR and cytokine-induced class switching to
IgG2a/c. Addressing the molecular mechanism, we show that IRF-5 regulates IgG2a/c
expression by decreasing Ikaros expression; reconstitution of IRF-5 in Irf5-/- B 
cells downregulates Ikaros levels and increases switching to IgG2a/c. The IRF
site in ikzf1 promoter binds IRF-5, IRF-4 and IRF-8. We show that IRF-8 but not
IRF-4 activates the ikzf1 promoter, and IRF-5 inhibits the transcriptional
activity of IRF-8. Collectively, these results identify the IRF-5-Ikaros axis as 
a critical modulator of IgG2a/c class switching.

PMCID: PMC3628768
PMID: 22535200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Hum Immunol. 2012 Jun;73(6):673-6. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2012.03.005. Epub 2012
Apr 19.

The TBX21 transcription factor T-1993C polymorphism is associated with decreased 
IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-4 production by primary human lymphocytes.

Fyall KM(1), Fong AM, Rao SB, Ibrahim JG, Waxweiler WT, Thomas NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
zina@iff.fiocruz.br, USA.

T-bet is a transcription factor that drives the Th1 immune response primarily
through promoting expression of the IFN-<U+03B3> gene. Polymorphisms in the T-bet gene, 
TBX21, have been associated with immune-mediated diseases such as asthma and
systemic sclerosis. We found that the TBX21 promoter polymorphism T-1993C is
associated with a significant decrease in IL-4 and IFN-<U+03B3> production by stimulated
primary human lymphocytes from healthy participants.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3368090
PMID: 22521571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34554. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034554. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

An essential regulatory role of downstream of kinase-1 in the ovalbumin-induced
murine model of asthma.

Lee CM(1), Jung ID, Noh KT, Lee JS, Park JW, Heo DR, Park JH, Chang JH, Choi IW, 
Kim JS, Shin YK, Park SJ, Han MK, Lee CG, Cho WK, Park YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical Research Institute, Pusan
National University School of Medicine, Yang-san, South Korea.

The downstream of kinase (DOK)-1 is involved in the protein tyrosine kinase (PTK)
pathway in mast cells, but the role of DOK-1 in the pathogenesis of asthma has
not been defined. In this study, we have demonstrated a novel regulatory role of 
DOK-1 in airway inflammation and physiologic responses in a murine model of
asthma using lentiviral vector containing DOK-1 cDNA or DOK-1-specific ShRNA. The
OVA-induced inflammatory cells, airway hyperresponsiveness, Th2 cytokine
expression, and mucus response were significantly reduced in DOK-1 overexpressing
mice compared to OVA-challenged control mice. The transgenic introduction of
DOK-1 significantly stimulated the activation and expression of STAT-4 and T-bet,
while impressively inhibiting the activation and expression of STAT-6 and GATA-3 
in airway epithelial cells. On the other hand, DOK-1 knockdown mice enhanced
STAT-6 expression and its nuclear translocation compared to OVA-challenged
control mice. When viewed in combination, our studies demonstrate DOK-1 regulates
allergen-induced Th2 immune responses by selective stimulation and inhibition of 
STAT-4 and STAT-6 signaling pathways, respectively. These studies provide a novel
insight on the regulatory role of DOK-1 in allergen-induced Th2 inflammation and 
airway responses, which has therapeutic potential for asthma and other allergic
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3326039
PMID: 22514638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Kidney Int. 2012 Aug;82(3):321-9. doi: 10.1038/ki.2012.112. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

Endothelial injury in transplant glomerulopathy is correlated with transcription 
factor T-bet expression.

Sun Q(1), Zhang M, Xie K, Li X, Zeng C, Zhou M, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Nephrology, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University School 
of Medicine, Nanjing, China. sunqiquan@hotmail.com

Transplant glomerulopathy is an important cause of late graft loss. Inflammatory 
lesions including glomerulitis and peritubular capillaritis, suggestive of
endothelial injury, are prominent in this condition but the mechanism underlying 
this inflammation remains unclear. Here we measured the expression of T-bet (a
member of the T-box family of transcription factors regulating Th1 lineage
commitment) and its relationship with inflammation in 70 patients with transplant
glomerulopathy. Within this cohort, 32 patients were diagnosed with transplant
glomerulopathy, 23 with interstitial fibrosis/tubular atrophy, and 15 with stable
grafts. There was a significant increase in T-bet expression in both glomerular
and peritubular capillaries of the transplant glomerulopathy group. This
expression was strongly correlated with CD4(+), CD8(+), and CD68(+) cell
infiltration within glomerular and peritubular capillaries. The expression of
GATA3, a Th2 regulator, was rarely found in the transplant glomerulopathy group. 
Transplant glomerulopathy was associated with diffuse peritubular capillary
dilation without reduced capillary density. Moreover, the degree of capillary
dilation was significantly correlated with the number of infiltrating CD68(+)
cells. Since endothelial injury is a typical lesion that follows alloantibody
reactivity, our results suggest that T-bet is involved in the pathogenesis of
this glomerulopathy.

PMID: 22513824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Pharmacology. 2012;89(3-4):229-36. doi: 10.1159/000337180. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

Genistein attenuated allergic airway inflammation by modulating the transcription
factors T-bet, GATA-3 and STAT-6 in a murine model of asthma.

Gao F(1), Wei D, Bian T, Xie P, Zou J, Mu H, Zhang B, Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Emergency Department, Wuxi People's Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Wuxi, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Genistein, a flavonoid in legumes and some herbal medicines, has
various biological actions. Previous studies have shown that genistein decreased 
airway inflammation in allergic asthma. However, studies on how genistein affects
immunoreactions in asthma are very limited.
OBJECTIVE: It was the aim of this study to investigate the effect of genistein on
T helper 1 (Th1)/Th2 cytokines in a murine asthma model and to explore its
underlying mechanisms.
METHODS: The asthma model was set up both in vivo and in vitro: the mice were
divided into four groups in vivo, i.e. control group, ovalbumin-sensitized (OVA) 
group, Gen20 group (20 mg/kg genistein) and Gen40 group (40 mg/kg genistein), and
into three groups in vitro, i.e. control group, OVA group, genistein group.
Changes in lung histology were observed and concentrations of interleukin-4,
interleukin-5 and interferon-<U+03B3> in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and serum were
measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The mRNA expression of GATA
binding protein 3 (GATA-3), signal transducer and activator of transcription 6
(STAT-6) and T-box transcription factor (T-bet) in the lungs and CD4+ T cells of 
each group were detected by real-time PCR and the corresponding proteins were
detected by Western blot.
RESULTS: The results showed that genistein attenuated OVA-induced airway
inflammation, decreased Th2-type cytokines and increased Th1-type cytokines.
Additionally, our data suggested that genistein may modulate the Th1/Th2 reaction
by inhibiting GATA-3 and STAT-6 production while increasing T-bet production.
CONCLUSION: Genistein may modulate the immunomodulatory actions caused by Th1/Th2
cytokines in asthma, at least partially, by the down-regulation of GATA-3 and
STAT-6 and the up-regulation of T-bet.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22508471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Cell Mol Immunol. 2012 May;9(3):193-4. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2012.8. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Single line or parallel lines: NK cell differentiation driven by T-bet and Eomes.

Jiang X(1), Chen Y, Peng H, Tian Z.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, China.

PMCID: PMC4012847
PMID: 22504953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35155. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035155. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

Compound A, a dissociated glucocorticoid receptor modulator, inhibits T-bet (Th1)
and induces GATA-3 (Th2) activity in immune cells.

Liberman AC(1), Antunica-Noguerol M, Ferraz-de-Paula V, Palermo-Neto J, Castro
CN, Druker J, Holsboer F, Perone MJ, Gerlo S, De Bosscher K, Haegeman G, Arzt E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Fisiología y Biología Molecular, Departamento de Fisiología y
Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires and Instituto de Investigación Biomedicina de Buenos 
Aires-CONICET-Partner Institute of the Max Planck Society, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(5): doi/10.1371/annotation/12a8fc89-5f47-4bad-8863-863d99a0e52d.

BACKGROUND: Compound A (CpdA) is a dissociating non-steroidal glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) ligand which has anti-inflammatory properties exerted by
down-modulating proinflammatory gene expression. By favouring GR monomer
formation, CpdA does not enhance glucocorticoid (GC) response element-driven gene
expression, resulting in a reduced side effect profile as compared to GCs.
Considering the importance of Th1/Th2 balance in the final outcome of immune and 
inflammatory responses, we analyzed how selective GR modulation differentially
regulates the activity of T-bet and GATA-3, master drivers of Th1 and Th2
differentiation, respectively.
RESULTS: Using Western analysis and reporter gene assays, we show in murine T
cells that, similar to GCs, CpdA inhibits T-bet activity via a transrepressive
mechanism. Different from GCs, CpdA induces GATA-3 activity by p38 MAPK-induction
of GATA-3 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation. CpdA effects are reversed by
the GR antagonist RU38486, proving the involvement of GR in these actions. ELISA 
assays demonstrate that modulation of T-bet and GATA-3 impacts on cytokine
production shown by a decrease in IFN-<U+03B3> and an increase in IL-5 production,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, through their effect favoring Th2 over Th1
responses, particular dissociated GR ligands, for which CpdA represents a
paradigm, hold potential for the application in Th1-mediated immune disorders.

PMCID: PMC3322149
PMID: 22496903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Blood. 2012 May 24;119(21):4928-38. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-395186. Epub 2012 
Apr 6.

Chronic HIV infection affects the expression of the 2 transcription factors
required for CD8 T-cell differentiation into cytolytic effectors.

Ribeiro-dos-Santos P(1), Turnbull EL, Monteiro M, Legrand A, Conrod K, Baalwa J, 
Pellegrino P, Shaw GM, Williams I, Borrow P, Rocha B.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, Unit 1020, Medical Faculty Déscartes, Paris, France.

CD8 T cells lose the capacity to control HIV infection, but the extent of the
impairment of CD8 T-cell functions and the mechanisms that underlie it remain
controversial. Here we report an extensive ex vivo analysis of HIV-specific CD8 T
cells, covering the expression of 16 different molecules involved in CD8 function
or differentiation. This approach gave remarkably homogeneous readouts in
different donors and showed that CD8 dysfunction in chronic HIV infection was
much more severe than described previously: some Ifng transcription was observed,
but most cells lost the expression of all cytolytic molecules and Eomesodermin
and T-bet by chronic infection. These results reveal a cellular mechanism
explaining the dysfunction of CD8 T cells during chronic HIV infection, as CD8 T 
cells are known to maintain some functionality when either of these transcription
factors is present, but to lose all cytotoxic activity when both are not
expressed. Surprisingly, they also show that chronic HIV and lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus infections have a very different impact on fundamental
T-cell functions, "exhausted" lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus-specific cells
losing the capacity to secrete IFN-<U+03B3> but maintaining some cytotoxic activity as
granzyme B and FasL are overexpressed and, while down-regulating T-bet,
up-regulating Eomesodermin expression.

PMID: 22490682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2012 Apr;11(2):125-31.

Association of polymorphisms in non-classic MHC genes with susceptibility to
autoimmune hepatitis.

Tang J(1), Zhou C, Zhang ZJ, Zheng SS.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Combined Multi-organ Transplantation, Ministry of Public
Health, Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, First Affiliated
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310003, China.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune hepatitis is a chronic, generally progressive inflammatory
disorder of the liver, of which the cause is unclear. It was demonstrated that
genetic factors are involved in its pathogenesis. Previous studies showed that
human leukocyte antigen in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is
associated with susceptibility to autoimmune hepatitis. Current genome scanning
studies suggest that genes outside the MHC also play a critical role in
autoimmune disorders. This article focuses on our current understanding of the
polymorphisms of these genes and their roles in the pathogenesis of autoimmune
hepatitis.
DATA SOURCES: Studies were identified by searching MEDLINE and PubMed for
articles using the keywords autoimmune hepatitis, polymorphism, CTLA-4, Fas,
TNF-alpha, TGF-beta1, TBX21 and VDR up to May 2011. Additional papers were
identified by a manual search of the references from key articles.
RESULTS: According to the case-control studies on genetic polymorphisms, at least
six genes (CTLA-4, Fas, TNF-alpha, TGF-beta1, TBX21 and VDR) are involved in
autoimmune hepatitis besides HLA. So far, there has been no agreement about gene 
susceptibility and the actual clinical significance of these genes is still
controversial.
CONCLUSION: Studies on gene polymorphisms outside the MHC and knowledge of
genetic predispositions for autoimmune hepatitis may not only elucidate
pathogenic mechanisms, but also provide new targets for therapy in the future.

PMID: 22484578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jul;1820(7):841-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2012.03.005. 
Epub 2012 Mar 14.

Induction of 6-sulfated glycans with cell adhesion activity via T-bet and GATA-3 
in human helper T cells.

Sakuma K(1), Chen GY, Aoki M, Kannagi R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center, Nagoya, Aichi 464-8681, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Cell surface 6-sulfated glycans play important roles in various
immunological events through cell-to-cell interactions. The 6-sulfation process
is mediated by 6-sulfotransferase family isoenzymes. We previously demonstrated
that GlcNAc6ST-1, one of the isoenzyme genes, is induced by GATA-3 and NF-<U+03BA>B in
human helper T (Th) cells. However, transcriptional regulation of HEC-GlcNAc6ST, 
another isoenzyme important in Th cells, remains unclear.
METHODS: 5'-RACE analysis, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and reporter assays
were performed to reveal transcriptional regulation of HEC-GlcNAc6ST.
RNA-knockdown and forced expression experiments were performed to demonstrate the
contribution of HEC-GlcNAc6ST to the 6-sulfated glycan expression.
RESULTS: We identified potential binding sites of Sp1, T-bet, and GATA-3 in the
HEC-GlcNAc6ST promoter. Reporter assays indicated that transfection of Sp1
enhanced the activity, whereas mithramycin A, an Sp1-specific inhibitor,
repressed it. Transfection of T-bet increased the activity, which was inhibited
by introducing a mutation into the potential T-bet binding site. GATA-3 alone
could not elevate the activity, although co-transfection of protein kinase A,
which is known to enhance IL-5 transcription in Th2 cells through phosphorylation
of GATA-3, caused elevation. RNA-knockdown and forced expression of HEC-GlcNAc6ST
in Jurkat cells down- and up-regulated a2,6-sialylated 6-sulfo
N-acetyllactosamine, a preferential ligand for B-cell-specific CD22 antigen,
respectively. From these results, we concluded that T-bet and GATA-3 as well as
Sp1 control the expression of glycan with cell-adhesion activity by regulating
HEC-GlcNAc6ST transcription in Th cells.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: These results may provide a clue to biological regulation
of Th-cell interaction with selectins and other carbohydrate-recognition
molecules by T-bet and GATA-3.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22446378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Blood. 2012 May 3;119(18):4174-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-09-378182. Epub 2012
Mar 20.

The Ets-1 transcription factor is required for Stat1-mediated T-bet expression
and IgG2a class switching in mouse B cells.

Nguyen HV(1), Mouly E, Chemin K, Luinaud R, Despres R, Fermand JP, Arnulf B,
Bories JC.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Universitaire
d'Hématologie Hôpital Saint Louis, 1 avenue Claude Vellefaux, Paris Cedex 10,
France.

In response to antigens and cytokines, mouse B cells undergo class-switch
recombination (CSR) and differentiate into Ig-secreting cells. T-bet, a T-box
transcription factor that is up-regulated in lymphocytes by IFN-<U+03B3> or IL-27, was
shown to regulate CSR to IgG2a after T cell-independent B-cell stimulations.
However, the molecular mechanisms controlling this process remain unclear. In the
present study, we show that inactivation of the Ets-1 transcription factor
results in a severe decrease in IgG2a secretion in vivo and in vitro. No T-bet
expression was observed in Ets-1-deficient (Ets-1(-/-)) B cells stimulated with
IFN-<U+03B3> and lipopolysaccharide, and forced expression of T-bet in these cells
rescued IgG2a secretion. Furthermore, we identified a transcriptional enhancer in
the T-bet locus with an activity in B cells that relies on ETS-binding sites.
After IFN-<U+03B3> stimulation of Ets-1(-/-) B cells, activated Stat1, which forms a
complex with Ets-1 in wild-type cells, no longer binds to the T-bet enhancer or
promotes histone modifications at this site. These results demonstrate that Ets-1
is critical for IgG2a CSR and acts as an essential cofactor for Stat1 in the
regulation of T-bet expression in B cells.

PMID: 22438254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 15;188(8):3869-75. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103627. Epub 2012
Mar 16.

The TIGIT/CD226 axis regulates human T cell function.

Lozano E(1), Dominguez-Villar M, Kuchroo V, Hafler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8018,
USA.

T cell Ig and ITIM domain (TIGIT) is a newly identified receptor expressed on T
cells that binds to CD155 on the dendritic cell surface, driving them to a more
tolerogenic phenotype. Given that TIGIT contains an ITIM motif in its
intracellular domain and considering the potential importance of the TIGIT/CD226 
pathway in human autoimmune disease, we investigated the specific role of TIGIT
in human CD4(+) T cells. Using an agonistic anti-TIGIT mAb, we demonstrate a
direct inhibitory effect on T cell proliferation with a decrease in expression of
T-bet, GATA3, IFN regulatory factor 4, and retinoic acid-related orphan receptor 
c with inhibition of cytokine production, predominantly IFN-<U+03B3>. Knockdown of TIGIT
expression by short hairpin RNA resulted in an increase of both T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3>
mRNA and protein expression with concomitant decrease in IL-10 expression.
Increases in IFN-<U+03B3> with TIGIT knockdown could be overcome by blocking CD226
signaling, indicating that TIGIT exerts immunosuppressive effects by competing
with CD226 for the same CD155 ligand. These data demonstrate that TIGIT can
inhibit T cell functions by competing with CD226 and can also directly inhibit T 
cells in a T cell-intrinsic manner. Our results provide evidence for a novel role
of this alternative costimulatory pathway in regulating human T cell responses
associated with autoimmune disease.

PMCID: PMC3324669
PMID: 22427644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Int Immunol. 2012 Jul;24(7):465-71. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxs043. Epub 2012 Mar 16.

Stereospecificity of ginsenoside Rg3 in promotion of the immune response to
ovalbumin in mice.

Wei X(1), Chen J, Su F, Su X, Hu T, Hu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Animal Science, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China.

Our previous investigation demonstrated that ginsenoside Rg3 was active in
promotion of the immune response. In this study, two epimers, 20(R)-Rg3 and
20(S)-Rg3, were compared for their adjuvant effects on the immune response
against ovalbumin (OVA). BALB/c mice were immunized subcutaneously with 10 µg of 
OVA alone or with 10 µg of OVA mixed in 20(R)-Rg3 (50 µg) or 20(S)-Rg3 (50 µg) on
days 1 and 15. Two weeks after the last immunization, blood was sampled to test
IgG and the IgG subclasses as well as IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-5; splenocytes were prepared
to measure proliferative responses to stimulations with Con A, LPS and OVA and
mRNA expressions of cytokines and transcription factors by reverse
transcription-PCR. Results indicated that both 20(R)-Rg3 and 20(S)-Rg3 exhibited 
the adjuvant effect on OVA-induced immune responses. 20(R)-Rg3 promoted
significantly higher serum-specific IgG and the IgG isotype responses in
association with highly up-regulated serum IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-5 than 20(S)-Rg3. In
addition, 20(R)-Rg3 significantly enhanced splenocyte proliferative responses to 
Con A, LPS and OVA as well as mRNA expression of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-12, IL-4 and IL-10 and
transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 by splenocytes when compared with the
20(S)-Rg3. Therefore, ginsenoside Rg3 is stereospecific in stimulation of the
immune response, and 20(R)-Rg3 has more potent adjuvant activity than 20(S)-Rg3.

PMID: 22427454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Immunity. 2012 Mar 23;36(3):374-87. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.01.015. Epub 2012 
Mar 15.

Transcription factor Foxo1 represses T-bet-mediated effector functions and
promotes memory CD8(+) T cell differentiation.

Rao RR(1), Li Q, Gubbels Bupp MR, Shrikant PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263,
USA.

The evolutionary conserved Foxo transcription factors are important regulators of
quiescence and longevity. Although, Foxo1 is known to be important in regulating 
CD8(+) T cell trafficking and homeostasis, its role in functional differentiation
of antigen-stimulated CD8(+) T cells is unclear. Herein, we demonstrate that
inactivation of Foxo1 was essential for instructing T-bet transcription
factor-mediated effector differentiation of CD8(+) T cells. The Foxo1
inactivation was dependent on mTORC1 kinase, given that blockade of mTORC1
abrogated mTORC2-mediated Akt (Ser473) kinase phosphorylation, resulting in
Foxo1-dependent switch from T-bet to Eomesodermin transcription factor activation
and increase in memory precursors. Silencing Foxo1 ablated interleukin-12- and
rapamycin-enhanced CD8(+) T cell memory responses and restored T-bet-mediated
effector functions. These results demonstrate an essential role of Foxo1 in
actively repressing effector or terminal differentiation processes to promote
memory CD8(+) T cell development and identify the functionally diverse mechanisms
utilized by Foxo1 to promote quiescence and longevity.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3314246
PMID: 22425248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Bioessays. 2012 Jul;34(7):569-75. doi: 10.1002/bies.201100180. Epub 2012 Mar 15.

Immune tolerance: are regulatory T cell subsets needed to explain suppression of 
autoimmunity?

Tian L(1), Humblet-Baron S, Liston A.

Author information: 
(1)VIB Autoimmune Genetics Laboratory, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

The potential for self-reactive T cells to cause autoimmune disease is held in
check by Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells (Tregs), essential mediators of peripheral
immunological tolerance. Tregs have the capacity to suppress multiple branches of
the immune system, tightly controlling the different subsets of effector T cells 
across multiple different tissue environments. Recent genetic experiments have
found mutations that disrupt specific Treg: effector T cell relationships,
leading to the possibility that subsets of Tregs are required to suppress each
subset of effector T cells. Here we review the environmental factors and
mechanisms that allow Tregs to suppress specific subsets of effector T cells, and
find that a parsimonious explanation of the genetic data can be made without
invoking Treg subsets. Instead, Tregs show a functional and chemotactic
plasticity based on microenvironmental influences that allows the common pool of 
cells to suppress multiple distinct immune responses.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22419393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. World J Gastroenterol. 2012 Mar 14;18(10):1117-22. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i10.1117.

Association between gastric cancer and -1993 polymorphism of TBX21 gene.

Zhang LH(1), Li Q, Li P, Zhu ST, Wang J, Yang HL, Xu CQ, Guo XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health and 
Family Medicine, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China.

AIM: To investigate the association between the polymorphism of TBX21 gene and
the risk of gastric cancer in a Chinese population.
METHODS: The -1993 polymorphism located in TBX21 gene promoter region was
identified by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(PCR-RFLP) method. The risk between TBX21 gene genotype and gastric cancer was
determined by multivariate logistic regression analysis in 220 gastric cancer
patients and 262 cancer-free controls matched by age, sex and ethnicity.
RESULTS: Compared with the TBX21 -1993TT genotype, the -1993CC genotype exhibited
a significantly elevated risk for gastric cancer [Odds ratio (OR) = 3.42, 95%
confidence interval (CI): 1.41-8.31]. The relationship between the -1993
polymorphic genotype and the invasive status such as lymph node and distant
metastasis was found among the gastric cancer patients (OR = 4.02, 95% CI:
1.87-8.66; OR = 7.02, 95% CI: 3.44-14.34, respectively).
CONCLUSION: TBX21 -1993 polymorphism might contribute to the risk of gastric
cancer, especially to the distant metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3296987
PMID: 22416188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 15;188(8):3766-73. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103478. Epub 2012
Mar 12.

Regulation of proinflammatory Th17 responses during Trypanosoma cruzi infection
by IL-12 family cytokines.

Cobb D(1), Smeltz RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Medical College of Virginia, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

Previously, we reported that the transcription factor T-bet (Tbx21) regulates
Th17 responses to Trypanosoma cruzi infection in an IFN-<U+03B3>-independent manner. In 
an effort to further understand this regulation, we examined the development and 
plasticity of Th17 cells during T. cruzi infection. Th17 cells recovered from
infected Tbx21(-/-) mice were amenable to the inhibitory effects of T-bet, as
ectopic expression of T-bet reduced IL-17 expression. We subsequently addressed
the role of IL-12 family cytokines IL-12 and IL-27 and report that IL-12p35(-/-) 
mice infected with T. cruzi exhibited a significant increase in Th17 cells and
Th17-associated inflammation. Ex vivo culture of these cells with IL-12 led to a 
dramatic reduction in IL-17 production and concomitant increase in IFN-<U+03B3>.
Importantly, the ability of IL-12 to suppress IL-17 was independent of IFN-<U+03B3>.
Surprisingly, and contrary to results reported for other pathogens, IL-27 had no 
inhibitory effect on Th17 development, as Ebi-3(-/-) mice failed to show any
increase in their T. cruzi-specific Th17 response. Furthermore, IL-27 could not
compensate or synergize with IL-12 to suppress IL-17 production ex vivo. Thus, we
have established that IL-12, not IL-27, is critical for regulating Th17 responses
to T. cruzi.

PMID: 22412196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Nat Immunol. 2012 Mar 11;13(4):405-11. doi: 10.1038/ni.2242.

Molecular mechanisms that control the expression and activity of Bcl-6 in TH1
cells to regulate flexibility with a TFH-like gene profile.

Oestreich KJ(1), Mohn SE, Weinmann AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

The transcription factors T-bet and Bcl-6 are required for the establishment of a
T helper type 1 cell (T(H)1 cell) and follicular helper T cell (T(FH) cell)
gene-expression profile, respectively. Here we found that high concentrations of 
interleukin 2 (IL-2) inhibited Bcl-6 expression in polarized T(H)1 cells.
Mechanistically, the low concentrations of Bcl-6 normally found in effector T(H)1
cells did not repress its target genes because a T-bet-Bcl-6 complex masked the
Bcl-6 DNA-binding domain. T(H)1 cells increased their Bcl-6/T-bet ratio in
response to limiting IL-2 conditions, which allowed excess Bcl-6 to repress its
direct target Prdm1 (which encodes the transcriptional repressor Blimp-1). The
Bcl-6-dependent repression of Blimp-1 effectively induced a partial T(FH) profile
because Blimp-1 directly repressed a subset of T(FH) signature genes, including
Cxcr5. Thus, IL-2-signaling regulates the Bcl-6-Blimp-1 axis in T(H)1 cells to
maintain flexibility with a T(FH) cell-like gene profile.

PMCID: PMC3561768
PMID: 22406686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Pharmacology. 2012;89(3-4):117-26. doi: 10.1159/000336335. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

A critical role for the inducible proteasomal subunits LMP7 and MECL1 in cytokine
production by activated murine splenocytes.

Rockwell CE(1), Monaco JJ, Qureshi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, Mich., USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The proteasome is a multi-subunit complex that
proteolytically cleaves proteins. The replacement of the constitutive proteasome 
subunits ß1, ß2, and/or ß5 with the IFN<U+03B3>-inducible subunits LMP2, MECL1, and/or
LMP7 results in the 'immunoproteasome'. The inducible subunits change the
cleavage specificities of the proteasome, but it is unclear whether they have
functions in addition to this. The purpose of the present study was to determine 
the role of the proteasome in general, as well as LMP7 and MECL1 specifically,
with regard to cytokine production by activated primary splenocytes.
METHODS: A LMP7/MECL1-null mouse was engineered to determine the roles of these
subunits in cytokine production. Isolated splenocytes from wild-type and
LMP7/MECL1-/- mice were treated with lactacystin and activated with PMA and
ionomycin and subsequently cytokine mRNA levels were quantified.
RESULTS: The present study demonstrates that LMP7/MECL1 regulates the expression 
of IFN<U+03B3>, IL4, IL10, IL2Rß, GATA3, and t-bet. In contrast, the regulation of IL2, 
IL13, TNFa, and IL2Ra by the proteasome appears to occur independently of
LMP7/MECL1.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, the present study demonstrates that LMP7 and MECL1
regulate cytokine expression, suggesting this system represents a novel mechanism
for the regulation of cytokines and cytokine signaling.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3702019
PMID: 22398747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Feb;20(1):133-6.

[Effects of transcription factor T-bet, GATA-3, FoxP3 and CD4(+)CD25(+)regulatory
T cells in pathogenesis of child Hench-Schonlein purpura].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Q(1), Ren SH, Dong W, Fang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics; Sichuan Province People Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan
Province, China. wangchunwei_@hotmail.com

The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of transcription factors
T-bet, GATA-3 in the pathogenesis of Hench-Schonlein purpura (HSP) in children,
the relationship between CD4(+)CD25(+)regulatory T cells, transcription factor
FoxP3 and the development of child HSP, and the molecular mechanisms of Th1/Th2
imbalance of child HSP at acute phase, so as to may provide a new approach and
strategy for the treatment of HSP at the molecular levels. The expression of
T-bet, GATA-3 and FoxP3 mRNA were detected by real time PCR using SYBR Green I in
46 patients with HSP at acute phase and 30 healthy children as controls. The
expression of T lymphocyte subsets CD4(+)CD25(+) in peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells was detected by flow cytometry. The results showed that the relative level 
of GATA-3 mRNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with HSP was
significantly higher than those of the control group (964.30 ± 655.18 vs 78.09 ± 
57.20, P < 0.01). The relative level of T-bet mRNA in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of patients with HSP was lower than those of the control group 
(53.98 ± 35.79 vs 181.56 ± 96.90, P < 0.01). The expression level of FoxP3 mRNA
with HSP was lower than that of the control group (32.17 ± 23.04 vs 147.91 ±
99.15, P < 0.01). The result of CD4(+)CD25(+) Treg with HSP was lower than those 
of the control group [(5.34 ± 2.51)% vs (7.85 ± 1.97)%, P < 0.01)]. It is
concluded that Th1/Th2 imbalance exists in acute phase of child HSP, especially
predominant activation of Th2, which correlates with the abnormal expression of
transcription factor T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA. At acute phase of child HSP, the
expression of CD4(+)CD25(+)Treg and its special transcription factor FoxP3 mRNA
are down-regulated. Treg cells decreases, which indicates that insufficient
immunosuppressive effects resulting from the reduction of Treg cells may be one
of the important reason in the immune imbalance of HSP acute phase. This study
provides experimental evidence for illustrating the pathogenesis of HSP from the 
molecular mechanism of Treg cells and its regulation, and also provides a new
thinking and new strategies for the treatment of HSP at molecular levels.

PMID: 22391183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Neurosci Res. 2012 May;73(1):24-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2012.02.013. Epub 2012 
Mar 1.

Further characterization of the juxtaglomerular neurons in the mouse main
olfactory bulb by transcription factors, Sp8 and Tbx21.

Kosaka T(1), Kosaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan. kosaka@med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Juxtaglomerular neurons in the mouse main olfactory bulb consist of various types
of neurons, especially classified by their chemical properties such as
transmitter-related molecules and calcium binding proteins. In addition several
transcription factors have been revealed to characterize neuronal subpopulations.
In this study we examined the immunoreactivities of two transcription factors,
Sp8 and Tbx21, in the juxtaglomerular neuronal subpopulations containing
calretinin, calbindin, secretagogin, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and nitric oxide
synthase (NOS). Both Sp8 and Tbx21 immunoreactivities were so diverse in their
staining intensities. Almost all calretinin and secretagogin positive neurons
were relatively strongly Sp8 positive, whereas none of calbindin positive neurons
were Sp8 positive. TH positive neurons were also usually Sp8 positive, although
some were faintly positive. These four types of interneurons were Tbx21 negative.
On the other hand large faintly NOS positive external tufted cells were
occasionally Tbx21 positive but always Sp8 negative, whereas small NOS positive
periglomerular cells without distinctly stained dendrites were usually Sp8
positive and Tbx21 negative. Strangely, most of strongly NOS positive
periglomerular cells with distinctly stained dendritic processes were Sp8
negative and Tbx21 negative. Thus Sp8 and Tbx21 immunoreactivities further
characterized juxtaglomerular neurons and, especially confirmed the heterogeneity
of NOS positive juxtaglomerular neurons.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22387948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Dec;25(23):1090-3.

[Expression of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 and relationship to the
numbers of eosinophils in rat model of allergic rhinitis].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang C(1), Li C, Luo G, Luo Y, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, the Second Affiliated
Hospital, Nanchang University, Nanchang, 330006, China. artent@sina.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To explore the expression of T-bet/GATA-3 in nasal mucosa tissue of
allergic rhinitis rat and to investigate the association between the expression
of T-bet/GATA-3 and the eosinophil count.
METHOD: Twenty SD rats were randomly divided into a control group and an allergic
rhinitis group. The allergic rhinitis rat model was induced with ovalbumin. The
total eosinophils were counted in the nasal mucosa. The concentrations of IL-4,
IL-5 and IFN-gamma in nasal lavage fluid were measured by ELISA. The mRNA and
protein expressions of IL-4, IL-5, IFN-gamma, T-bet and GATA-3 in the nasal
mucosa were detected by RT-PCR and Western blot respectively.
RESULT: The main inflammatory cells were eosinophils in the nasal mucosa of
allergic rhinitis rats. The level of IL-4, IL-5 and IFN-gamma in control group
was significantly higher than that in allergic rhinitis group (P < 0.01). The
mRNA and protein expression of IFN-gamma and T-bet in allergic rhinitis group was
significantly higher than that in control group (P < 0.01). While the mRNA and
protein expression of IL-4, IL-5 and GATA-3 in control group was significantly
higher than that in allergic rhinitis group (P < 0.01). The ratio of protein
expression of T-bet and GATA-3 was negatively correlated with the eosinophil
count, IL-4 and IL-5, but positively with the concentrations of IFN-gamma.
CONCLUSION: The imbalance of transcription factor GATA-3 and T-bet has a close
correlation with the eosinophil count, and may play a key role in the formation
of allergic rhinitis.

PMID: 22384571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31244. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031244. Epub 2012 Feb 16.

Th17-related genes and celiac disease susceptibility.

Medrano LM(1), García-Magariños M, Dema B, Espino L, Maluenda C, Polanco I,
Figueredo MÁ, Fernández-Arquero M, Núñez C.

Author information: 
(1)UGC de Inmunología, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San Carlos (IdISSC), Madrid, Spain.

Th17 cells are known to be involved in several autoimmune or inflammatory
diseases. In celiac disease (CD), recent studies suggest an implication of those 
cells in disease pathogenesis. We aimed at studying the role of genes relevant
for the Th17 immune response in CD susceptibility. A total of 101 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), mainly selected to cover most of the variability
present in 16 Th17-related genes (IL23R, RORC, IL6R, IL17A, IL17F, CCR6, IL6,
JAK2, TNFSF15, IL23A, IL22, STAT3, TBX21, SOCS3, IL12RB1 and IL17RA), were
genotyped in 735 CD patients and 549 ethnically matched healthy controls.
Case-control comparisons for each SNP and for the haplotypes resulting from the
SNPs studied in each gene were performed using chi-square tests. Gene-gene
interactions were also evaluated following different methodological approaches.
No significant results emerged after performing the appropriate statistical
corrections. Our results seem to discard a relevant role of Th17 cells on CD
risk.

PMCID: PMC3281077
PMID: 22359581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2011 Nov;29(11):816-9.

[Study on mRNA expression of immune-related genes in patients with allergic
dermatitis induced by trichloroethylene].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu XY(1), Liu YF, Yi J, Ke YB, Yuan JH, Huang HY, Mao JY, Mao KL.

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shenzhen 518055,
Guangdong, China. yxu2008@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To study mRNA expression of immune-related genes (Foxp3, GATA3, CTLA4 
and T-bet) in peripheral blood of the patients with allergic dermatitis induced
by trichloroethylene (TCE).
METHODS: The peripheral blood samples were collected from 8 healthy workers
(control group) and 8 patients with allergic dermatitis induced by TCE (case
group). Real-time quantitative PCR was applied to detect mRNA expression of
immune-related genes (Foxp3, GATA3, CTLA4, T-bet).
RESULTS: The mRNA expression levels of Foxp3, GATA3 and CTLA4 genes increased by 
115%, 97% and 241% in case group, as compared with control group (P < 0.01). The 
mRNA expression level of T-bet gene decreased by 47% in case group, as compared
with control group (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: The mRNA expression levels of some immune-related genes changed in
patients with allergic dermatitis induced by TCE, those genes may play an
important role in TCE-induced allergy.

PMID: 22357516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Acta Histochem. 2012 Dec;114(8):779-84. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2012.01.005. Epub
2012 Feb 20.

Expression of Th1 and Th2 cytokine-associated transcription factors, T-bet and
GATA-3, in the eutopic endometrium of women with endometriosis.

Chen P(1), Zhang Z, Chen Q, Ren F, Li T, Zhang C, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital Affiliated to
China Medical University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.

The objective of the present study was to evaluate the expression of T-box
expressed in T cells (T-bet) and GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3) in the eutopic
endometrium from women with endometriosis. Endometrial tissues were collected
from 20 women with laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis and 20 women without 
endometriosis. T-bet and GATA-3 expression was measured by quantitative real-time
PCR (qPCR), immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis. Eutopic endometrial
tissues from patients with endometriosis expressed lower levels of T-bet mRNA and
high levels of GATA-3 mRNA, leading to a significant lower T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA
ratio (P<0.05). Western blot analysis showed that the T-bet/GATA-3 protein ratio 
in endometriosis group was also statistically lower than that in the control
group (P<0.05). These results suggested that T-bet and GATA-3 may act as cytokine
regulatory genes, and the Th2-specific transcription factor, GATA-3, probably
plays an essential role in the immune response and the development of
endometriosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22356900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 1;188(7):3315-22. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102775. Epub 2012
Feb 15.

A 17q12 allele is associated with altered NK cell subsets and function.

Xia Z(1), Liu Q, Berger CT, Keenan BT, Kaliszewska A, Cheney PC, Srivastava GP,
Castillo IW, De Jager PL, Alter G.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Translational NeuroPsychiatric Genomics, Institute for the
Neurosciences, Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

NK cells play an important role in innate immunity. A previous genome-wide
association study demonstrated an association between a 17q12 allele
(rs9916629(C)) and lower frequency of CD3(-)CD56(+) NK cells in peripheral blood.
We performed an analysis that not only replicates the original result of the
genome-wide association study (p = 0.036) but also defines the specific cell
subpopulations and functions that are modulated by the rs9916629 polymorphism in 
a cohort of 96 healthy adult subjects using targeted multiparameter flow
cytometric profiling of NK cell phenotypes and functions. We found that
rs9916629(C) is associated with alterations in specific NK cell subsets,
including lower frequency of predominantly cytotoxic CD56(dim) NK cells (p =
0.011), higher frequency of predominantly regulatory CD56(bright) NK cells (p =
0.019), and a higher proportion of NK cells expressing the inhibitory NKG2A
receptor (p = 0.0002). Functionally, rs9916629(C) is associated with decreased
secretion of macrophage inflammatory protein-1ß by NK cells in the context of
Ab-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (p = 0.039) and increased degranulation
in response to MHC class I-deficient B cells (p = 0.017). Transcriptional
profiling of NK cells suggests that rs9916629 influences the expression of
transcription factors such as TBX21, which has a role in NK cell differentiation,
offering a possible mechanism for the phenotypic and functional differences
between the different alleles. The rs9916629(C) allele therefore has a validated 
effect on the proportion of NK cells in peripheral blood and skews NK cells
toward a specific phenotypic and functional profile, potentially influencing the 
impact that these innate immune cells have on infection and autoimmunity.

PMID: 22345646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012 Sep 1;84(1):266-73. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.11.027. Epub 2012 Feb 13.

Intestinal irradiation and fibrosis in a Th1-deficient environment.

Linard C(1), Billiard F, Benderitter M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Radioprotection et de Sûreté Nucléaire, Fontenay-aux-Roses,
France. christine.linard@irsn.fr

PURPOSE: Changes in the Th1/Th2 immune balance may play a role in increasing the 
incidence of radiation-induced toxicity. This study evaluates the consequences of
Th1 deficiency on intestinal response (fibrosis and T cell trafficking) to
abdominal irradiation and examines in mucosa and mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) the
differential involvement of the two Th1 pathways, T-bet/STAT1 and IL-12/STAT4, in
controlling this balance in mice.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Using T-bet-deficient mice (T-bet-/-), we evaluated the
mRNA and protein expression of the Th1 pathways (IFN-<U+03B3>, T-bet/STAT1, and
IL-12/STAT4) and the CD4+ and CD8+ populations in ileal mucosa and MLN during the
first 3 months after 10 Gy abdominal irradiation.
RESULTS: The T-bet-deficient mice showed an increased fibrotic response to
radiation, characterized by higher TGF-ß1, col3a1 expression, and collagen
deposition in mucosa compared with wild-type mice. This response was associated
with drastically lower expression of IFN-<U+03B3>, the hallmark Th1 cytokine. Analysis
of the Th1 expression pathways, T-bet/STAT1 and IL-12/STAT4, showed their equal
involvement in the failure of Th1 polarization. A minimal IFN-<U+03B3> level depended on
the IL-23-p19/STAT4 level. In addition, the radiation-induced deficiency in the
priming of Th1 by IFN-<U+03B3> was related to the defective homing capacity of CD8+
cells in the mucosa.
CONCLUSION: Irradiation induces Th2 polarization, and the Th2 immune response may
play a role in potentiating irradiation-induced intestinal collagen deposition.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22336200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Neural Syst Circuits. 2011 Feb 1;1(1):5. doi: 10.1186/2042-1001-1-5.

Genetic visualization of the secondary olfactory pathway in Tbx21 transgenic
mice.

Mitsui S(1), Igarashi KM, Mori K, Yoshihara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Neurobiology of Synapse, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. yoshihara@brain.riken.jp.

BACKGROUND: Mitral and tufted cells are the projection neurons in the olfactory
bulb, conveying odour information to various regions of the olfactory cortex. In 
spite of their functional importance, there are few molecular and genetic tools
that can be used for selective labelling or manipulation of mitral and tufted
cells. Tbx21 was first identified as a T-box family transcription factor
regulating the differentiation and function of T lymphocytes. In the brain, Tbx21
is specifically expressed in mitral and tufted cells of the olfactory bulb.
RESULTS: In this study, we performed a promoter/enhancer analysis of mouse Tbx21 
gene by comparing nucleotide sequence similarity of Tbx21 genes among several
mammalian species and generating transgenic mouse lines with various lengths of
5' upstream region fused to a fluorescent reporter gapVenus. We identified the
cis-regulatory enhancer element (~300 nucleotides) at ~ 3.0 kb upstream of the
transcription start site of Tbx21 gene, which is both necessary and sufficient
for transgene expression in mitral and tufted cells. In contrast, the 2.6-kb
5'-flanking region of mouse Tbx21 gene induced transgene expression with variable
patterns in restricted populations of neurons predominantly located along the
olfactory pathway. Furthermore, we generated transgenic mice expressing the
genetically-encoded fluorescent exocytosis indicator, synaptopHluorin, in mitral 
and tufted cells for visualization of presynaptic neural activities in the
piriform cortex.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptional enhancer of Tbx21 gene provides a powerful tool 
for genetic manipulations of mitral and tufted cells in studying the development 
and function of the secondary olfactory pathways from the bulb to the cortex.

PMCID: PMC3257540
PMID: 22330144  [PubMed]


428. Mol Immunol. 2012 Mar;50(3):142-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.01.005. Epub 2012
Feb 8.

Expression of NLRP3 inflammasome and T cell population markers in adipose tissue 
are associated with insulin resistance and impaired glucose metabolism in humans.

Goossens GH(1), Blaak EE, Theunissen R, Duijvestijn AM, Clément K, Tervaert JW,
Thewissen MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, NUTRIM School for Nutrition, Toxicology &
Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
G.Goossens@maastrichtuniversity.nl

Recent studies in rodents indicate that the nucleotide-binding domain,
leucine-rich-containing family, pyrin domain-containing-3 (NLRP3) inflammasome
and a proinflammatory shift in the T cell population in adipose tissue (AT)
contribute to AT inflammation and insulin resistance. We investigated: (1) the
interplay between the NLRP3 inflammasome and T cell populations in abdominal
subcutaneous AT in obese and lean humans in relation to AT inflammatory
processes, and (2) involvement of the NLRP3 inflammasome and T cell populations
in insulin resistance. Abdominal subcutaneous AT biopsies were collected in 10
obese men with impaired glucose tolerance and 9 lean normal glucose tolerant
age-matched controls. AT gene expression of NLRP3 inflammasome-related genes and 
markers of T cell populations, chemoattraction, macrophage infiltration and other
aspects of inflammation were examined. Furthermore, we examined systemic adaptive
immune activation and insulin sensitivity (hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp).
CASPASE-1 mRNA and the proportion of T(h)1 transcripts (TBX21/CD3<U+025B>) were
significantly higher in AT from obese compared with lean subjects. CASPASE-1
expression and a relative increase in T(h)1 transcripts in AT were strongly
associated with insulin resistance and impairments in glucose homeostasis. Gene
expression of NLRP3, CASPASE-1, CD3<U+025B> (pan T cells), TBX21 (T(h)1 cells) and RORC 
(T(h)17 cells) was positively, whereas GATA3 (T(h)2 cells) was inversely
correlated with AT inflammation. Our data suggest that NLRP3 inflammasome
activation and a T(h)1 shift in the T cell population in AT of obese subjects is 
related to insulin resistance and impaired glucose metabolism, which may be
explained by AT inflammatory processes.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22325453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Virol. 2012 Apr;86(8):4566-77. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05545-11. Epub 2012 Feb 8.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor valproic acid lessens NK cell action against
oncolytic virus-infected glioblastoma cells by inhibition of STAT5/T-BET
signaling and generation of gamma interferon.

Alvarez-Breckenridge CA(1), Yu J, Price R, Wei M, Wang Y, Nowicki MO, Ha YP,
Bergin S, Hwang C, Fernandez SA, Kaur B, Caligiuri MA, Chiocca EA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Scientist Training Program, The Ohio State University Medical Center
and The James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Tumor virotherapy has been and continues to be used in clinical trials. One
barrier to effective viral oncolysis, consisting of the interferon (IFN) response
induced by viral infection, is inhibited by valproic acid (VPA) and other histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi). Innate immune cell recruitment and activation
have been shown to be deleterious to the efficacy of oncolytic herpes simplex
virus (oHSV) infection, and in this report we demonstrate that VPA limits this
deleterious response. VPA, administered prior to oHSV inoculation in an
orthotopic glioblastoma mouse model, resulted in a decline in NK and macrophage
recruitment into tumor-bearing brains at 6 and 24 h post-oHSV infection.
Interestingly, there was a robust rebound of recruitment of these cells at 72 h
post-oHSV infection. The observed initial decline in immune cell recruitment was 
accompanied by a reduction in their activation status. VPA was also found to have
a profound immunosuppressive effect on human NK cells in vitro. NK cytotoxicity
was abrogated following exposure to VPA, consistent with downmodulation of
cytotoxic gene expression of granzyme B and perforin at the mRNA and protein
levels. In addition, suppression of gamma IFN (IFN-<U+03B3>) production by VPA was
associated with decreased STAT5 phosphorylation and dampened T-BET expression.
Despite VPA-mediated immune suppression, mice were not at significantly increased
risk for HSV encephalitis. These findings indicate that one of the avenues by
which VPA enhances oHSV efficacy is through initial suppression of immune cell
recruitment and inhibition of inflammatory cell pathways within NK cells.

PMCID: PMC3318659
PMID: 22318143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e31069. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031069. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

TBX21 and HLX1 polymorphisms influence cytokine secretion at birth.

Casaca VI(1), Illi S, Suttner K, Schleich I, Ballenberger N, Klucker E, Turan E, 
von Mutius E, Kabesch M, Schaub B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Allergy, University Childrens Hospital Munich,
Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: TBX21 (T cell specific T-box transcription factor) and HLX1
(H.20-like homeobox 1) are crucial transcription factors of T(H)1-cells, inducing
their differentiation and suppressing T(H)2 commitment, particularly important
for early life immune development. This study investigated the influence of TBX21
and HLX1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which have previously been shown
to be associated with asthma, on T(H)1/T(H)2 lineage cytokines at birth.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Cord blood mononuclear cells (CBMCs) of 200 neonates were
genotyped for two TBX21 and three HLX1 SNPs. CBMCs were stimulated with innate
(Lipid A, LpA; Peptidoglycan, Ppg), adaptive stimuli (house dust mite
Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus 1, Derp1) or mitogen (phytohemagglutinin, PHA).
Cytokines, T-cells and mRNA expression of T(H)1/T(H)2-related genes were
assessed. Atopic diseases during the first 3 years of life were assessed by
questionnaire answered by the parents. Carriers of TBX21 promoter SNP rs17250932 
and HLX1 promoter SNP rs2738751 showed reduced or trendwise reduced (p=0.07)
IL-5, IL-13 and TNF-a secretion after LpA-stimulation. Carriers of HLX1 SNP
rs2738751 had lower IL-13 levels following Ppg-stimulation (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.08). Carriers
of HLX1 exon 1 SNP rs12141189 showed increased IL-5 (LpA, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.007; Ppg,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.10), trendwise increased IL-13 (LpA), higher GM-CSF (LpA/Ppg, p=0.05) and
trendwise decreased IFN-<U+03B3> secretion (Derp1+LpA-stimulation, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.1). Homozygous 
carriers of HLX1 promoter SNP rs3806325 showed increased IL-13 and IL-6
(unstimulated, p=0.03). In carriers of TBX21 intron 3 SNP rs11079788 no
differences in cytokine secretion were observed. mRNA expression of
T(H)1/T(H)2-related genes partly correlated with cytokines at protein level.
TBX21 SNP rs11079788 carriers developed less symptoms of atopic dermatitis at 3
years of age (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms in TBX21 and HLX1 influenced primarily IL-5 and IL-13 
secretion after LpA-stimulation in cord blood suggesting that genetic variations 
in the transcription factors essential for the T(H)1-pathway may contribute to
modified T(H)2-immune responses already early in life. Further follow-up of the
cohort is required to study the polymorphisms' relevance for immune-mediated
diseases such as childhood asthma.

PMCID: PMC3268767
PMID: 22303482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Turk J Gastroenterol. 2011 Dec;22(6):587-93.

siRNA-mediated knockdown of FoxP3 promotes the ratio of T-helper 1 (Th1) to Th2
in chronic hepatitis B patients.

Yongsheng Y(1), Xiaoliang L, Zhenghao T, Guoqing Z.

Author information: 
(1)Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Department of
Infectious Diseases, Shanghai, China. yuyongsheng@medmail.com.cn

To determine the effect of regulatory T cells on the ratio of Th1/Th2
differentiation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of chronic hepatitis B
patients, FoxP3, the essential transcription factor for Tcells differentiation
and function, was knocked down by FoxP3 siRNA, which was affirmed by real-time
polymerase chain reaction for decreased expression of FoxP3. Then, at different
time points, comparing with control groups, we detected enhanced lymphocyte
proliferation and up-regulated Th1-type cytokines, but down-regulated Th2-type
cytokines by ELISA. Finally, to research the involved mechanisms, an increased
ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA expression was found by real-time polymerase chain
reaction. Our results suggest that siRNA-mediated knockdown of FoxP3 could
regulate the immune balance of Th1/Th2 in chronic hepatitis B patients, which may
be mediated partly by regulating transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3.

PMID: 22287403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Cancer Cell Int. 2012 Jan 23;12(1):2. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-12-2.

Granulocyte-macrophage stimulating factor (GM-CSF) increases circulating
dendritic cells but does not abrogate suppression of adaptive cellular immunity
in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer receiving chemotherapy.

Martinez M(1), Ono N, Planutiene M, Planutis K, Nelson EL, Holcombe RF.

Author information: 
(1)Tisch Cancer Institute of Mt, Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
randall.holcombe@mssm.edu.

BACKGROUND: Advanced cancer and chemotherapy are both associated with immune
system suppression. We initiated a clinical trial in patients receiving
chemotherapy for metastatic colorectal cancer to determine if administration of
GM-CSF in this setting was immunostimulatory.
METHODS: Between June, 2003 and January, 2007, 20 patients were enrolled in a
clinical trial (NCT00257322) in which they received 500 ug GM-CSF daily for 4
days starting 24 hours after each chemotherapy cycle. There were no toxicities or
adverse events reported. Blood was obtained before chemotherapy/GM-CSF
administration and 24 hours following the final dose of GM-CSF and evaluated for 
circulating dendritic cells and adaptive immune cellular subsets by flow
cytometry. Peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) expression of <U+03B3>-interferon
and T-bet transcription factor (Tbx21) by quantitative real-time PCR was
performed as a measure of Th1 adaptive cellular immunity. Pre- and post-treatment
(i.e., chemotherapy and GM-CSF) samples were evaluable for 16 patients, ranging
from 1 to 5 cycles (median 3 cycles, 6 biologic sample time points). Dendritic
cells were defined as lineage (-) and MHC class II high (+).
RESULTS: 73% of patients had significant increases in circulating dendritic cells
of ~3x for the overall group (5.8% to 13.6%, p = 0.02) and ~5x excluding
non-responders (3.2% to 14.5%, p < 0.001). This effect was sustained over
multiple cycles for approximately half of the responders, but tachyphylaxis over 
subsequent chemotherapy cycles was noted for the remainder. Treatment also led to
a significant reduction in the proportion of circulating regulatory T-cells
(Treg; p = 0.0042). PBMC Tbx21 levels declined by 75% following each chemotherapy
cycle despite administration of GM-CSF (p = 0.02). PBMC <U+03B3>-interferon expression, 
however was unchanged.
CONCLUSIONS: This clinical trial confirms the suppressive effects of chemotherapy
on Th1 cellular immunity in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer but
demonstrates that mid-cycle administration of GM-CSF can significantly increase
the proportion of circulating dendritic cells. As the role of dendritic cells in 
anti-tumor immunity becomes better defined, GM-CSF administration may provide a
non-toxic intervention to augment this arm of the immune system for cancer
patients receiving cytotoxic therapy.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT00257322.

PMCID: PMC3283445
PMID: 22270330  [PubMed]


433. Immunity. 2012 Jan 27;36(1):55-67. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.11.016. Epub 2012
Jan 18.

The transcription factors T-bet and Eomes control key checkpoints of natural
killer cell maturation.

Gordon SM(1), Chaix J, Rupp LJ, Wu J, Madera S, Sun JC, Lindsten T, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Mar;12(3):150.
    Immunity. 2012 Jan 27;36(1):1-3.

Natural killer (NK) cells play critical roles defending against tumors and
pathogens. We show that mice lacking both transcription factors Eomesodermin
(Eomes) and T-bet failed to develop NK cells. Developmental stability of immature
NK cells constitutively expressing the death ligand TRAIL depended on T-bet.
Conversely, maturation characterized by loss of constitutive TRAIL expression and
induction of Ly49 receptor diversity and integrin CD49b (DX5(+)) required Eomes. 
Mature NK cells from which Eomes was deleted reverted to phenotypic immaturity if
T-bet was present or downregulated NK lineage antigens if T-bet was absent,
despite retaining expression of Ly49 receptors. Fetal and adult hepatic
hematopoiesis restricted Eomes expression and limited NK development to the
T-bet-dependent, immature stage, whereas medullary hematopoiesis permitted
Eomes-dependent NK maturation in adult mice. These findings reveal two
sequential, genetically separable checkpoints of NK cell maturation, the
progression of which is metered largely by the anatomic localization of
hematopoiesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3381976
PMID: 22261438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Inflamm Res. 2011;4:139-46. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S25314. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

Transcriptional characteristics of CD4 T cells in young asthmatic children: RORC 
and FOXP3 axis.

Hamzaoui A(1), Maalmi H, Berraïes A, Abid H, Ammar J, Hamzaoui K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Respiratory Disease, Homeostasis and Cell
Dysfunction Unit Research, Abderrahman Mami Hospital, Ariana, Tunisia.

BACKGROUND: Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder, hypothetically caused by
autoreactive Th2 cells, whereas Th1 and regulatory T cells may confer protection.
The development of Th subpopulations is dependent on the expression of
lineage-specific transcription factors.
PURPOSE: This study aimed to assess the balance of CD4(+) T cell populations in
asthmatic children.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) mRNA expression was assessed
in 30 asthmatic children (18 patients with mild asthma and 12 with moderate
asthma). Real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) quantified TBX21, GATA-3,
RORC, FOXP3, and EBI3 mRNA expression. Intracellular cytokine expression of IL-2,
IL-4, IL-10, and IFN-<U+03B3> in CD4(+) T cells in asthmatic children was measured by
flow cytometry. IL-6 and IL-17 cytokines were assessed in serum by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: A significant increase was found in the percentage of CD4(+) and CD8(+) 
T cell-producing IL-4, IL-6, and IL-17. A decreased percentage of CD4(+)
producing IFN-<U+03B3> in asthmatic children was found. Expression of GATA-3 (Th2),
retinoid-related orphan receptor C (RORC) (Th17), and EBI3 were increased in
asthmatic patients compared to healthy controls. Expression of FOXP3 (Treg) and
TBX21 (Th1) were decreased (P < 0.0001 and P < 0.0001) in asthmatic children.
Analysis of transcription factor ratios revealed an increase in the RORC/FOXP3 (P
= 0.0001), and a significant decrease of TBX21/GATA-3 (P = 0.0001) ratios in
patients with asthma.
CONCLUSION: Young asthmatics were characterized by increased IL-4 production and 
low IFN-<U+03B3> synthesis. The increased serum IL-17 and IL-6 levels sustained an
inflammatory environment in young asthmatics. The results indicate that FOXP3 and
RORC mRNA expression could be associated with the sustained inflammatory process,
transduced by low immune tolerance by Treg cells. The TBX21/GATA-3 and RORC/FOXP3
ratios dysregulation in asthmatics is consistent with the plasticity existing
between Th1, Th17, and Treg cells during inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3259694
PMID: 22259252  [PubMed]


435. Immunogenetics. 2012 May;64(5):361-70. doi: 10.1007/s00251-011-0597-6. Epub 2012 
Jan 19.

The role of upstream stimulatory factor 1 in the transcriptional regulation of
the human TBX21 promoter mediated by the T-1514C polymorphism associated with
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Li J(1), Li J, You Y, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, 400038, China.

T-bet is a key regulator for the lineage commitment in CD4+ T helper (Th) 1 cells
by activating the hallmark production of interferon-<U+03B3>. Previously, two single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the TBX21 promoter, T-1993C and T-1514C, have 
been shown by statistic studies to associate with systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). The effect of -1993 SNP on the Yin Yang 1 transcription factor-mediated
promoter activity has been already indicated. This study aimed to investigate
roles of the T-1514C SNP on TBX21 transcription and its functional effect by
luciferase reporter, electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, and flow cytometric analysis of intracellular
T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3>, and IL-4 expression in activated CD4+ T cells. The TBX21 promoter
carrying -1514C possessed significantly lower transcriptional activity than that 
of -1514T and was markedly downregulated by the overexpression of upstream
stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1) when compared with the promoter carrying -1514T.
EMSA indicated that the transcription factor USF-1 was bound to the -1514C allele
probe with the affinity higher than that to the -1514T allele probe. ChIP assay
suggested that USF-1 bound around -1514 of TBX21 genomic DNA in vivo in the human
T cell line Jurkat with -1514C/T. The individuals carrying -1514C allele were
determined to have significantly diminished expression of T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> and
increased IL-4 production in CD4+ T cells compared with those of -1514T allele.
The findings demonstrate that the T-1514C polymorphism affects TBX21 gene
expression and Th1 cytokine production by binding USF-1 to the SNP site.

PMID: 22258560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Immunol. 2012 Feb 15;188(4):1630-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101712. Epub 2012
Jan 16.

Th2 skewing by activation of Nrf2 in CD4(+) T cells.

Rockwell CE(1), Zhang M, Fields PE, Klaassen CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

NF erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a transcription factor that mediates
the upregulation of a battery of cytoprotective genes in response to cell stress.
Recent studies showed that Nrf2 also modulates immune responses and exhibits
anti-inflammatory activity. In this article, we demonstrate that a common food
preservative, tert-butylhydroquinone, can activate Nrf2 in T cells, as evidenced 
by Nrf2 binding to the antioxidant response element and the subsequent
upregulation of Nrf2 target genes. The activation of Nrf2 suppresses IFN-<U+03B3>
production, while inducing the production of the Th2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and
IL-13. Nrf2 activation also suppresses T-bet DNA binding and promotes
GATA-binding protein 3 DNA binding. Collectively, the present studies suggested
that Nrf2 activation skews CD4(+) T cells toward Th2 differentiation and, thus,
represents a novel regulatory mechanism in CD4(+) T cells. Further studies are
needed to determine whether the commercial use of Nrf2 activators as food
preservatives promotes food allergies in humans.

PMCID: PMC3273574
PMID: 22250088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Hum Immunol. 2012 Mar;73(3):223-31. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2011.12.017. Epub 2012 
Jan 3.

T-cell proliferation and forkhead box P3 expression in human T cells are
dependent on T-cell density: physics of a confined space?

Bernardo D(1), Al-Hassi HO, Mann ER, Tee CT, Murugananthan AU, Peake ST, Hart AL,
Knight SC.

Author information: 
(1)Antigen, Presentation Research Group, Imperial College London, Northwick Park 
and St. Mark's Campus, Harrow, HA1 3UJ, UK.

T-cell proliferation rates in vitro depend on factors including initial T-cell
number, dose of stimulus, culture time, and available physical space. The role of
forkhead box P3 (FoxP3) in the identification of T cells with a regulatory
phenotype remains controversial in humans. Through 5-carboxyfluorescein diacetate
succinimidyl ester labeling of human T cells and subsequent culture of different 
numbers of T cells and antigen-presenting cells (APC), we studied proliferative
T-cell responses and FoxP3 expression in divided T cells. T-cell proliferation
rates depended on initial T-cell/APC numbers. Proliferation rates decreased when 
high initial T-cell numbers were increased. FoxP3 expression was expressed
exclusively in virtually all divided T cells cultured at high T-cell densities,
irrespective of their CD4 nature or cytokine content, and was coexpressed with
T-bet. However, when T cells were cultured on larger surfaces or at lower initial
numbers, FoxP3 expression was not induced in divided T cells, even when most of
the cells had undergone cell division. FoxP3(+) T cells generated at high cell
densities did not elicit a suppressive phenotype and FoxP3 expression was
subsequently lost in time when the stimulus was removed. Therefore, caution
should be observed in the use of FoxP3 expression to identify regulatory T cells 
in humans because its expression may be only a consequence of activation status
in a restricted environment.

Crown Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22248741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Eur J Pharmacol. 2012 Mar 5;678(1-3):71-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.12.025.
Epub 2011 Dec 27.

Pirfenidone restricts Th2 differentiation in vitro and limits Th2 response in
experimental liver fibrosis.

Navarro-Partida J(1), Martinez-Rizo AB, Gonzalez-Cuevas J, Arrevillaga-Boni G,
Ortiz-Navarrete V, Armendariz-Borunda J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology in Medicine and Gene Therapy, Department of
Molecular Biology and Genomics, CUCS, University of Guadalajara, Mexico.
josenavapa@hotmail.com

Polarized T helper type 2 (Th2) response is linked with fibrosis. Here, we
evaluated the effect of the anti-fibrotic agent pirfenidone on Th type 1 (Th1)
and Th2 responses. For in vivo testing; Wistar rats were made cirrhotic by
intraperitoneal administration of thioacetamide. Once hepatic damage was
established, pirfenidone was administered intragastrically on a daily basis
during three weeks. Gene expression of Th marks was evaluated by RT-PCR and
Western blot assays from liver homogenates. Pirfenidone therapy induced
down-regulation of Th2 transcripts and proteins (GATA3 and IL-4), without
affecting significantly Th1 genes expression (T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3>). We found that the
activated form of p38 MAPK (identified by Western blot) was reduced by
pirfenidone treatment, which is consistent with the anti-Th2 activity observed.
Pirfenidone reduced GATA3 nuclear localization without modifying its DNA binding 
activity (evaluated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay). For in vitro
testing; human naive CD4+ T cells were cultured in either Th1 or Th2 polarizing
conditions in the presence of pirfenidone and flow cytometric analysis of
intracellular synthesis of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-4 was conducted. Pirfenidone impaired
development of Th2 subpopulation. In conclusion, pirfenidone is capable of
impairing Th2 differentiation and limits Th2 profibrogenic response. The
mechanism involves p38 inhibition and regulation of GATA3 expression and
translocation.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22222821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Mol Ther. 2012 Mar;20(3):644-51. doi: 10.1038/mt.2011.283. Epub 2012 Jan 3.

Combined Tbet and IL12 gene therapy elicits and recruits superior antitumor
immunity in vivo.

Qu Y(1), Chen L, Lowe DB, Storkus WJ, Taylor JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

We have recently shown that intratumor (i.t.) injection of syngenic dendritic
cells (DC) engineered to express the transcription factor Tbet (TBX21) promotes
protective type-1 T cell-mediated immunity via a mechanism that is largely
interleukin (IL)-12p70-independent. Since IL-12 is a classical promoter of type-1
immunity, the current study was undertaken to determine whether gene therapy
using combined Tbet and IL-12 complementary DNA (cDNA) would yield improved
antitumor efficacy based on the complementary/synergistic action of these
biologic modifiers. Mice bearing established subcutaneous (s.c.) tumors injected 
with DC concomitantly expressing ectopic Tbet and IL12 (i.e., DC.Tbet/IL12)
displayed superior (i) rates of tumor rejection and extended overall survival,
(ii) cross-priming of Tc1 reactive against antigens expressed within the tumor
microenvironment, and (iii) infiltration of CD8(+) T cells into treated tumors in
association with elevated locoregional production of CXCR3 ligand chemokines. In 
established bilateral tumor models, i.t. delivery of DC.Tbet/IL12 into a single
lesion led to slowed growth or regression at both tumor sites. Furthermore,
DC.Tbet/IL12 pulsed with tumor antigen-derived peptides and injected as a therapy
distal to the tumor site prevented tumor growth and activated robust
antigen-specific Tc1 responses. These data support the translation use of
combined Tbet and IL-12p70 gene therapy in the cancer setting.

PMCID: PMC3293621
PMID: 22215017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Histopathology. 2012 Jan;60(2):287-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.04086.x.

Intramucosal variant of nasal natural killer (NK)/T cell lymphoma has a better
survival than does invasive variant: implication on loss of E26
transformation-specific sequence 1 (ETS-1) and T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet)
with invasion.

Lin TC(1), Chen SU, Chen YF, Chang YC, Lin CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

AIMS: Nasal natural killer/T cell lymphoma (NNKTCL) arises from the nasal mucosa,
and spreads to adjacent tissues via local invasion or to regional lymph nodes and
distant sites via metastasis. The aims of this study were to determine the impact
of invasion on the prognosis of NNKTCL, and correlate invasion with the
expression of cytotoxic markers of lymphoma cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Histopathological evaluations of invasion and
immunohistochemistry for cytotoxic markers, including E26 transformation-specific
sequence 1 (ETS-1), T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet), signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT-1), CD56 and granzyme B (GB), were performed in 
64 NNKTCLs. There were 17 stage I cases without invasion (stage Ia or
intramucosal), 21 stage I cases with invasion (stage Ib), 16 stage II cases and
10 stages III/IV cases. Stage Ia NNKTCLs had a better 5-year overall survival
rate than that of stages Ib, II or III/IV NNKTCLs (85%, 38%, 33% and 20%,
respectively, P < 0.001 by log-rank test). Loss of ETS-1 was found in 24% (four
of 17) stage Ia NNKTCLs and in 65% (28 of 43) stages Ib/II/III/IV NNKTCLs (P =
0.04, Fisher's exact test); loss of T-bet was found in 29% (five of 17) stage Ia 
NNKTCLs and in 67% (30 of 45) stages Ib/II/III/IV NNKTCLs (P = 0.02, Fisher's
exact test).
CONCLUSIONS: NNKTCL is classically an aggressive lymphoma, but the intramucosal
variant is less aggressive. Loss of ETS-1 or T-bet correlated weakly with
invasion, a finding that requires further confirmation.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 22211287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Immunity. 2011 Dec 23;35(6):919-31. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.11.012.

Early Th1 cell differentiation is marked by a Tfh cell-like transition.

Nakayamada S(1), Kanno Y, Takahashi H, Jankovic D, Lu KT, Johnson TA, Sun HW,
Vahedi G, Hakim O, Handon R, Schwartzberg PL, Hager GL, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis 
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA. nakayamadas@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Feb;12(2):74.

Follicular helper T (Tfh) cells comprise an important subset of helper T cells;
however, their relationship with other helper lineages is incompletely
understood. Herein, we showed interleukin-12 acting via the transcription factor 
STAT4 induced both Il21 and Bcl6 genes, generating cells with features of both
Tfh and Th1 cells. However, STAT4 also induced the transcription factor T-bet.
With ChIP-seq, we defined the genome-wide targets of T-bet and found that it
repressed Bcl6 and other markers of Tfh cells, thereby attenuating the nascent
Tfh cell-like phenotype in the late phase of Th1 cell specification. Tfh-like
cells were rapidly generated after Toxoplasma gondii infection in mice, but T-bet
constrained Tfh cell expansion and consequent germinal center formation and
antibody production. Our data argue that Tfh and Th1 cells share a transitional
stage through the signal mediated by STAT4, which promotes both phenotypes.
However, T-bet represses Tfh cell functionalities, promoting full Th1 cell
differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3244883
PMID: 22195747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Nat Commun. 2011 Dec 20;2:600. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1609.

A role for T-bet-mediated tumour immune surveillance in anti-IL-17A treatment of 
lung cancer.

Reppert S(1), Boross I, Koslowski M, Türeci Ö, Koch S, Lehr HA, Finotto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Laboratories of Cellular and Molecular Lung
Immunology, Institute of Molecular Pneumology, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Hartmannstraße 14, Erlangen 91052, Germany.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. The cytokine
interleukin-17A supports tumour vascularization and growth, however, its role in 
lung cancer is unknown. Here we show, in the lungs of patients with lung
adenocarcinoma, an increase in interleukin-17A that is inversely correlated with 
the expression of T-bet and correlated with the T regulatory cell transcription
factor Foxp3. Local targeting of interleukin-17A in experimental lung
adenocarcinoma results in a reduction in tumour load, local expansion of
interferon-<U+03B3>-producing CD4(+) T cells and a reduction in lung
CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells. T-bet((-/-)) mice have a significantly 
higher tumour load compared with wild-type mice. This is associated with the
local upregulation of interleukin-23 and induction of
interleukin-17A/interleukin-17R-expressing T cells infiltrating the tumour. Local
anti-interleukin-17A antibody treatment partially improves the survival of
T-bet((-/-)) mice. These results suggest that local anti-interleukin-17A antibody
therapy could be considered for the treatment of lung tumours.

PMID: 22186896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2011 Dec;10(4):243-9. doi: 010.04/ijaai.243249.

Effect of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) on viability, proliferation, activation 
and lineage-specific transcription factors of CD4+ T cells.

Bidad K(1), Salehi E, Oraei M, Saboor-Yaraghi AA, Nicknam MH.

Author information: 
(1)Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), as an active metabolite of vitamin A, has been
shown to affect immune cells. This study was performed to evaluate the effect of 
ATRA on viability, proliferation, activation and lineage-specific transcription
factors of CD4+ T cells. CD4+ T cells were separated from heparinized blood of
healthy donors and were cultured in conditions, some with, some without ATRA.
Viability was assessed by PI flowcytometry and proliferation was measured by MTT 
assay. CD69 expression was determined by flowcytometry as a measure of cell
activation. Lineage-specific transcription factors (FOXP3, ROR<U+03B3>t and T-bet) were 
examined by intracellular staining and flowcytometry. High doses of ATRA (0.1-1
mM) caused extensive cell death in both PBMCs and CD4+ T cells. Doses of ATRA
equal to or lower than 10 µM did not adversely affect cell viability and
proliferation in comparison to culture medium without ATRA. Doses of ATRA between
10 µM and 1nM significantly increased cell activation when compared to culture
medium without ATRA. ATRA could increase FOXP3+ and also FOXP3+ROR<U+03B3>t+ T cells
while it decreased ROR<U+03B3>t+ and T-bet+ T cells. This study showed that doses of
ATRA up to 10 µM are safe when using with CD4+ T cells in terms of cell
viability, proliferation and activation. We could also show that ATRA diverts the
human immune response in neutral conditions (without adding polarizing cytokines)
by increasing FOXP3+ cells and decreasing ROR<U+03B3>t+ cells. ATRA could be regarded as
a potential therapy in inflammatory conditions and autoimmunities.

PMID: 22184266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Inflammation. 2012 Jun;35(3):1069-77. doi: 10.1007/s10753-011-9413-6.

Morphine, but not ketamine, decreases the ratio of Th1/Th2 in CD4-positive cells 
through T-bet and GATA3.

Gao M(1), Sun J, Jin W, Qian Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical
University, No. 300, Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, China.

This study was conducted to investigate the effect of morphine on CD4-positive T 
cells differentiation and the transcriptional factors induced by phorbol
myristate acetate (PMA) and ionomycin. CD4-positive lymphocytes separated from
healthy volunteers were incubated by PMA (25 ng/ml)<U+2009>+<U+2009>ionomycin (1 µg/ml) with or
without the presence of morphine, ketamine, or naloxone. Th subsets, supernatant 
cytokines, and transcriptional factors were detected 4 h later. Th1 and Th2
cells, levels of INF-<U+03B3>, IL-2, IL-4 and the activities of T-bet and GATA3 were
significantly increased after incubation with PMA and ionomycin. However, the
number of Th1 cells, Th1/ Th2, the levels of INF-<U+03B3> and INF-<U+03B3>/IL-4, and the
activities and protein levels of T-bet and GATA3 were decreased after incubation 
with PMA and ionomycin in the presence of morphine. Naloxone can abolish
morphine's suppressive effect on Th cell differentiation. Morphine has a negative
effect on Th cell balance induced by PMA and ionomycin, the mechanism is related 
to T-bet and GATA3.

PMID: 22160839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2011 Dec;91 Suppl 1:S82-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2011.10.016.
Epub 2011 Dec 5.

A defect in the synthesis of Interferon-<U+03B3> by the T cells of Complement-C5
deficient mice leads to enhanced susceptibility for tuberculosis.

Mashruwala MA(1), Smith AK, Lindsey DR, Moczygemba M, Wetsel RA, Klein JR, Actor 
JK, Jagannath C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas Health
Sciences Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN<U+03B3>) plays a major role during host defense against Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (Mtb). T cells produce IFN<U+03B3> in response to IL-12 and IL-18 secreted 
from Mtb infected macrophages. IFN<U+03B3> in turn, induces nitric oxide secretion in
macrophages that kills Mtb. IFN<U+03B3> knockout mice are thus hyper-susceptible to
tuberculosis. We reported earlier that Complement-C5 deficient (C5(-/-)) congenic
mice are more susceptible to tuberculosis and showed reduced IL-12 synthesis in
their macrophages. Using C5(-/-) congenic mice that carry a deletion in the C5
gene and the wild type C5(+/+) mice, we demonstrate here that, the C5(-/-)
derived CD3(+) T cells, have an additional defect in the synthesis of IFN<U+03B3>.
C5(-/-) T cells produced lower levels of IFN<U+03B3> upon stimulation by antigen
presenting cells (APCs) infected with Mtb or when stimulated directly with a
combination of IL-12 and IL-18. The latter was in part due to a reduced
phosphorylation of STAT4 following IL-12/IL-18 stimulation. Addition of C5a
peptide to IL-12/IL-18 partially restored STAT4 phosphorylation and IFN<U+03B3>
synthesis in C5(-/-) T cells indicating that IL-12/IL-18 mediated signaling
within CD3(+) T cells involves C5a peptide. Finally, C5(-/-) T cells derived from
M. bovis BCG or Mtb infected mice showed a reduced expression of T-bet (T-box
expressed in T cells) transcription factor, which correlated well with a reduced 
T cell secretion of IFN<U+03B3>. Since T-bet mediated IFN<U+03B3> synthesis facilitates Th1
expansion, C5(-/-) mouse derived T cells appear to have an intrinsic defect in
the production of IFN<U+03B3>, which is related to C5 deficiency and this may explain
their increased susceptibility to infection with Mtb and BCG.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3263371
PMID: 22154007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Circulation. 2011 Dec 20;124(25):2920-32. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.009910.
Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Loss of myeloid related protein-8/14 exacerbates cardiac allograft rejection.

Shimizu K(1), Libby P, Rocha VZ, Folco EJ, Shubiki R, Grabie N, Jang S, Lichtman 
AH, Shimizu A, Hogg N, Simon DI, Mitchell RN, Croce K.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, NRB7, Boston, MA 02115, USA. ksmz@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: The calcium-binding proteins myeloid-related protein (MRP)-8 (S100A8)
and MRP-14 (S100A9) form MRP-8/14 heterodimers (S100A8/A9, calprotectin) that
regulate myeloid cell function and inflammatory responses and serve as early
serum markers for monitoring acute allograft rejection. Despite functioning as a 
proinflammatory mediator, the pathophysiological role of MRP-8/14 complexes in
cardiovascular disease is incompletely defined. This study investigated the role 
of MRP-8/14 in cardiac allograft rejection using MRP-14(-/-) mice that lack
MRP-8/14 complexes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We examined parenchymal rejection after major
histocompatibility complex class II allomismatched cardiac transplantation (bm12 
donor heart and B6 recipients) in wild-type (WT) and MRP-14(-/-) recipients.
Allograft survival averaged 5.9±2.9 weeks (n=10) in MRP-14(-/-) recipients
compared with >12 weeks (n=15; P<0.0001) in WT recipients. Two weeks after
transplantation, allografts in MRP-14(-/-) recipients had significantly higher
parenchymal rejection scores (2.8±0.8; n=8) than did WT recipients (0.8±0.8;
n=12; P<0.0001). Compared with WT recipients, allografts in MRP-14(-/-)
recipients had significantly increased T-cell and macrophage infiltration and
increased mRNA levels of interferon-<U+03B3> and interferon-<U+03B3>-associated chemokines
(CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11), interleukin-6, and interleukin-17 with significantly
higher levels of Th17 cells. MRP-14(-/-) recipients also had significantly more
lymphocytes in the adjacent para-aortic lymph nodes than did WT recipients (cells
per lymph node: 23.7±0.7×10(5) for MRP-14(-/-) versus 6.0±0.2×10(5) for WT;
P<0.0001). The dendritic cells (DCs) of the MRP-14(-/-) recipients of bm12 hearts
expressed significantly higher levels of the costimulatory molecules CD80 and
CD86 than did those of WT recipients 2 weeks after transplantation. Mixed
leukocyte reactions with allo-endothelial cell-primed MRP-14(-/-) DCs resulted in
significantly higher antigen-presenting function than reactions using WT DCs.
Ovalbumin-primed MRP-14(-/-) DCs augmented proliferation of OT-II
(ovalbumin-specific T cell receptor transgenic) CD4(+) T cells with increased
interleukin-2 and interferon-<U+03B3> production. Cardiac allografts of B6 major
histocompatibility complex class II(-/-) hosts and of B6 WT hosts receiving
MRP-14(-/-) DCs had significantly augmented inflammatory cell infiltration and
accelerated allograft rejection compared with WT DCs from transferred recipient
allografts. Bone marrow-derived MRP-14(-/-) DCs infected with MRP-8 and MRP-14
retroviral vectors showed significantly decreased CD80 and CD86 expression
compared with controls, indicating that MRP-8/14 regulates B7-costimulatory
molecule expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that MRP-14 regulates B7 molecule expression
and reduces antigen presentation by DCs and subsequent T-cell priming. The
absence of MRP-14 markedly increased T-cell activation and exacerbated allograft 
rejection, indicating a previously unrecognized role for MRP-14 in immune cell
biology.

PMCID: PMC3277828
PMID: 22144572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Toxicol Lett. 2012 Feb 5;208(3):225-31. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.11.012. Epub
2011 Nov 23.

Imbalance of Th1 and Th2 cells in cardiac injury induced by ambient fine
particles.

Zhao J(1), Xie Y, Qian C, Li L, Jiang R, Kan H, Chen R, Song W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environment Health, School of Public Health, Fudan University,
the Key Laboratory of Public Health Safety, Ministry of Education, Shanghai
200032, China.

The study was to explore the potential immunoregulatory mechanisms linking fine
particles and cardiac injury. Wistar kyoto (WKY) rats were exposed by
intratracheal instillation to fine particles with the doses of 0.0, 1.6, 8.0 and 
40.0mg/kg b.w., respectively. The exposure was conducted once a day, for three
consecutive days. Twenty-four hours after the last exposure, the rats were
sacrificed. Th1- and Th2-related transcription factors and cytokines were
assessed in left ventricle of rats. The mRNA expressions of Th1- and Th2-related 
transcription factors signal transducer and activator of transcriptionl 1
(STAT1), signal transducer and activator of transcriptional 6 (STAT6), GATA-3 and
T-bet were assessed in left ventricle of rats using real-time PCR. Meanwhile, the
levels of Th1- and Th2-related cytokines IL-4, IL-13 and interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>)
were determined by ELISA kits in cardiac homogenate supernatant of rats.
Furthermore, the protein expression of IL-4 and IFN-<U+03B3> were detected in myocardium
by Western blot. The results of cardiac histology demonstrated exacerbated
cardiac lesions and histological characterization of inflammation and
degeneration in rats after exposure to fine particles. Moreover, fine particles
induced significant increase of IL-4 and IL-13 and decrease of IFN-<U+03B3> in
myocardium of rats. The mRNA expression of STAT1, STAT6 and GATA-3 were
up-regulated in left ventricle of rats in a dose-dependent manner, whereas T-bet 
was significantly down-regulated. The variations of these cytokines demonstrated 
the imbalance of Th1 and Th2 cytokines existed in cardiac injuries induced by
fine particle. The imbalance of Th1/Th2 cytokines might be one of the mechanisms 
of immunotoxicity of cardiovascular system induced by ambient fine particles.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22134058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Hum Immunol. 2012 Jan;73(1):118-21. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2011.11.007. Epub 2011 
Nov 20.

The polymorphisms of T cell-specific TBX21 and STAT4 genes may contribute to the 
susceptibility of Chinese individuals to aplastic anemia.

Ge M(1), Zheng Y, Li X, Shi J, Ge J, Li H, Feng S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology &
Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science & Peking Union
Medical College, Tianjin 300020, People's Republic of China.

T cell-specific T-box transcription factor gene (TBX21) and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) have been suggested as 2 candidate genes for
conferring susceptibility to autoimmunity. We herein hypothesized that the
polymorphisms of TBX21 and STAT4 genes might contribute to the susceptibility of 
Chinese individuals to aplastic anemia (AA) as T cell-mediated immune disease
characterized by hypoplasia and pancytopenia. We investigated the distributions
of TBX21 (T-1993C and T-1514C) and STAT4 (rs7574862) polymorphisms in 202 adult
patients with AA and 195 healthy controls by polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism. The frequencies of T-1993C
(but not T-1514C) genotype and allele distribution were significantly higher in
AA patients than in controls. The T allele (TT + TG genotypes) of STAT4 variant
rs7574865 was associated with increased susceptibility of Chinese people to AA.
Our results indicated that single nucleotide polymorphisms in TBX21 and STAT4
might contribute to susceptibility to AA in the Chinese population.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22133489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2012;157(4):349-53. doi: 10.1159/000329159. Epub 2011
Nov 24.

Regulatory-T, T-helper 1, and T-helper 2 cell differentiation in nasal mucosa of 
allergic rhinitis with olive pollen sensitivity.

Sogut A(1), Yilmaz O, Kirmaz C, Ozbilgin K, Onur E, Celik O, Pinar E, Vatansever 
S, Dinc G, Yuksel H.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Allergy and Pulmonology Unit, Celal Bayar University School of
Medicine, Manisa, Turkey. ayhansogut29@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Allergic rhinitis (AR) is a disease in which T-helper (Th)2 response 
is predominant and its pathogenic mechanism is still poorly understood.
AIM: To evaluate the possible role of Th1, Th2 and regulatory-T (Treg) cells in
the pathogenesis of AR.
METHODS: This case-control study enrolled 41 patients with seasonal AR (10-62
years old), sensitive to olive pollens, and 15 healthy controls (18-60 years
old). Nasal biopsy was performed and specimens of nasal lavage fluid were
obtained from all participants. The levels of interleukin (IL)-4, IL-10,
interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) were measured in
nasal lavage fluid specimens. The expression of FOXP3, GATA-3 and T-bet was
measured by immunohistochemical methods in the nasal biopsy specimens.
RESULTS: The levels of IFN-<U+03B3> in the group with AR were significantly lower than
those in the control group (p = 0.008). The levels of IL-4, IL-10 and TGF-ß did
not differ between the two groups. The expression of FOXP3 and T-bet in patients 
with AR was significantly lower than that in the control group (both p = 0.001). 
Expression of GATA-3 in the nasal mucosa was similar between the groups (p =
0.2). The ratios of T-bet/GATA-3 and FOXP3/GATA-3 in the AR group were
significantly lower than those in the control group (p = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Insufficient Treg and Th1 cells may be associated with the allergic
inflammation that may be attributed to the Th2 immune response in patients
suffering from AR who are sensitive to olive pollen.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22123238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Immunity. 2011 Nov 23;35(5):733-45. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.08.017.

Eomesodermin controls interleukin-5 production in memory T helper 2 cells through
inhibition of activity of the transcription factor GATA3.

Endo Y(1), Iwamura C, Kuwahara M, Suzuki A, Sugaya K, Tumes DJ, Tokoyoda K,
Hosokawa H, Yamashita M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The regulation of memory CD4(+) helper T (Th) cell function, such as polarized
cytokine production, remains unclear. Here we show that memory T helper 2 (Th2)
cells are divided into four subpopulations by CD62L and CXCR3 expression. All
four subpopulations produced interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-13, whereas only the
CD62L(lo)CXCR3(lo) population produced IL-5 accompanied by increased H3-K4
methylation at the Il5 gene locus. The transcription factor Eomesodermin (encoded
by Eomes) was highly expressed in memory Th2 cells, whereas its expression was
selectively downregulated in the IL-5-producing cells. Il5 expression was
enhanced in Eomes-deficient cells, and Eomesodermin was shown to interact with
the transcription factor GATA3, preventing GATA3 binding to the Il5 promoter.
Memory Th2 cell-dependent airway inflammation was attenuated in the absence of
the CD62L(lo)CXCR3(lo) population but was enhanced by Eomes-deficient memory Th2 
cells. Thus, IL-5 production in memory Th2 cells is regulated by Eomesodermin via
the inhibition of GATA3 activity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22118525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Immunobiology. 2012 Jun;217(6):601-9. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2011.10.021. Epub 2011
Nov 3.

C6-ceramide enhances Interleukin-12-mediated T helper type 1 cell responses
through a cyclooxygenase-2-dependent pathway.

Kue CS(1), Jung MY, Cho D, Kim TS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul 136-701, Republic of Korea.

Ceramides, lipid molecules located predominantly within the plasma membrane of a 
cell, can function as second messengers, and have been known to carry out a
number of cellular functions. T helper type 1 (Th1) immune responses are known to
be involved in the cellular immunity, which is crucial in the cancer and allergy 
immunotherapy. This study was designed to evaluate the effects of ceramides on T 
helper cell responses and their underlying mechanisms. We demonstrated that a
cell-permeable C6-ceramide (C6) together with IL-12 enhanced Th1 cell
differentiation, whereas C6 alone had no effects, as demonstrated by the
increased populations of IFN-<U+03B3> expressing CD4(+) T cells and the up-regulation of
IFN-<U+03B3> production from CD4(+) T cells. In contrast, C2-ceramide and long chain
ceramides (C16 and C24) did not affect the Th1 responses. C6 treatment was shown 
to increase the expression of T-bet, a master transcription factor of Th1
responses, in a dose-dependent fashion. Furthermore, C6 increased the expression 
of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in CD4(+) T cells. The C6-mediated increase of IFN-<U+03B3> 
production and IFN-<U+03B3> expressing CD4(+) T cell populations were significantly
suppressed by a COX-2 specific inhibitor (NS-398) in a dose-dependent manner.
T-bet expression was also decreased by NS-398 treatment, thereby indicating that 
C6 ceramide enhances Th1 responses via a COX-2 dependent pathway. This result
demonstrates that C6 may be utilized in therapies for the treatment of immune
diseases such cancer and allergy by enhancing the Th1 activity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22112438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Feb;42(2):320-9. doi: 10.1002/eji.201142091. Epub 2011 Dec
20.

Type-I IFN drives the differentiation of short-lived effector CD8+ T cells in
vivo.

Wiesel M(1), Crouse J, Bedenikovic G, Sutherland A, Joller N, Oxenius A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Microbiology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.

Two subsets of CD8(+) T cells are generated early during an immune response; one 
of these subsets forms the memory pool, known as memory precursor effector cells 
(MPECs), identified by high expression of CD127 and low expression of KLRG1,
whereas the other subset forms short-lived effector cells (SLECs) identified by
low expression of CD127 and high expression of KLRG1. Here, we studied in vivo
the role of type-I IFN in this fate decision. We found that under priming
conditions dominated by type-I IFN, as observed in lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus (LCMV) infection, type-I IFN signaling directly impacted the regulation of 
T-bet and thus the early fate decision of CD8(+) T cells. In the absence of
type-I IFN signaling, CD8(+) T cells failed to form SLECs but could form MPECs
that give rise to functional memory CD8(+) T cells. Together, these findings
identify type-I IFN as an important factor driving SLEC differentiation and thus 
instructing the early division between the effector and memory precursor CD8(+)
T-cell pool.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22102057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Feb;42(2):311-9. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141847. Epub 2011 Dec
19.

Developmental regulation of Th17-cell capacity in human neonates.

Black A(1), Bhaumik S, Kirkman RL, Weaver CT, Randolph DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Alabama
School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL 35249, USA.

Human neonates are at significantly greater risk of serious infection than
immunocompetent adults. In particular, very low birth weight infants in the
neonatal intensive care nursery are at high risk of developing life-threatening
bacterial and fungal infections. Recent studies have identified Th17 cells as
critical mediators of immunity to bacterial and fungal infections at epithelial
barriers. Little is known, however, about the ontogeny of Th17-cell responses in 
humans. The frequency of serious bacterial infections in preterm infants and the 
importance of Th17 cells in providing protection against such infections in
animal studies prompted us to study Th17-cell development in human neonates.
Naïve CD4(+) T cells from extremely preterm infants, term infants, and adults
were assayed for their capacity to develop into Th17 effector cells.
Surprisingly, Th17-cell capacity was inversely related to developmental age.
Neonates expressed higher levels of IL-23R, ROR<U+03B3>t, and STAT3 prior to activation 
and showed a significant Th17-cell bias after activation. In contrast, adult
cells expressed more TBX21 with a corresponding Th1-cell bias. CD161 expression
on Th17-cell precursors was also developmentally regulated. Our results suggest
there is significant developmental regulation of CD4(+) effector lineages with a 
strong bias toward Th17-cell development early in life.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3414367
PMID: 22101893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Immunol. 2011 Dec 15;187(12):6335-45. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003965. Epub 2011 
Nov 14.

IL-15 regulates homeostasis and terminal maturation of NKT cells.

Gordy LE(1), Bezbradica JS, Flyak AI, Spencer CT, Dunkle A, Sun J, Stanic AK,
Boothby MR, He YW, Zhao Z, Van Kaer L, Joyce S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Semi-invariant NKT cells are thymus-derived innate-like lymphocytes that modulate
microbial and tumor immunity as well as autoimmune diseases. These
immunoregulatory properties of NKT cells are acquired during their development.
Much has been learned regarding the molecular and cellular cues that promote NKT 
cell development, yet how these cells are maintained in the thymus and the
periphery and how they acquire functional competence are incompletely understood.
We found that IL-15 induced several Bcl-2 family survival factors in thymic and
splenic NKT cells in vitro. Yet, IL-15-mediated thymic and peripheral NKT cell
survival critically depended on Bcl-x(L) expression. Additionally, IL-15
regulated thymic developmental stage 2 to stage 3 lineage progression and
terminal NKT cell differentiation. Global gene expression analyses and validation
revealed that IL-15 regulated Tbx21 (T-bet) expression in thymic NKT cells. The
loss of IL-15 also resulted in poor expression of key effector molecules such as 
IFN-<U+03B3>, granzyme A and C, as well as several NK cell receptors, which are also
regulated by T-bet in NKT cells. Taken together, our findings reveal a critical
role for IL-15 in NKT cell survival, which is mediated by Bcl-x(L), and effector 
differentiation, which is consistent with a role of T-bet in regulating terminal 
maturation.

PMCID: PMC3237743
PMID: 22084435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2011 Dec;91 Suppl 1:S96-104. doi:
10.1016/j.tube.2011.10.018. Epub 2011 Nov 13.

The <U+0394>fbpA attenuated candidate vaccine from Mycobacterium tuberculosis, H37Rv
primes for a stronger T-bet dependent Th1 immunity in mice.

Roche CM(1), Smith A, Lindsey DR, Meher A, Schluns K, Arora A, Armitige LY,
Jagannath C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas Health
Sciences Center, 6431 Fannin, MSB 2.200, Houston, TX, USA.

The <U+0394>fbpA candidate vaccine derived from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (H37Rv) (Mtb)
protects mice better than BCG against tuberculosis, and we investigated the
hypothesis that <U+0394>fbpA may induce a stronger Th1 immunity. Since T-bet
transcription factor regulates Th1 immunity, mice infected with <U+0394>fbpA, BCG
vaccine and related mycobacteria were analyzed for T-bet positive T cells. Mouse 
dendritic cells (DCs) or macrophages were also pulsed with excretory-secreted
antigens (ES; Antigen-85B, ESAT-6 and CFP10) and cocultured with T cells from
immunized or naïve mice and tested for in vitro induction of T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3>. In 
both models, <U+0394>fbpA mutant induced a stronger response of T-bet(+)CD4 T cells,
which correlated with an increased expansion of IFN-<U+03B3>(+)CD4 T cells in vivo and
in vitro. When DCs pulsed with ES antigens were allowed to stimulate T cells,
ESAT-6 and CFP-10 failed to induce a recall expansion of T-bet(+)IFN-<U+03B3>(+)CD4 T
cells from BCG vaccinated mice. Thus, deletion of RD1 in BCG seems to reduce its 
ability to induce T-bet and induce stronger Th1 immunity. Finally, mice were
vaccinated with <U+0394>fbpA and BCG and challenged with virulent Mtb for evaluation of 
protection and T cell expansion. <U+0394>fbpA vaccinated mice showed a rapid and
stronger expansion of CD4(+)CXCR3(+) IFN-<U+03B3>(+) T cells in the lungs of Mtb
challenged mice, compared to those which had BCG vaccine. <U+0394>fbpA immunized mice
also showed a better decline of the Mtb bacterial counts of the lungs. Mtb
derived <U+0394>fbpA candidate vaccine therefore induces qualitatively better T-bet
dependent Th1 immunity than BCG vaccine.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3248993
PMID: 22082615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Cytokine. 2012 Jan;57(1):191-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.10.006. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

IL-4 acts as a potent stimulator of IFN-<U+03B3> expression in CD8+ T cells through
STAT6-dependent and independent induction of Eomesodermin and T-bet.

Oliver JA(1), Stolberg VR, Chensue SW, King PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5620, USA.

CD8+ T cell synthesis of IFN-<U+03B3> is an important component of the CD8+ T cell
immune response. In short-term cultures of murine pan-T cells, we found that IL-4
was the principal cytokine responsible for driving IFN-<U+03B3> synthesis by
CD3/CD28-activated CD8+ T cells. IL-4 was able to induce low levels of IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA
in CD8+ T cells even in the absence of CD3/CD28 engagement, although concomitant 
CD3/CD28 stimulation was necessary for IFN-<U+03B3> secretion. IL-4 induction of IFN-<U+03B3>
was explained by its ability to induce Eomesodermin and T-bet transcription
factors whose expression was further increased by CD3/CD28. Expression of
Eomesodermin, T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> induced by IL-4 was partially dependent upon
activation of MAPK and PI3K but independent of the canonical IL-4-activated
transcription factor, STAT6. In contrast, expression of IFN-<U+03B3> induced by
IL-4/CD3/CD28 stimulation showed additional dependency upon STAT6 which functions
to increase expression of Eomesodermin specifically. These novel findings point
to a function for IL-4 as a direct regulator of IFN-<U+03B3> expression in CD8+ T cells 
and reveal the molecular mechanisms involved.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3246089
PMID: 22078635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Sep;25(17):791-5.

[Kinetic expression of T-bet and GATA-3 genes in rat allergic rhinitis models].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Chen D, Li T, Wen W, Shi J, He X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, the First Affiliated
Hospital of Kunming Medical College, Kunming, 650031, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate kinetic expression of genes T-bet and GATA-3 in blood
mononuclear cells (BMCs) in allergic rhinitis rats model at different stages of
development of allergic rhinitis.
METHOD: Twenty SD rats (including 10 male and 10 female) were divided into 2
groups, experimental group and control group, randomly, 10 rats for each group.
Ten rats in experimental group were sensitized and intranasally challenged by
OVA, aluminium hydroxide hydrate gel and Bordelella pertussis inactive
microorganism suspension (B. pertussis) adjuvants, as allergic rhinitis models,
Ten rats in control group were investigated using physiological saline only. BMCs
were separated from 2 ml blood which was extracted from rat heart at the end of
sensitization, 10- hour after the first challenge and 10-hour after the final
challenge, respectively. RT-PCR was utilized to detect the expression of T-bet
and GATA-3.
RESULT: At the end of sensitization, 10-hour after the first challenge and
10-hour after the final challenge, in experimental group, Relative quantitation
of expression of T-bet was 0.404 +/- 0.187, 1.676 +/- 0.708, 0.503 +/- 0.514 and 
that of GATA-3 was 0.434 +/- 0.147, 0.600 +/- 0.480, 1.029 +/- 0.690,
respectively. While, In control group, Relative quantitation of expression of
T-bet was 0.487 +/- 0.212, 0.486 +/- 0.148, 0.495 +/- 0.103 and and its of GATA-3
was 0.596 +/- 0.249, 0.474 +/- 0.101, 0.550 +/- 0.119, respectively. At 10-hour
after the first challenge, relative quantitation of expression of T-bet in
experimental group was increased markedly and there was significant difference
compared with contol group (t=4.18, P<0.01). In experimental group, The amount of
expression of T-bet at 10-hour after first challenge was higher than it at
10-hour after the final challenge and there was markedly difference (t=5.14,
P<0.01). The amount of expression of T-bet at 10-hour after first challenge was
increased significantly compared with it at the end of sensitization (t= 5.27,
P<0.01). while, the expression of GATA-3 at 10-hour after final challenge was
markedly increased compared with it at the end of sensitization (t= 3.51, P<0.05)
and was higher than it at 10-hour after first challenge (t=2.53, P<0.05). At
10-hour after final challenge, The amount of expression of GATA-3 in experimental
group was significantly higher than it in control group (t=2.71, P<0.05).
However, both the expression of GATA-3 and T-bet had not markedly changed in
control group.
CONCLUSION: It is thought that the development of allergic rhinitis is a
successive and sequencing kinetic course, and imbalance of expression of GATA-3
and T-bet may be genetic base on allergic rhinitis, both GATA-3 and T-bet were
involved in allergic rhinitis only in different phase of development of allergic 
rhinitis.

PMID: 22070074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Toxicol Lett. 2012 Jan 25;208(2):133-41. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.10.015. Epub 
2011 Oct 25.

Developmental stage-specific changes in immunological biomarkers in male C3H/HeN 
mice after early life toluene exposure.

Win-Shwe TT(1), Kunugita N, Nakajima D, Yoshida Y, Fujimaki H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Environmental Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8506, Japan.

We investigated the effects of low-level toluene exposure on immunological
biomarkers during different developmental stages in infant mice. Fetuses in utero
in the pregnant mice on gestational day (GD) 14 as well as male pups on postnatal
day (PND) 2 and PND 8 were exposed either to filtered air (control; 0 ppm), or to
5 ppm or to 50 ppm of toluene for 5 consecutive days in the whole body exposure
chamber. Immunological biomarkers in the blood and spleen of PND 21 male mice
were examined by ELISA, real-time RT-PCR, flow cytometry, and histological
analysis. Plasma total IgG1 levels were markedly reduced in PND 21 mice exposed
to 5 ppm of toluene during all developmental stages. Splenic T lymphocyte subsets
and mRNA expression levels of Th1 cytokine IL-12, transcription factor T-bet, and
Foxp3 were significantly suppressed in PND 21 male mice exposed to toluene during
PNDs 8-12. There were changes in some immunological biomarkers in PND 42 mice
exposed to toluene during PNDs 8-12. These findings indicate developmental
stage-specific changes in non-specific immunological biomarkers in mice after
early life toluene exposure.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22057034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Am J Pathol. 2012 Jan;180(1):221-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.09.007. Epub 2011
Nov 3.

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis 
by altering balance among CD4+ T-cell subsets.

Wang J(1), Ren Z, Xu Y, Xiao S, Meydani SN, Wu D.

Author information: 
(1)Nutritional Immunology Laboratory, Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research
Center on Aging, Sackler Graduate School of Biochemical Sciences, Tufts
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

The green tea component epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) may be beneficial in
autoimmune diseases; however, the underlying mechanisms are not well understood. 
In this study, we determined the effect of EGCG on the development of
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, an animal model for human multiple
sclerosis, and the underlying mechanisms. Female C57BL/6 mice were fed EGCG (0%, 
0.15%, 0.3%, and 0.6% in diet) for 30 days and then immunized with specific
antigen myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 35-55. EGCG dose dependently
attenuated clinical symptoms and pathological features (leukocyte infiltration
and demyelination) in the central nervous system and inhibited antigen-specific
T-cell proliferation and delayed-type hypersensitivity skin response. We further 
showed that EGCG reduced production of interferon-<U+03B3>, IL-17, IL-6, IL-1ß, and
tumor necrosis factor-a; decreased types 1 and 17 helper T cells (Th1 and Th17,
respectively); and increased regulatory T-cell populations in lymph nodes, the
spleen, and the central nervous system. Moreover, EGCG inhibited expression of
transcription factors T-box expressed in T cells and retinoid-related orphan
receptor-<U+03B3>t, the specific transcription factor for Th1 and Th17 differentiation, 
respectively; the plasma levels of intercellular adhesion molecule 1; and CCR6
expression in CD4(+) T cells. These results indicate that EGCG may attenuate
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis autoimmune response by inhibiting
immune cell infiltration and modulating the balance among pro- and
anti-autoimmune CD4(+) T-cell subsets. Thus, we identified a novel mechanism that
underlies EGCG's beneficial effect in autoimmune disease.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22056360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Blood. 2011 Nov 3;118(18):4765-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-09-377325.

Th1 and Th17 join forces for acute GVHD.

Teshima T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kyushu University, Japan.

Comment on
    Blood. 2011 Nov 3;118(18):5011-20.

PMID: 22053173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Immunol. 2011 Dec 1;187(11):5615-26. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101058. Epub 2011
Nov 2.

Human Th1 and Th17 cells exhibit epigenetic stability at signature cytokine and
transcription factor loci.

Cohen CJ(1), Crome SQ, MacDonald KG, Dai EL, Mager DL, Levings MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia V5Z 4H4, Canada.

The linear model of Th cell lineage commitment is being revised due to reports
that mature Th cells can trans-differentiate into alternate lineages. This
ability of Th cells to reprogram is thought to be regulated by epigenetic
mechanisms that control expression of transcription factors characteristic of
opposing lineages. It is unclear, however, to what extent this new model of Th
cell plasticity holds true in human Th cell subsets that develop under
physiological conditions in vivo. We isolated in vivo-differentiated human Th1
and Th17 cells, as well as intermediate Th1/17 cells, and identified distinct
epigenetic signatures at cytokine (IFNG and IL17A) and transcription factor
(TBX21, RORC, and RORA) loci. We also examined the phenotypic and epigenetic
stability of human Th17 cells exposed to Th1-polarizing conditions and found that
although they could upregulate TBX21 and IFN-<U+03B3>, this occurred without loss of
IL-17 or RORC expression, and resulted in cells with a Th1/17 phenotype.
Similarly, Th1 cells could upregulate IL-17 upon enforced expression of RORC2,
but did not lose expression of IFN-<U+03B3> or TBX21. Despite alterations in expression 
of these signature genes, epigenetic modifications were remarkably stable aside
from the acquisition of active histone methylation marks at cytokine gene
promoters. The limited capacity of human Th17 and Th1 cells to undergo complete
lineage conversion suggests that the bipotent Th1/17 cells may arise from Th1
and/or Th17 cells. These data also question the broad applicability of the new
model of Th cell lineage plasticity to in vivo-polarized human Th cell subsets.

PMID: 22048764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Chin Med J (Engl). 2011 Sep;124(18):2899-906.

Molecular mechanism of icariin on rat asthmatic model.

Xu CQ(1), LE JJ, Duan XH, DU WJ, Liu BJ, Wu JF, Cao YX, Dong JC.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Department, Huashan Hospital Affiliated to Fudan University,
Shanghai 200040, China.

BACKGROUND: Effects of icariin on airway inflammation in asthmatic rats and the
intervention of LPS induced inflammation are interfered with the machanism of
icariin. Our study aimed to observe the effect of icariin on ovalbumin-induced
imbalance of Th1/Th2 cytokine expression and its mechanism.
METHODS: Sixty male SD rats were randomly divided into control group (PBS),
asthma group (ovalbumin (OVA)-induced), dexamethasone group, and OVA+icariin low,
medium and high dose groups (5, 10, 20 mg/kg, respectively). Each group had ten
rats. The model of OVA sensitization was a rat asthma model. Enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method was used to observe the effects of icariin on 
interleukin-4 (IL-4) and inerferon <U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) in rats' lung tissue.
Immunohistochemical staining was applied to detect the intervention effects of
icariin on T cells (T-bet) and gatabinding protein 3 (GATA-3) in rat pulmonary
tissue. Realtime RT-PCR was used to observe the intervention effects of icariin
on T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA expression in rat pulmonary tissue and spleen
lymphocytes. Western blotting was used to observe the icariin intervention
effects on T-bet, GATA-3 and nuclear factor-Kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) p65 protein
expressions in rat pulmonary tissue.
RESULTS: The ELISA results from pulmonary tissue showed that IL-4 expression was 
significantly reduced (P < 0.05), while the IFN-<U+03B3> expression increased but not
significantly when we compared OVA+icariin medium and high dose groups with the
asthma group. Immunohistochemical staining of pulmonary tissue showed that the
GATA-3 decreased significantly while the T-bet staining did not change in the
OVA+icariin high dose group. In pulmonary tissue and spleen lymphocytes T-bet and
GATA-3 mRNA expressions were significantly reduced (P < 0.05) in icariin
treatment groups compared with the asthma model group. GATA-3 and T-bet mRNA in
rat spleen lymphocytes in the asthma group were higher than in the control group.
GATA-3 mRNA expression in pulmonary tissue significantly decreased (P < 0.05)
while T-bet mRNA expression decreased but not significantly in the icariin
treatment group compared with the asthma group. T-bet and GATA-3 protein
expressions in pulmonary tissue increased significantly compared with the asthma 
group, which meant that icariin could inhibit the increase of GATA-3 protein, but
not of T-bet. The bronchus, blood vessels and periphery pulmonary tissue had
infiltration of inflammatory cells in the OVA+icariin high dose group while NF-<U+03BA>B
p65 cells were reduced, and expression of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 in this group was less than
in the asthma group. The expression of total p65 protein decreased with icariin
treatment while the expression of cytoplasmic p65 protein increased.
CONCLUSIONS: Icariin could regulate the imbalance of Th1/Th2 cytokines in
asthmatic rat pulmonary tissue. Icariin could regulate the imbalance of Th1/Th2
associated transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in asthmatic rat pulmonary
tissue and spleen lymphocytes. Icariin could inhibit the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 
protein in asthmatic rat pulmonary tissue.

PMID: 22040500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Int Immunol. 2011 Dec;23(12):761-72. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxr087. Epub 2011 Oct
29.

Requirement of GATA-binding protein 3 for II13 gene expression in
IL-18-stimulated Th1 cells.

Nakahira M(1), Nakanishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Medical Zoology, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1
Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.

Recent reports have revealed that CD4(+) T(h) cell subsets have the ability to
alter their gene expression pattern in response to extracellular stimuli. We
previously highlighted the plasticity of T(h)1 cells by demonstrating that T(h)1 
cells gain the capacity to produce IL-3, IL-9, IL-13 and granulocyte macrophage
colony-stimulating factor in response to antigen, IL-2 and IL-18, and based on
their unique function, we designated these activated T(h)1 cells as 'super T(h)1 
cells'. However, the precise molecular mechanism underlying IL-13 production by
super T(h)1 cells has not been elucidated. Here, we show that the GATA-binding
protein 3 (Gata3) is essentially required for II13 gene expression in super T(h)1
cells. Gata3 is synergistically induced in T-box expressed in T-cells
(T-bet)-expressing T(h)1 cells when co-stimulated with anti-CD3, IL-18 and IL-4
through the activation of nuclear factor of activated T cells, nuclear factor
kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells and signal transducer and
activator of transcription 6, respectively. However, Gata3 induction is not
satisfactory, and additional TCR or anti-CD3 signaling is prerequisite for
triggering IL-13 production by Gata3 plus T-bet-expressing T(h)1 cells. These
findings suggest that Gata3, which is not originally expressed in T(h)1 cells,
alters the cytokine production profile by T(h)1 cells.

PMID: 22039015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2012 May;18(5):900-12. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21913. Epub 2011 Oct
21.

Crohn's disease-associated polymorphism within the PTPN2 gene affects
muramyl-dipeptide-induced cytokine secretion and autophagy.

Scharl M(1), Mwinyi J, Fischbeck A, Leucht K, Eloranta JJ, Arikkat J, Pesch T,
Kellermeier S, Mair A, Kullak-Ublick GA, Truninger K, Noreen F, Regula J, Gaj P, 
Pittet V, Mueller C, Hofmann C, Fried M, McCole DF, Rogler G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland. michael.scharl@usz.ch

BACKGROUND: The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs2542151 within the gene
locus region encoding protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 2 (PTPN2)
has been associated with Crohn's disease (CD), ulcerative colitis (UC), type-I
diabetes, and rheumatoid arthritis. We have previously shown that PTPN2 regulates
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling and cytokine secretion in human
THP-1 monocytes and intestinal epithelial cells (IEC). Here, we studied whether
intronic PTPN2 SNP rs1893217 regulates immune responses to the
nucleotide-oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2) ligand, muramyl-dipeptide (MDP).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Genomic DNA samples from 343 CD and 663 non-IBD control
patients (male and female) from a combined German, Swiss, and Polish cohort were 
genotyped for the presence of the PTPN2 SNPs, rs2542151, and rs1893217.
PTPN2-variant rs1893217 was introduced into T(84) IEC or THP-1 cells using a
lentiviral vector.
RESULTS: We identified a novel association between the genetic variant,
rs1893217, located in intron 7 of the PTPN2 gene and CD. Human THP-1 monocytes
carrying this variant revealed increased MAPK activation as well as elevated mRNA
expression of T-bet transcription factor and secretion of interferon-<U+03B3> in
response to the bacterial wall component, MDP. In contrast, secretion of
interleukin-8 and tumor necrosis factor were reduced. In both, T(84) IEC and
THP-1 monocytes, autophagosome formation was impaired.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a novel CD-associated PTPN2 variant that modulates
innate immune responses to bacterial antigens. These findings not only provide
key insights into the effects of a functional mutation on a clinically relevant
gene, but also reveal how such a mutation could contribute to the onset of
disease.

Copyright © 2011 Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America, Inc.

PMID: 22021207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Clin Immunol. 2012 Feb;142(2):117-26. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2011.08.015. Epub 2011 
Sep 16.

GATA3 and a dominant regulatory gene expression profile discriminate operational 
tolerance in human transplantation.

Moraes-Vieira PM(1), Takenaka MC, Silva HM, Monteiro SM, Agena F, Lemos F,
Saitovitch D, Kalil J, Coelho V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Heart Institute (InCor), School of Medicine,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Some organ-transplanted patients achieve a state of "operational tolerance" (OT) 
in which graft function is maintained after the complete withdrawal of
immunosuppressive drugs. We used a gene panel of regulatory/inflammatory
molecules (FOXP3, GATA3, IL10, TGFB1, TGFBR1/ TBX21, TNF and IFNG) to investigate
the gene expression profile in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of
renal-transplanted individuals experiencing OT compared to transplanted
individuals not displaying OT and healthy individuals (HI). OT subjects showed a 
predominant regulatory (REG) profile with higher gene expression of GATA3, FOXP3,
TGFB1 and TGFB receptor 1 compared to the other groups. This predominant REG gene
expression profile displayed stability over time. The significant GATA3 gene and 
protein expressions in OT individuals suggest that a Th2 deviation may be a
relevant pathway to OT. Moreover, the capacity of the REG/INFLAMMA gene panel to 
discriminate OT by peripheral blood analysis indicates that this state has
systemic repercussions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22019771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Neuroimmunol. 2011 Dec 15;240-241:45-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2011.09.008.
Epub 2011 Oct 22.

T-bet deficient mice exhibit resistance to stress-induced development of
depression-like behaviors.

Kim SJ(1), Lee H, Joung HY, Lee G, Lee HJ, Shin MK, Kim SH, Shim I, Bae H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung-Hee University, 
#1 Hoeki-Dong, Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

T-bet, a Th1-specific T-box transcription factor, regulates Th1 development by
inducing endogenous Th1 cytokines and IFN-<U+03B3>. This study was conducted to
determine if T-bet knockout mice exhibit resistance to stress-induced development
of depression-like behaviors. The T-bet knockout mice significantly reduced
depressive-like behaviors provoked by repeated restraint stress in an elevated
plus-maze test (EPM), tail suspension test (TST), and forced swim test (FST).
Moreover, stress-induced elevations of the pro-inflammatory cytokines were
attenuated in T-bet deficient group. These results suggest that T-bet directly
mediated stress-induced depression. Therefore, understanding T-bet function
during stress represents an additional treatment strategy for depression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22018704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Immunity. 2011 Oct 28;35(4):622-32. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.07.015. Epub 2011 
Oct 20.

Functional and epigenetic studies reveal multistep differentiation and plasticity
of in vitro-generated and in vivo-derived follicular T helper cells.

Lu KT(1), Kanno Y, Cannons JL, Handon R, Bible P, Elkahloun AG, Anderson SM, Wei 
L, Sun H, O'Shea JJ, Schwartzberg PL.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Follicular T helper (Tfh) cells provide critical help to B cells for germinal
center (GC) formation. Mutations affecting SLAM-associated protein (SAP) prevent 
GC formation because of defective T cell-B cell interactions, yet effects on Tfh 
cell differentiation remain unclear. We describe the in vitro differentiation of 
functionally competent "Tfh-like" cells that expressed interleukin-21, Tfh cell
markers, and Bcl6 and rescued GC formation in SAP-deficient hosts better than
other T helper (Th) cells. SAP-deficient Tfh-like cells appeared virtually
indistinguishable from wild-type, yet failed to support GCs in vivo.
Interestingly, both Tfh-like and in vivo-derived Tfh cells could produce effector
cytokines in response to polarizing conditions. Moreover, Th1, Th2, and Th17
cells could be reprogrammed to obtain Tfh cell characteristics. ChIP-Seq analyses
revealed positive epigenetic markings on Tbx21, Gata3, and Rorc in Tfh-like and
ex vivo Tfh cells and on Bcl6 in non-Tfh cells, supporting the concept of
plasticity between Tfh and other Th cell populations.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3235706
PMID: 22018472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Immunity. 2011 Oct 28;35(4):633-46. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.08.016. Epub 2011 
Oct 20.

Differential expression of Ly6C and T-bet distinguish effector and memory Th1
CD4(+) cell properties during viral infection.

Marshall HD(1), Chandele A, Jung YW, Meng H, Poholek AC, Parish IA, Rutishauser
R, Cui W, Kleinstein SH, Craft J, Kaech SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2011 Oct 28;35(4):496-8.

CD4(+) T cells differentiate into multiple effector types, but it is unclear how 
they form memory T cells during infection in vivo. Profiling virus-specific
CD4(+) T cells revealed that effector cells with T helper 1 (Th1) or T follicular
helper (Tfh) cell characteristics differentiated into memory cells, although
expression of Tfh cell markers declined over time. In contrast to virus-specific 
effector CD8(+) T cells, increased IL-7R expression was not a reliable marker of 
CD4(+) memory precursor cells. However, decreased Ly6C and T-bet (Tbx21)
expression distinguished a subset of Th1 cells that displayed greater longevity
and proliferative responses to secondary infection. Moreover, the gene expression
profile of Ly6C(lo)T-bet(int) Th1 effector cells was virtually identical to
mature memory CD4(+) T cells, indicating early maturation of memory CD4(+) T cell
features in this subset during acute viral infection. This study provides a
framework for memory CD4(+) T cell development after acute viral infection.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3444169
PMID: 22018471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Autoimmunity. 2012 Mar;45(2):129-36. doi: 10.3109/08916934.2011.622013. Epub 2011
Oct 21.

Functional polymorphisms in TBX21 and HLX are associated with development and
prognosis of Graves' disease.

Morita M(1), Watanabe M, Inoue N, Inaoka C, Akamizu T, Tatsumi KI, Hidaka Y,
Iwatani Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Division of Health Sciences, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: It has been indicated that T-box 21 (TBX21) and H 2.0-like homeobox
(HLX) are transcription factors related to the differentiation of T helper 1
cells, whereas GATA-binding protein 3 is the master transcription factor of T
helper 2 cells.
METHODS: We genotyped -1514T/C (rs17250932) and -1993T/C (rs4794067)
polymorphisms of TBX21, - 742C/G polymorphism (rs2184658) of HLX and -1420G/A
polymorphism (rs1269486) of GATA3 in genomic DNA samples from Japanese patients; 
51 patients with severe Hashimoto's disease (HD), 39 with mild HD, 66 with
intractable Graves' disease (GD), in whom remission was difficult to induce, 47
with GD in remission and 79 healthy volunteers.
RESULTS: The T alleles of the TBX21-1514T/C and -1993T/C polymorphisms were more 
frequent in patients with intractable GD than in those with GD in remission.
Among individuals with the TBX21-1993TT genotype, the G allele of HLX-742C/G
polymorphism, which correlates with low HLX expression, was more frequent in
patients with intractable GD than in those with GD in remission.
CONCLUSIONS: Functional polymorphisms in TBX21 are associated with the
development of autoimmune thyroid diseases and prognosis of GD, and a functional 
polymorphism in HLX in combination with the TBX21 polymorphism is also associated
with the prognosis of GD.

PMID: 22014209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Clin Exp Immunol. 2011 Nov;166(2):227-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2011.04437.x.

Signal transducer and activation of transcription 6 (STAT6) regulates T helper
type 1 (Th1) and Th17 nephritogenic immunity in experimental crescentic
glomerulonephritis.

Summers SA(1), Phoon RK, Odobasic D, Dewage L, Kitching AR, Holdsworth SR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Inflammatory Diseases, Monash University Department of Medicine,
VIC, Australia.

Experimental crescentic glomerulonephritis is driven by systemic cellular immune 
responses. A pathogenic role for T helper type 1 (Th1) and Th17 cells is well
established. T-bet, a key transcription factor required for Th1 lineage
commitment, and retinoic acid-related orphan receptor-<U+03B3>t (Ror<U+03B3>t), a key Th17
transcription factor, are required for full expression of disease. Similarly,
several Th1- and Th17-associated cytokines have been implicated in disease
augmentation. The role of Th2 cells in the disease is less clear, although
Th2-associated cytokines, interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-10, are protective. We sought
to determine the role of signal transducer and activation of transcription 6
(STAT6), a key regulator of Th2 responses, in experimental crescentic
glomerulonephritis. Compared to wild-type mice, histological and functional renal
injury was enhanced significantly in STAT6(-/-) mice 21 days after administration
of sheep anti-mouse glomerular basement membrane globulin. Consistent with the
enhanced renal injury, both Th1 and Th17 nephritogenic immune responses were
increased in STAT6(-/-) mice. Conversely, production of IL-5, a key
Th2-associated cytokine, was decreased significantly in STAT6(-/-) mice. Early in
the disease process systemic mRNA expression of T-bet and Ror<U+03B3> was increased in
STAT6(-/-) mice. We conclude that STAT6 is required for attenuation of Th1 and
Th17 nephritogenic immune responses and protection from crescentic
glomerulonephritis.

© 2011 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2011 British Society
for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC3219898
PMID: 21985369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Immunol. 2011 Nov 15;187(10):4998-5006. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100031. Epub
2011 Oct 7.

Autoreactive Tbet-positive CD4 T cells develop independent of classic Th1
cytokine signaling during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Yeh WI(1), McWilliams IL, Harrington LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294, USA.

Many autoimmune chronic inflammatory diseases, including multiple sclerosis, are 
associated with the presence of Th1 and Th17 effector CD4 T cells. Paradoxically,
the principal Th1 cytokine IFN-<U+03B3> does not appear necessary for disease, but the
key Th1-associated transcription factor Tbet has been reported to be essential
for disease development. This conundrum propelled us to investigate the
regulation of this transcription factor during autoimmunity. Following the onset 
of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, we observed a preferential
upregulation of Tbet by CD4 T cells within the CNS, but not the secondary
lymphoid organs. These Tbet-positive CD4 T cells were capable of producing the
cytokine IFN-<U+03B3>, and a proportion of these cells produced both IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17A.
Interestingly, these Tbet-positive cells were present in high frequencies during 
disease in IFN-<U+03B3>-deficient mice. Moreover, we found that CD4 T cells from
IFN-<U+03B3>-deficient/IFN-<U+03B3> reporter mice upregulated the Thy1.1 reporter, indicating
the presence of Th1 or Th1-like, Tbet-positive CD4 T cells even in the absence of
the cardinal Th1 cytokine IFN-<U+03B3>. These IFN-<U+03B3>-deficient Th1-like cells not only
maintain multiple Th1 properties but also exhibit increased expression of genes
associated with the Th17 phenotype. We further examined the requirement of other 
Th1-associated molecules in controlling Tbet expression during experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis and noted that STAT1, IL-12, and IFN-<U+03B3> were
dispensable for the induction of Tbet in vivo. Hence, this study highlights the
complex regulation of Tbet and the potential unrecognized role for Th1 cells
during autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC3709433
PMID: 21984703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2012 Apr;61(4):523-33. doi: 10.1007/s00262-011-1109-0.
Epub 2011 Oct 9.

Tipifarnib-mediated suppression of T-bet-dependent signaling pathways.

Bai F(1), Villagra AV, Zou J, Painter JS, Connolly K, Blaskovich MA, Sokol L,
Sebti S, Djeu JY, Loughran TP, Wei S, Sotomayor E, Epling-Burnette P.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, SRB3, 12902 Magnolia Dr,
Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Large granular lymphocyte (LGL) leukemia is a chronic lymphoproliferative disease
in which T-bet [T-box transcription factor 21 gene (tbx21)] overexpression may
play a pathogenic role. T-bet orchestrates the differentiation of mature
peripheral T-cells into interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and tumor necrosis factor-a
producing CD4+ T-helper type I (Th1) and CD8+ T cytotoxic cells that are
necessary for antiviral responses. When IL-12 is produced by antigen-presenting
cells, T-bet expression is induced, causing direct stimulation of ifng gene
transcription while simultaneously acting as a transcriptional repressor of the
IL4 gene, which then leads to Th1 dominance and T-helper type 2 differentiation
blockade. Additionally, T-bet has been shown to regulate histone acetylation of
the ifng promoter and enhancer to loosen condensed DNA, creating greater
accessibility for other transcription factor binding, which further amplifies
IFN<U+03B3> production. We found that treatment with a farnesyltransferase inhibitor
tipifarnib reduced Th1 cytokines in LGL leukemia patient T-cells and blocked
T-bet protein expression and IL-12 responsiveness in T-cells from healthy donors.
The mechanism of suppression was based on modulation of histone acetylation of
the ifng gene, which culminated in Th1 blockade.

PMCID: PMC4612510
PMID: 21983879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 11;108(41):17105-10. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109095108. Epub 2011 Sep 26.

Essential role of Mediator subunit Med1 in invariant natural killer T-cell
development.

Yue X(1), Izcue A, Borggrefe T.

Author information: 
(1)The Max-Planck-Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, D-79108 Freiburg,
Germany.

CD1d-restricted invariant NKT (iNKT) cells are a unique lineage of T lymphocytes 
that regulate both innate and adaptive immunity. The Mediator complex forms the
bridge between transcriptional activators and the general transcription
machinery. Med1/TRAP220 (also called DRIP205) is a key component of Mediator that
interacts with ligand-bound hormone receptors, such as the vitamin D receptor.
Here, we show that T-cell-specific Med1 deficiency results in a specific block in
iNKT cell development but the development of conventional aß T cells remains
grossly normal. The defect is cell-intrinsic and depends neither on apoptosis,
cell-cycle control, nor on CD1d expression of CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive
thymocytes. Surprisingly, ectopic expression of a Va14-Ja18 T-cell receptor
transgene completely rescues the defect caused by Med1 deficiency. At the
molecular level, thymic iNKT cells in Med1(-/-) animals display reduced levels of
IL-2Rß and T-bet expression and could not complete terminal maturation. Thus,
Med1 is essential for a complete intrathymic development of iNKT cells.

PMCID: PMC3193226
PMID: 21949387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Immunol. 2011 Oct 15;187(8):4068-76. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002145. Epub 2011
Sep 19.

Increased numbers of preexisting memory CD8 T cells and decreased T-bet
expression can restrain terminal differentiation of secondary effector and memory
CD8 T cells.

Joshi NS(1), Cui W, Dominguez CX, Chen JH, Hand TW, Kaech SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

Memory CD8 T cells acquire effector memory cell properties after reinfection and 
may reach terminally differentiated, senescent states ("Hayflick limit") after
multiple infections. The signals controlling this process are not well
understood, but we found that the degree of secondary effector and memory CD8 T
cell differentiation was intimately linked to the amount of T-bet expressed upon 
reactivation and preexisting memory CD8 T cell number (i.e., primary memory CD8 T
cell precursor frequency) present during secondary infection. Compared with naive
cells, memory CD8 T cells were predisposed toward terminal effector (TE) cell
differentiation because they could immediately respond to IL-12 and induce T-bet,
even in the absence of Ag. TE cell formation after secondary (2°) or tertiary
infections was dependent on increased T-bet expression because T-bet(+/-) cells
were resistant to these phenotypic changes. Larger numbers of preexisting memory 
CD8 T cells limited the duration of 2° infection and the amount of IL-12
produced, and consequently, this reduced T-bet expression and the proportion of
2° TE CD8 T cells that formed. Together, these data show that over repeated
infections, memory CD8 T cell quality and proliferative fitness is not strictly
determined by the number of serial encounters with Ag or cell divisions, but is a
function of the CD8 T cell differentiation state, which is genetically controlled
in a T-bet-dependent manner. This differentiation state can be modulated by
preexisting memory CD8 T cell number and the intensity of inflammation during
reinfection. These results have important implications for vaccinations involving
prime-boost strategies.

PMCID: PMC3991478
PMID: 21930973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Pediatr Nephrol. 2011 Dec;26(12):2253-8. doi: 10.1007/s00467-011-1996-5. Epub
2011 Sep 16.

Imbalance towards Th1 pathway predominance in purpura nephritis with proteinuria.

Tsuruga K(1), Watanabe S, Oki E, Aizawa-Yashiro T, Yoshida H, Imaizumi T, Ito E, 
Tanaka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University Hospital, Hirosaki, Japan.

Although recent reports suggest a possible role for an imbalance in Th1 and Th2
proinflammatory cytokines in the development and progression of
glomerulonephritis, there is little information on Th1 or Th2 predominance in
Henoch-Schönlein purpura nephritis (HSPN). Since T-bet and GATA-3 are
transcriptional factors that regulate the differentiation of helper T lymphocytes
into Th1 and Th2, we examined the relative mRNA expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in
the urinary sediment of children with proteinuric HSPN by real-time quantitative 
PCR. Eight consecutive patients with proteinuric HSPN (4 with grade IIIa and 4
with grade IIIb according to the International Study of Kidney Disease in
Children criteria) and 20 healthy subjects were enrolled in this study. The
relative expression level of T-bet was significantly higher in the urinary
sediment of patients with HSPN at presentation than in that of the healthy
controls (p = 0.021), while the relative expression of GATA-3 was significantly
lower in the urinary sediment of patients than in that of controls (p = 0.002).
Urinary mRNA expression of T-bet correlated with the urinary protein/creatinine
ratio (r = 0.608, p = 0.013), and correlated inversely with serum level of total 
protein (r = -0.574, p = 0.020). Moreover, a significantly increased intensity of
T-bet immunostaining was observed in the glomeruli in the biopsy specimen of all 
study patients. All patients received immunosuppressive therapy. Repeat
measurements of urinary mRNA expression of T-bet and GATA-3 after treatment
revealed that the expression of T-bet in patients had significantly decreased
relative to the baseline (p = 0.003), while the expression of GATA-3 remained
static. In a patient subjected to a post-treatment renal biopsy, the increased
intensity of immunostaining of T-bet had clearly diminished following
immunosuppressive treatment, in accordance with a significant decrease in urinary
mRNA expression of T-bet. These observations suggest that patients with
proteinuric HSPN demonstrate increased T-bet and depressed GATA-3 expression in
the urinary sediment, indicating a possible shift in Th1/Th2 balance towards Th1 
predominance.

PMID: 21922214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Jan;64(1):162-72. doi: 10.1002/art.33335.

Overexpression of T-bet gene regulates murine autoimmune arthritis.

Kondo Y(1), Iizuka M, Wakamatsu E, Yao Z, Tahara M, Tsuboi H, Sugihara M, Hayashi
T, Yoh K, Takahashi S, Matsumoto I, Sumida T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba City, Ibaraki, Japan.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Jan;64(1):40-1.

OBJECTIVE: To clarify the role of T-bet in the pathogenesis of collagen-induced
arthritis (CIA).
METHODS: T-bet-transgenic (Tg) mice under the control of the CD2 promoter were
generated. CIA was induced in T-bet-Tg mice and wild-type C57BL/6 (B6) mice.
Levels of type II collagen (CII)-reactive T-bet and retinoic acid
receptor-related orphan nuclear receptor <U+03B3>t (ROR<U+03B3>t) messenger RNA expression were
analyzed by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Criss-cross experiments using
CD4+ T cells from B6 and T-bet-Tg mice, as well as CD11c+ splenic dendritic cells
(DCs) from B6 and T-bet-Tg mice with CII were performed, and interleukin-17
(IL-17) and interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN<U+03B3>) in the supernatants were measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. CD4+ T cells from B6, T-bet-Tg, or
T-bet-Tg/IFN<U+03B3>-/- mice were cultured for Th17 cell differentiation, then the
proportions of cells producing IFN<U+03B3> and IL-17 were analyzed by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting.
RESULTS: Unlike the B6 mice, the T-bet-Tg mice did not develop CIA. T-bet-Tg mice
showed overexpression of Tbx21 and down-regulation of Rorc in CII-reactive T
cells. Criss-cross experiments with CD4+ T cells and splenic DCs showed a
significant reduction in IL-17 production by CII-reactive CD4+ T cells in
T-bet-Tg mice, even upon coculture with DCs from B6 mice, indicating dysfunction 
of IL-17-producing CD4+ T cells. Inhibition of Th17 cell differentiation under an
in vitro condition favoring Th17 cell differentiation was observed in both
T-bet-Tg mice and T-bet-Tg/IFN<U+03B3>-/- mice.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of T-bet in T cells suppressed the development of
autoimmune arthritis. The regulatory mechanism of arthritis might involve
dysfunction of CII-reactive Th17 cell differentiation by overexpression of T-bet 
via IFN<U+03B3>-independent pathways.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 21905017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Jan;64(1):40-1. doi: 10.1002/art.33331.

Interferon-<U+03B3>-independent suppression of Th17 cell differentiation by T-bet
expression in mice with autoimmune arthritis.

Koike T.

Comment on
    Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Jan;64(1):162-72.

PMID: 21905014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Int J Mol Med. 2011 Dec;28(6):1013-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.792. Epub 2011 Sep
7.

Mitigation of 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene-induced atopic dermatitis-related symptoms
by Terminalia chebula Retzius.

Nam DY(1), Lee JM, Heo JC, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea.

To evaluate whether an aqueous seed extract of Terminalia chebula Retzius
inhibited development of atopy in vivo, we used a 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene
(DNFB)-induced animal model of atopic symptoms to investigate the effects of the 
extract. We measured CD4+ cell numbers by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining,
and determined the expression levels of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9,
interleukin (IL)-31, and T-bet genes, in this animal model. The data showed that 
a Terminalia chebula extract (100 µg/ml) exhibited strong anti-atopic activity,
mediating a 52% reduction in the immune response, as measured by thickness of ear
swelling, and resulting in decreased eosinophil levels in adjacent skin tissue.
Collectively, the results indicate that a Terminalia chebula seed extract has
potential for alleviation of atopy-like symptoms induced by DNFB in the mouse.

PMID: 21901245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Immunol. 2011 Oct 1;187(7):3867-77. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100770. Epub 2011
Aug 26.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 facilitates con a-induced IFN-<U+03B3>-- mediated immune
hepatic injury.

Tsai CC(1), Huang WC, Chen CL, Hsieh CY, Lin YS, Chen SH, Yang KC, Lin CF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University Medical
College, Tainan 701, Taiwan.

Immune hepatic injury induced by Con A results primarily from IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated
inflammation, followed by hepatic cell death. Glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3,
which acts proapoptotically and is proinflammatory, is also important for
facilitating IFN-<U+03B3> signaling. We hypothesized a pathogenic role for GSK-3 in Con 
A hepatic injury. Con A stimulation caused GSK-3 activation in the livers of
C57BL/6 mice. Inhibiting GSK-3 reduced Con A hepatic injury, including hepatic
necrosis and apoptosis, inflammation, infiltration of T cells and granulocytes,
and deregulated expression of adhesion molecule CD54. Con A induced hepatic
injury in an IFN-<U+03B3> receptor 1-dependent manner. Con A/IFN-<U+03B3> induced activation
and expression of STAT1 in a GSK-3-dependent manner. GSK-3 facilitated
IFN-<U+03B3>-induced inducible NO synthase, but had limited effects on CD95 upregulation
and CD95-mediated hepatocyte apoptosis in vitro. Notably, inhibiting GSK-3
decreased Con A-induced IFN-<U+03B3> production in both wild-type and IFN-<U+03B3> receptor
1-deficient C57BL/6 mice. In Con A-activated NKT cells, GSK-3 was also activated 
and was required for nuclear translocation of T-box transcription factor Tbx21, a
transcription factor of IFN-<U+03B3>, but it was not required for CD95 ligand expression
or activation-induced cell death. These results demonstrate the dual and
indispensable role of GSK-3 in Con A hepatic injury by facilitating IFN-<U+03B3>-induced
hepatopathy.

PMID: 21873526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Blood. 2011 Nov 3;118(18):5011-20. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-03-340315. Epub 2011
Aug 19.

Prevention of GVHD while sparing GVL effect by targeting Th1 and Th17
transcription factor T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t in mice.

Yu Y(1), Wang D, Liu C, Kaosaard K, Semple K, Anasetti C, Yu XZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology & Blood and Marrow Transplantation, H. Lee Moffitt
Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 Nov 3;118(18):4765-7.

Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) is effective therapy for
hematologic malignancies through T cell-mediated GVL effects. However, HCT
benefits are frequently offset by the destructive GVHD, which is also induced by 
donor T cells. Naive Th can differentiate into Th1 and Th17 subsets and both can 
mediate GVHD after adoptive transfer into an allogeneic host. Here we tested the 
hypothesis that blockade of Th1 and Th17 differentiation is required to prevent
GVHD in mice. T cells with combined targeted disruption of T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t have
defective differentiation toward Th1 and Th17 and skewed differentiation toward
Th2 and regulatory phenotypes, and caused ameliorated GVHD in a major
MHC-mismatched model of HCT. GVL effects mediated by granzyme-positive CD8 T
cells were largely preserved despite T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t deficiency. These data
indicate that GVHD can be prevented by targeting Th1 and Th17 transcription
factors without offsetting GVL activity.

PMCID: PMC3208306
PMID: 21856864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Am J Pathol. 2011 Oct;179(4):1929-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.06.040. Epub
2011 Aug 18.

Increased expression of peripheral blood leukocyte genes implicate CD14+ tissue
macrophages in cellular intestine allograft rejection.

Ashokkumar C(1), Ningappa M, Ranganathan S, Higgs BW, Sun Q, Schmitt L, Snyder S,
Dobberstein J, Branca M, Jaffe R, Zeevi A, Squires R, Alissa F, Shneider B,
Soltys K, Bond G, Abu-Elmagd K, Humar A, Mazariegos G, Hakonarson H, Sindhi R.

Author information: 
(1)Hillman Center for Pediatric Transplantation, Children's Hospital of
Pittsburgh of University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Recurrent rejection shortens graft survival after intestinal transplantation
(ITx) in children, most of whom also experience early acute cellular rejection
(rejectors). To elucidate mechanisms common to early and recurrent rejection, we 
used a test cohort of 20 recipients to test the hypothesis that candidate
peripheral blood leukocyte genes that trigger rejection episodes would be evident
late after ITx during quiescent periods in genome-wide gene expression analysis
and would achieve quantitative real-time PCR replication pre-ITx (another
quiescent period) and in the early post-ITx period during first rejection
episodes. Eight genes were significantly up-regulated among rejectors in the late
post-ITx and pre-ITx periods, compared with nonrejectors: TBX21, CCL5, GNLY,
SLAMF7, TGFBR3, NKG7, SYNE1, and GK5. Only CCL5 was also up-regulated in the
early post-ITx period. Among resting peripheral blood leukocyte subsets in
randomly sampled nonrejectors, CD14(+) monocytes expressed the CCL5 protein
maximally. Compared with nonrejectors, rejectors demonstrated higher counts of
both circulating CCL5(+)CD14(+) monocytes and intragraft CD14(+) monocyte-derived
macrophages in immunohistochemistry of postperfusion and early post-ITx biopsies 
from the test and an independent replication cohort. Donor-specific
alloreactivity measured with CD154(+) T-cytotoxic memory cells correlated with
the CCL5 gene and intragraft CD14(+) monocyte-derived macrophages at graft
reperfusion and early post-ITx. CCL5 gene up-regulation and CD14(+) macrophages
likely prime cellular ITx rejection. Infiltration of reperfused intestine
allografts with CD14(+) macrophages may predict rejection events.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3181350
PMID: 21854741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Am J Clin Pathol. 2011 Sep;136(3):390-9. doi: 10.1309/AJCP5GE1PSBMBZTW.

An assessment of the usefulness of immunohistochemical stains in the diagnosis of
hairy cell leukemia.

Sherman MJ(1), Hanson CA, Hoyer JD.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905,
USA.

Annexin-1 and T-bet are recently described immunohistochemical stains that
reportedly assist in the diagnosis of hairy cell leukemia (HCL). Our objective
was to assess the sensitivity and specificity of a panel of immunohistochemical
stains in distinguishing HCL from other B-cell neoplasms, particularly splenic
and extranodal marginal zone lymphomas (SMZL and ENMZL, respectively). The study 
included 234 bone marrow biopsy specimens: 101 HCL, 13 SMZL, and 10 ENMZL cases
were assessed with CD20, tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP), DBA.44, a-1,
T-bet, and cyclin D1, and 110 control cases were assessed with annexin-1 and
T-bet. Our study showed that annexin-1 is a specific and sensitive marker for
HCL; however, interpretation is limited by positivity within myeloid precursors. 
T-bet, DBA.44, and TRAP immunohistochemical stains lack sufficient sensitivity
and specificity to differentiate HCL from either form of marginal zone lymphoma. 
However, our data suggest that the addition cyclin D1 to the immunostaining panel
will increase the sensitivity and specificity of HCL diagnosis.

PMID: 21846914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Allergy (Cairo). 2012;2012:794890. doi: 10.1155/2012/794890. Epub 2011 Aug 7.

Genetic mechanisms in aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease.

Shrestha Palikhe N(1), Kim SH, Jin HJ, Hwang EK, Nam YH, Park HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Ajou University School of
Medicine, San-5, Woncheondong, Youngtonggu, Suwon 442-721, Republic of Korea.

Aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD) refers to the development of
bronchoconstriction in asthmatics following the exposure to aspirin or other
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The key pathogenic mechanisms associated
with AERD are the overproduction of cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs) and increased
CysLTR1 expression in the airway mucosa and decreased lipoxin and PGE2 synthesis.
Genetic studies have suggested a role for variability of genes in disease
susceptibility and the response to medication. Potential genetic biomarkers
contributing to the AERD phenotype include HLA-DPB1, LTC4S, ALOX5, CYSLT, PGE2,
TBXA2R, TBX21, MS4A2, IL10, ACE, IL13, KIF3A, SLC22A2, CEP68, PTGER, and CRTH2
and a four-locus SNP set composed of B2ADR, CCR3, CysLTR1, and FCER1B. Future
areas of investigation need to focus on comprehensive approaches to identifying
biomarkers for early diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC3151506
PMID: 21837245  [PubMed]


484. Jpn J Ophthalmol. 2011 Sep;55(5):534-40. doi: 10.1007/s10384-011-0047-x. Epub
2011 Aug 9.

Transconjunctival immunotherapy using cholera toxin B to treat experimental
allergic conjunctivitis in a mouse model.

Oikawa A(1), Shoji J, Inada N, Sawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Visual Sciences, Department of Ophthalmology, Nihon University
School of Medicine, 30-1 Oyaguchi-Kamimachi, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, 173-8610, Japan.
aoikawa@med.nihon-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: We evaluated the use of immunological biomarkers in transconjunctival
immunotherapy by using cholera toxin B for treating experimental allergic
conjunctivitis in a mouse model.
METHODS: Balb/c mice were sensitized using intraperitoneal injections of
ovalbumin (OVA) and were then divided into two groups. The first group was
treated by topical instillation of OVA after the instillation of combined OVA and
cholera toxin B (CTB) solution B group). The second group was treated by topical 
instillation of OVA alone (allergy group). The control group consisted of
nonsensitized mice undergoing topical OVA instillation only. The numbers of
eosinophils and CD4-positive lymphocytes in the conjunctiva were determined
histologically, and the observation of immunoglobulin A (IgA)-positive cells in
the conjunctiva was performed by immunohistochemistry. Cytokine concentration in 
the conjunctiva was determined by the protein-array methods. Messenger RNA
expression of T-cell-specific markers, such as T-bet, GATA-3, and Foxp3, in the
conjunctiva was detected by reversed transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The number of eosinophils and CD4-positive lymphocytes increased
significantly in the allergy group compared with the control group (P < 0.001)
but showed no difference between the CTB group and control group. Concentrations 
of interleukin 4 (IL-4) (P < 0.05), B-lymphocyte chemoattractant (P < 0.01), and 
thymus-expressed chemokine (P < 0.05) in the conjunctiva were significantly
higher in the CTB group than in the other two groups. GATA-3 messenger RNA (mRNA)
in the conjunctiva was expressed in the three groups, but T-bet and Foxp3 were
not detected.
CONCLUSION: Transconjunctival immunotherapy using CTB can be evaluated by
histological examination of eosinophils and CD4-positive T cells, and a mucosal
immunity-associated chemokine and a helper T-cell-17-associated chemokine as
biomarkers.

PMID: 21826470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Immunity. 2011 Aug 26;35(2):169-81. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.07.009. Epub 2011 
Aug 4.

MicroRNA-29 regulates T-box transcription factors and interferon-<U+03B3> production in 
helper T cells.

Steiner DF(1), Thomas MF, Hu JK, Yang Z, Babiarz JE, Allen CD, Matloubian M,
Blelloch R, Ansel KM.

Author information: 
(1)Sandler Asthma Basic Research Center and Department of Microbiology &
Immunology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Sep;11(9):573.
    Immunotherapy. 2011 Nov;3(11):1291-2.

MicroRNA (miRNA)-deficient helper T cells exhibit abnormal IFN-<U+03B3> production and
decreased proliferation. However, the contributions of individual miRNAs to this 
phenotype remain poorly understood. We conducted a screen for miRNA function in
primary T cells and identified individual miRNAs that rescue the defects
associated with miRNA deficiency. Multiple members of the miR-17 and miR-92
families enhanced miRNA-deficient T cell proliferation whereas miR-29 largely
corrected their aberrant interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) expression. Repression of IFN-<U+03B3>
production by miR-29 involved direct targeting of both T-bet and Eomes, two
transcription factors known to induce IFN-<U+03B3> production. Although not usually
expressed at functionally relevant amounts in helper T cells, Eomes was abundant 
in miRNA-deficient cells and was upregulated after miR-29 inhibition in wild-type
cells. These results demonstrate that miR-29 regulates helper T cell
differentiation by repressing multiple target genes, including at least two that 
are independently capable of inducing the T helper 1 (Th1) cell gene expression
program.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3361370
PMID: 21820330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Immunobiology. 2011 Dec;216(12):1264-73. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2011.07.003. Epub
2011 Jul 7.

Serine protease inhibitor, 4-(2-aminoethyl)-benzene sulfonyl fluoride, impairs
IL-12-induced activation of pSTAT4ß, NF<U+03BA>B, and select pro-inflammatory mediators 
from estrogen-treated mice.

Karpuzoglu E(1), Gogal RM Jr, Ansar Ahmed S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Anatomy and Radiology,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30621, USA.

Estrogen, a natural immunomodulator, is believed to be involved in the regulation
of not only normal immune responses, but also pathological conditions such as
inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. We have previously reported that estrogen
exposure induces several pro-inflammatory molecules including nitric oxide,
cytokines and chemokines (IFN<U+03B3>, IL-12, MCP-1, etc.) and modifies transcription
factors (preferential expression of STAT4ß, increased NF<U+03BA>B p50/p50 DNA binding,
and enhanced T-bet and Bcl-3) from activated splenocytes. Given that estrogen
promotes diverse range of pro-inflammatory molecules, and modifies transcription 
factors, it is plausible that estrogen upregulates a common set of molecular
event(s) that favors inflammation. Serine proteases are thought to play an
important role in inflammation. Therefore in this study, we investigated the
consequence of exposure of splenocytes stimulated with a key Th1/IFN<U+03B3>-inducing
cytokine IL-12 or ConA from estrogen-treated mice to a serine protease inhibitor,
4-(2-aminoethyl)-benzenesulfonyl fluoride (AEBSF), on inflammatory cytokines
(IFN<U+03B3>, IL-12) and related transcription factors (STAT4a/ß, T-bet, NF<U+03BA>B). Exposure
of splenocytes to AEBSF for 3h noticeably inhibited the induction of IFN<U+03B3>, IL-12,
and IL-12-induced STAT4ß, mRNA expression of T-bet and IL-12Rß2. The
AEBSF-mediated inhibition of cytokines was accompanied by the expression of a
normal-sized NF<U+03BA>B, downregulation of p50/p50 DNA binding but did not alter Bcl3. 
These findings provide a new understanding of inflammation and inhibition of
serine proteases has important implications for designing novel therapeutic
strategies for a broad range of inflammatory diseases.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21813204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Aug;27(8):876-9.

[The effect of Uygur medicine Hyssopus officinalis L on expression of T-bet,
GATA-3 and STAT-3 mRNA in lung tissue of asthma rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang HY(1), Ding JB, Halmurat U, Hou M, Xue ZQ, Zhu M, Tian SG, Ma XM.

Author information: 
(1)Xinjiang VIP Lab of Great Physician and Pharmacology of Traditional Chinese
Medical Formulae, Urumqi, China.

AIM: To study the Uygur medicine Hyssopus officinalis L on T-bet, GATA-3, STAT-3 
mRNA levels of asthma rats in order to explore the mechanism of its treatment of 
asthma.
METHODS: Rats were randomly divided into normal control group, asthma model group
and dexamethasone group and water extract of Hyssopus officinalis L high and low 
dose group. The rats were sensitized with OVA, Al(OH)(3); and DPT vaccine and
then challenged with inhalation of aerosolized OVA solution for Preparation of
asthma model and the level of T-bet, GATA-3, STAT-3 mRNA were detected with
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The normal control group and model group, model group and treatment
group, the expression of T-bet, GATA-3 and STAT-3 mRNA in the lung tissue was
statistically significant differences(P<0.05). Compared with model group, after
treatment of Hyssopus officinalis L the expression of GATA-3 and STAT-3 mRNA of
asthma rats significantly reduced (P<0.05), but the expression of T-bet mRNA was 
significantly higher (P<0.05).The expression of GATA-3 and STAT-3 mRNA of
Hyssopus officinalis L high-dose treatment group was lower than the low-dose
treatment group (P<0.05), but T-bet mRNA that was higher(P<0.05). The expression 
of T-bet mRNA has negative correlation with GATA-3 mRNA (r=-0.696), the
expression of STAT-3 mRNA has correlation with T-bet mRNA and GATA-3
mRNA(r=-0.767, 0.772), P<0.05.
CONCLUSION: Hyssopus officinalis L probably regulates the differentiation of Th1,
Th2 and Th17 on transcription level to play the role of anti-inflammatory.

PMID: 21806885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Leuk Lymphoma. 2012 Jan;53(1):152-5. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2011.606941. Epub 2011
Sep 19.

Three different expression patterns of T-bet in angioimmunoblastic T-cell
lymphoma.

Jöhrens K(1), Dietel M, Anagnostopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité University Medicine Berlin, Campus Mitte,
Berlin, Germany. korinna.joehrens@charite.de

Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) exhibits a multifaceted clinical
picture and distinct architectural patterns that correlate with disease
progression and the number of neoplastic cells. In this study we investigated the
expression of the transcription factor T-bet and correlated it with the
architectural patterns in 29 cases of AITL. Double immunolabelings for T-bet,
CD20, CD3 or PD1 revealed the following patterns: predominant T-bet expression by
neoplastic T-cells (A), by aggregates of small B-cells (B) or by B-immunoblasts
(C). The majority of cases of AITL pattern II showed a T-bet expression pattern B
(6/8 cases), while the majority of those with pattern III exhibited the T-bet
pattern A (11/21 cases). We propose that T-bet expression by B-cells represents a
T-cell independent immune response trying to cope with opportunistic infections, 
while T-bet expression by neoplastic T-cells is linked to the introduction of a
Th17 response responsible for the immunologic derangements characteristic of
AITL.

PMID: 21780995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Immunol Lett. 2011 Oct 30;140(1-2):81-91. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2011.06.011. Epub 
2011 Jul 6.

Antipsychotic drugs suppress the AKT/NF-<U+03BA>B pathway and regulate the
differentiation of T-cell subsets.

Chen ML(1), Tsai TC, Lin YY, Tsai YM, Wang LK, Lee MC, Tsai FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, Taipei Branch, New 
Taipei City, Taiwan.

Antipsychotic drugs (APDs) are commonly used to ease the symptoms of
schizophrenia; however, these same drugs also have an effect on the human immune 
system. Our previous studies have shown that risperidone and clozapine
effectively decrease the production of IFN-<U+03B3> for CD4(+) T-cells in PBMC. In
contrast, haloperidol causes an increase in the production of IFN-<U+03B3> for CD4(+)
T-cells in PBMC. In this study we show that risperidone and clozapine can reduce 
Th1 cell differentiation and T-bet expression. The differentiation of Th1 cells
was reduced in clozapine or risperidone treated PBMC by inhibiting the
phosphorylation of AKT but not STAT-4. Typical APD, haloperidol, had the opposite
effect in regulating T cell differentiation when compared with atypical APDs
including risperidone and clozapine. Haloperidol decreased the expression of
GATA-3, a Th2-related transcription factor, by inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B activation rather
than STAT-6 phosphorylation and thus decreased Th2 differentiation. In addition, 
chronic risperidone and clozapine treatment reduces the IFN-<U+03B3> producing CD4(+)
T-cell population within PBMC. In conclusion, this study suggests that APDs do
indeed regulate the body's immune response and therefore all APDs should have
their own patent in regulating immune responses.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21763349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e21868. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021868. Epub 2011 Jul 5.

RTL551 treatment of EAE reduces CD226 and T-bet+ CD4 T cells in periphery and
prevents infiltration of T-bet+ IL-17, IFN-<U+03B3> producing T cells into CNS.

Sinha S(1), Miller LM, Subramanian S, Burrows GG, Vandenbark AA, Offner H.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Portland, Oregon,
United States of America.

Recombinant T cell receptor ligands (RTLs) that target encephalitogenic T-cells
can reverse clinical and histological signs of EAE, and are currently in clinical
trials for treatment of multiple sclerosis. To evaluate possible regulatory
mechanisms, we tested effects of RTL therapy on expression of pathogenic and
effector T-cell maturation markers, CD226, T-bet and CD44, by CD4+ Th1 cells
early after treatment of MOG-35-55 peptide-induced EAE in C57BL/6 mice. We showed
that 1-5 daily injections of RTL551 (two-domain I-A(b) covalently linked to
MOG-35-55 peptide), but not the control RTL550 ("empty" two-domain I-A(b) without
a bound peptide) or Vehicle, reduced clinical signs of EAE, prevented trafficking
of cells outside the spleen, significantly reduced the frequency of CD226 and
T-bet expressing CD4+ T-cells in blood and inhibited expansion of CD44 expressing
CD4+ T-cells in blood and spleen. Concomitantly, RTL551 selectively reduced CNS
inflammatory lesions, absolute numbers of CNS infiltrating T-bet expressing CD4+ 
T-cells and IL-17 and IFN-<U+03B3> secretion by CNS derived MOG-35-55 reactive cells
cultured ex vivo. These novel results demonstrate that a major effect of RTL
therapy is to attenuate Th1 specific changes in CD4+ T-cells during EAE and
prevent expansion of effector T-cells that mediate clinical signs and CNS
inflammation in EAE.

PMCID: PMC3130056
PMID: 21750737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Br J Cancer. 2011 Jul 26;105(3):366-71. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.261. Epub 2011 Jul 
12.

T-bet expression in intratumoral lymphoid structures after neoadjuvant
trastuzumab plus docetaxel for HER2-overexpressing breast carcinoma predicts
survival.

Ladoire S(1), Arnould L, Mignot G, Apetoh L, Rébé C, Martin F, Fumoleau P,
Coudert B, Ghiringhelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Georges François Leclerc Center, Centre de
Recherche INSERM 866, Faculté de Médecine, 7 Boulevard Jeanne d'Arc, Dijon 21000,
France.

BACKGROUND: In HER2-overexpressing breast cancer, accumulating preclinical
evidences suggest that some chemotherapies, like trastuzumab, but also taxanes,
are able to trigger a T helper 1 (Th1) anticancer immune response that contribute
to treatment success. T helper 1 immune response is characterised by the
expression of the transcription factor T-bet in CD4 T lymphocytes. We
hypothesised that the presence of such T cells in the tumour immune infiltrates
following neoadjuvant chemotherapy would predict patient survival.
METHODS: In a series of 102 consecutive HER2-overexpressing breast cancer
patients treated by neoadjuvant chemotherapy incorporating antracyclines or
taxane and trastuzumab, we studied by immunohistochemistry the peritumoral
lymphoid infiltration by T-bet+ lymphocytes before and after chemotherapy in both
treatment groups. Kaplan-Meier analysis and Cox modelling were used to assess
relapse-free survival (RFS).
RESULTS: Fifty-eight patients have been treated with trastuzumab-taxane and 44
patients with anthracyclines-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The presence of
T-bet+ lymphocytes in peritumoral lymphoid structures after chemotherapy was
significantly more frequent in patients treated with trastuzumab-taxane
(P=0.0008). After a median follow-up of 40 months, the presence of T-bet+
lymphocytes after neoadjuvant chemotherapy confers significantly better RFS
(log-rank test P=0.011) only in patients treated with trastuzumab-taxane. In this
population, multivariate Cox regression model showed that only the presence of
T-bet+ lymphocytes in peritumoral lymphoid structures after neoadjuvant
chemotherapy was independently associated with improved RFS (P=0.04).
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that the tumour infiltration by T-bet+ Th1
lymphocytes following neoadjuvant trastuzumab-taxane may represent a new
independent prognostic factor of improved outcome in HER2-overexpressing breast
carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3172914
PMID: 21750556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Oct;41(10):2987-96. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141666. Epub 2011 Aug
30.

TGF-ß signaling via Smad4 drives IL-10 production in effector Th1 cells and
reduces T-cell trafficking in EAE.

Huss DJ(1), Winger RC, Cox GM, Guerau-de-Arellano M, Yang Y, Racke MK,
Lovett-Racke AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, The Ohio
State University Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA.

Erratum in
    Eur J Immunol. 2012 Nov;42(11):3084.

Effector Th1 cells perpetuate inflammatory damage in a number of autoimmune
diseases, including MS and its animal model EAE. Recently, a self-regulatory
mechanism was described in which effector Th1 cells produce the immunomodulatory 
cytokine IL-10 to dampen the inflammatory response in both normal and autoimmune 
inflammation. While the presence of TGF-ß has been suggested to enhance and
stabilize an IFN-<U+03B3>(+) IL-10(+) phenotype, the molecular mechanism is poorly
understood. Additionally, in the context of adoptive transfer EAE, it is unclear 
whether IL-10 acts on the transferred Th1 cells or on endogenous host cells. In
the present study, using myelin-specific TCR-Tg mice, we show that repetitive Ag 
stimulation of effector Th1 cells in the presence of TGF-ß increases the
population of IFN-<U+03B3>(+) IL-10(+) cells, which correlates with a decrease in EAE
severity. Additionally, TGF-ß signaling causes binding of Smad4 to the IL-10
promoter, providing molecular evidence for TGF-ß-mediated IL-10 production from
Th1 effector cells. Finally, this study demonstrates that IL-10 not only reduces 
encephalitogenic markers such as IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet on Th1 effector cells expressing
the IL-10R but also prevents recruitment of both transferred and host-derived
inflammatory T cells. These data establish a regulatory mechanism by which highly
activated Th1 effector cells modulate their pathogenicity through the induction
of IL-10.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3478765
PMID: 21728174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Immunol Res. 2011 Aug;50(2-3):269-75. doi: 10.1007/s12026-011-8227-9.

T-cell-mediated tumor immune surveillance and expression of B7 co-inhibitory
molecules in cancers of the upper gastrointestinal tract.

Lu B(1), Chen L, Liu L, Zhu Y, Wu C, Jiang J, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, E1047
BST, 200 Lothrop Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. Binfeng@pitt.edu

Tumorigenesis can induce adaptive T-cell-mediated immune responses against
malignant cells. Such cellular immune responses are actively suppressed by cancer
cells via mechanisms of immune tolerance. We studied T-cell responses against
tumor growth by examining tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in upper
gastrointestinal (GI) cancers. The number of T-bet(+) TILs correlates with better
survival of esophageal cancer patients. Using well-defined mouse models, we have 
further shown that T-bet and Eomes are both required for the adaptive anti-tumor 
immunity by regulating T-cell trafficking into the tumor tissue and their
effector functions inside the tumor microenvironment. In order to gain further
insight into the tumor immune microenvironment in the upper GI cancer, we have
also studied expression levels of co-inhibitory molecules such as B7-H1/PD-L1 and
B7-H4 in tissue specimens of esophageal and gastric cancers. These inhibitory B7 
molecules were expressed at high but variable levels by cancer cells. The
overexpression of these molecules correlates with poor clinicopathological
parameters and shorter patient survival time. The number of CD3(+) and CD8(+)
TILs correlates inversely with expression levels of B7-H4 in samples from
esophageal cancer, supporting a role of active immune suppression by inhibitory
B7 molecules in the tumor microenvironment. In addition, TILs show functional
exhaustion and express high levels of PD-1 and Tim-3. We propose that metabolic
competition mediated by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks) characterizes the 
immune suppression within cancer tissues. Future tumor vaccine design should
combine blockade of B7 inhibitory molecules and enhancement of T-bet and Eomes
levels within the tumor microenvironment.

PMID: 21717068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Neuroinflammation. 2011 Jun 24;8:73. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-73.

Lymph node-derived donor encephalitogenic CD4+ T cells in C57BL/6 mice adoptive
transfer experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis highly express GM-CSF and
T-bet.

Cravens PD(1), Hussain RZ, Zacharias TE, Ben LH, Herndon E, Vinnakota R,
Lambracht-Washington D, Nessler S, Zamvil SS, Eagar TN, Stüve O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, TX, USA.

Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is a relevant animal model for
the human demyelinating inflammatory disorder of the central nervous system
(CNS), multiple sclerosis (MS). Induction of EAE by adoptive transfer allows
studying the role of the donor T lymphocyte in disease pathogenesis. It has been 
challenging to reliably induce adoptive transfer EAE in C57BL/6 (H-2b) mice. The 
goal of this study was to develop a reproducible and high yield protocol for
adoptive transfer EAE in C57BL/6 mice. A step-wise experimental approach
permitted us to develop a protocol that resulted in a consistent relatively high 
disease incidence of ~70% in recipient mice. Donor mice were immunized with
myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)p35-55 in complete Freund's adjuvant
(CFA) followed by pertussis toxin (PT). Only lymph node cells (LNC) isolated at
day 12 post immunization, and restimulated in vitro for 72 hours with 10 µg/mL of
MOGp35-55 and 0.5 ng/mL of interleukin-12 (IL-12) were able to transfer disease. 
The ability of LNC to transfer disease was associated with the presence of
inflammatory infiltrates in the CNS at day 12. Interferon gamma (IFN<U+03B3>) was
produced at comparable levels in cell cultures prepared from mice at both day 6
and day 12 post immunization. By contrast, there was a trend towards a negative
association between IL-17 and disease susceptibility in our EAE model. The amount
of GM-CSF secreted was significantly increased in the culture supernatants from
cells collected at day 12 post immunization versus those collected at day 6
post-immunization. Activated CD4+ T cells present in the day 12 LNC cultures
maintained expression of the transcription factor T-bet, which has been shown to 
regulate the expression of the IL-23 receptor. Also, there was an increased
prevalence of MOGp35-55-specific CD4+ T cells in day 12 LNC after in vitro
re-stimulation. In summary, encephalitogenic LNC that adoptively transfer EAE in 
C57BL/6 mice were not characterized by a single biomarker in our study, but by a 
composite of inflammatory markers. Our data further suggest that GM-CSF
expression by CD4+ T cells regulated by IL-23 contributes to their
encephalitogenicity in our EAE model.

PMCID: PMC3161869
PMID: 21702922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Aug;31(16):3445-56. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05383-11. Epub 2011 Jun 
20.

c-Abl-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of the T-bet DNA-binding domain regulates
CD4+ T-cell differentiation and allergic lung inflammation.

Chen A(1), Lee SM, Gao B, Shannon S, Zhu Z, Fang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. chenan7281@yahoo.com

The tyrosine kinase c-Abl is required for full activation of T cells, while its
role in T-cell differentiation has not been characterized. We report that c-Abl
deficiency skews CD4(+) T cells to type 2 helper T cell (Th2) differentiation,
and c-Abl(-/-) mice are more susceptible to allergic lung inflammation. c-Abl
interacts with and phosphorylates T-bet, a Th1 lineage transcription factor.
c-Abl-mediated phosphorylation enhances the transcriptional activation of T-bet. 
Interestingly, three tyrosine residues within the T-bet DNA-binding domain are
the predominant sites of phosphorylation by c-Abl. Mutation of these tyrosine
residues inhibits the promoter DNA-binding activity of T-bet. c-Abl regulates Th 
cell differentiation in a T-bet-dependent manner because genetic deletion of
T-bet in CD4(+) T cells abolishes c-Abl-deficiency-mediated enhancement of Th2
differentiation. Reintroduction of T-bet-null CD4(+) T cells with wild-type
T-bet, but not its tyrosine mutant, rescues gamma interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>) production
and inhibits Th2 cytokine production. Therefore, c-Abl catalyzes tyrosine
phosphorylation of the DNA-binding domain of T-bet to regulate CD4(+) T cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3147793
PMID: 21690296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Nat Immunol. 2011 Jun 20;12(7):597-606. doi: 10.1038/ni.2059.

T-bet in disease.

Lazarevic V(1), Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The activation of immune-defense mechanisms in response to a microbial attack
must be robust and appropriately tailored to fight particular types of pathogens.
Infection with intracellular microorganisms elicits a type 1 inflammatory
response characterized by mobilization of T helper type 1 (T(H)1) cells to the
site of infection, where they are responsible for the recruitment and activation 
of macrophages. At the center of the type 1 inflammatory response is the
transcription factor T-bet, a critical regulator of the T(H)1 differentiation
program. T-bet induces the production of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and orchestrates
the T(H)1 cell-migratory program by regulating the expression of chemokines and
chemokine receptors. However, tight regulation of the type 1 inflammatory
response is essential for the prevention of immunopathology and the development
of organ-specific autoimmunity. In this review, we discuss how T-bet expression
drives autoaggressive and inflammatory processes and how its function in vivo
must be delicately balanced to avoid disease.

PMID: 21685955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Gastroenterology. 2011 Aug;141(2):653-62, 662.e1-4. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2011.04.053. Epub 2011 Apr 30.

Antigen-presenting cell production of IL-10 inhibits T-helper 1 and 17 cell
responses and suppresses colitis in mice.

Liu B(1), Tonkonogy SL, Sartor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoonesis, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine,
Jilin University, Changchun, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Mice that are deficient in interleukin (IL)-10 develop
colitis, mediated by T-helper (Th)1 and Th17 cells, and IL-10-producing
regulatory T (Treg) cells suppress colitis, implicating IL-10 in maintaining
mucosal homeostasis. We assessed the relative importance of immunoregulatory
IL-10 derived from T cells or from antigen presenting cells (APCs) in development
of intestinal inflammation.
METHODS: CD4(+) cells from germ-free (GF) or specific pathogen-free (SPF)
IL-10(-/-) or wild-type mice were injected into IL-10(-/-), Rag2(-/-) mice or
Rag2(-/-) mice that express IL-10. After 6-8 weeks, we evaluated inflammation,
spontaneous secretion of cytokines from colonic tissue, and mRNA levels of the
transcription factor T-bet and the immunoregulatory cytokine transforming growth 
factor (TGF)-ß. CD4(+) T cells were co-cultured with bacterial lysate-pulsed APCs
and assayed for cytokine production, FoxP3 expression, and TGF-ß-mediated Smad
signaling.
RESULTS: CD4(+) cells from GF or SPF IL-10(-/-) or wild-type mice induced more
severe colitis and higher levels of inflammatory cytokines in IL-10(-/-),
Rag2(-/-) mice than in IL-10-replete, Rag2(-/-) mice. Co-cultures of IL-10(-/-)
or wild-type CD4(+) T cells plus bacterial lysate-pulsed APCs from IL-10(-/-)
mice contained more interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>, IL-12/23p40, and IL-17 than co-cultures
of the same T cells plus APCs from wild-type mice. CD11b(+) APCs were required
for these effects. Blocking IL-10 receptors increased production of IFN-<U+03B3> and
IL-12/23p40 whereas exogenous IL-10 suppressed these cytokines. IL-10-producing
APCs induced TGF-ß-mediated, retinoic acid-dependent, differentiation of FoxP3(+)
Treg cells, whereas blocking the retinoic acid receptor, in vitro and in vivo,
reduced proportions of FoxP3(+) Treg cells.
CONCLUSIONS: IL-10 produced by APCs regulates homeostatic T-cell responses to
commensal bacteria.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4651012
PMID: 21679711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Sep;41(9):2688-98. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141539. Epub 2011 Aug 
8.

Type I interferons suppress CD4<U+207A> T-cell-dependent parasite control during
blood-stage Plasmodium infection.

Haque A(1), Best SE, Ammerdorffer A, Desbarrieres L, de Oca MM, Amante FH, de
Labastida Rivera F, Hertzog P, Boyle GM, Hill GR, Engwerda CR.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Infection Laboratory, Queensland Institute of Medical Research 
and The Australian Centre for Vaccine Development, Herston, QLD, Australia.
ashraful.haque@qimr.edu.au

During blood-stage Plasmodium infection, large-scale invasion of RBCs often
occurs before the generation of cellular immune responses. In Plasmodium berghei 
ANKA (PbA)-infected C57BL/6 mice, CD4(+) T cells controlled parasite numbers
poorly, instead providing early help to pathogenic CD8(+) T cells. Expression
analysis revealed that the transcriptional signature of CD4(+) T cells from
PbA-infected mice was dominated by type I IFN (IFN-I) and IFN-<U+03B3>-signalling
pathway-related genes. A role for IFN-I during blood-stage Plasmodium infection
had yet to be established. Here, we observed IFN-a protein production in the
spleen of PbA-infected C57BL/6 mice over the first 2 days of infection. Mice
deficient in IFN-I signalling had reduced parasite burdens, and displayed none of
the fatal neurological symptoms associated with PbA infection. IFN-I
substantially inhibited CD4(+) T-bet(+) T-cell-derived IFN-<U+03B3> production, and
prevented this emerging Th1 response from controlling parasites. Experiments
using BM chimeric mice revealed that IFN-I signalled predominantly via
radio-sensitive, haematopoietic cells, but did not suppress CD4(+) T cells via
direct signalling to this cell type. Finally, we found that IFN-I suppressed
IFN-<U+03B3> production, and hampered efficient control of parasitaemia in mice infected
with non-lethal Plasmodium chabaudi. Thus, we have elucidated a novel regulatory 
pathway in primary blood-stage Plasmodium infection that suppresses CD4(+)
T-cell-mediated parasite control.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21674481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011 Aug;10(8):1375-84. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-0030. Epub
2011 Jun 8.

Enhanced antitumor effects by chemical modified IGb3 analogues.

Zhou Z(1), Zhang C, Xia C, Chen W, Zhu H, Shang P, Ma F, Wang PG, Zhang J, Xu W, 
Tian Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunopharmacology & Immunotherapy, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan, China.

Certain glycolipid antigens for natural killer T (NKT) cells can direct the
overall cytokine balance of the immune response. However, the molecular mechanism
of Th1- or Th2-biased cytokine secretion by NKT cells is still unknown.
Previously, we synthesized isoglobotrihexosylceramide (iGb3) analogues by
introducing a hydroxyl group at C4 on the ceramide portion of iGb3 to produce
4-HO-iGb3 or to further deoxylation on the terminal galactose to produce
4'''-dh-iGb3. Both modified iGb3, especially 4'''-dh-iGb3, stimulated more IFN-<U+03B3> 
production by hepatic NKT cells, and thus elicited preferential Th1 responses.
Here, we found that 4'''-dh-iGb3-loaded bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (DC) 
could significantly inhibit growth of subcutaneous melanoma and suppress lung
metastasis in C57BL/6 mice compared with unmodified iGb3-loaded DCs. In
investigating the mechanisms of this improved activity, we found that
4'''-dh-iGb3 stimulation increased STAT1 signaling by NKT cells, whereas the
phosphorylation of Th2 type cytokine-associated transcription factor STAT6
signaling was not affected. Analysis of the structures of iGb3 and 4'''-dh-iGb3
revealed that 4'''-dh-iGb3 provides greater stability and affinity between
glycolipid and CD1d or NKT TCR complex than iGb3. Thus, 4'''-dh-iGb3 can improve 
the antitumor effects of a DC-based vaccine possibly by stabilizing the
CD1d/glycolipid/TCR complex and stimulating IFN-<U+03B3> signaling of NKT cells.
Furthermore, chemical modification of iGb3 can elicit Th1-biased responses by NKT
cells, and 4'''-dh-iGb3 combined with a DC vaccine may serve as a potent new
NKT-based therapy against tumors and infectious diseases.

©2011 AACR

PMID: 21653685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Immunol. 2011 Jul 1;187(1):133-40. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002742. Epub 2011 Jun
3.

Transcriptional control of rapid recall by memory CD4 T cells.

Lai W(1), Yu M, Huang MN, Okoye F, Keegan AD, Farber DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21201, USA.

Memory T cells are distinguished from naive T cells by their rapid production of 
effector cytokines, although mechanisms for this recall response remain
undefined. In this study, we investigated transcriptional mechanisms for rapid
IFN-<U+03B3> production by Ag-specific memory CD4 T cells. In naive CD4 T cells, IFN-<U+03B3>
production only occurred after sustained Ag activation and was associated with
high expression of the T-bet transcription factor required for Th1
differentiation and with T-bet binding to the IFN-<U+03B3> promoter as assessed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis. By contrast, immediate IFN-<U+03B3> production
by Ag-stimulated memory CD4 T cells occurred in the absence of significant
nuclear T-bet expression or T-bet engagement on the IFN-<U+03B3> promoter. We identified
rapid induction of NF-<U+03BA>B transcriptional activity and increased engagement of
NF-<U+03BA>B on the IFN-<U+03B3> promoter at rapid times after TCR stimulation of memory
compared with naive CD4 T cells. Moreover, pharmacologic inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B
activity or peptide-mediated inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B p50 translocation abrogated
early memory T cell signaling and TCR-mediated effector function. Our results
reveal a molecular mechanism for memory T cell recall through enhanced NF-<U+03BA>B p50 
activation and promoter engagement, with important implications for memory T cell
modulation in vaccines, autoimmunity, and transplantation.

PMCID: PMC3131107
PMID: 21642544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19889. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019889. Epub 2011 May 19.

Expansion of CD4(+) CD25(+) and CD25(-) T-Bet, GATA-3, Foxp3 and ROR<U+03B3>t cells in
allergic inflammation, local lung distribution and chemokine gene expression.

Lu Y(1), Malmhäll C, Sjöstrand M, Rådinger M, O'Neil SE, Lötvall J, Bossios A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Krefting Research Centre, Institute of
Medicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Allergic asthma is associated with airway eosinophilia, which is regulated by
different T-effector cells. T cells express transcription factors T-bet, GATA-3, 
ROR<U+03B3>t and Foxp3, representing Th1, Th2, Th17 and Treg cells respectively. No
study has directly determined the relative presence of each of these T cell
subsets concomitantly in a model of allergic airway inflammation. In this study
we determined the degree of expansion of these T cell subsets, in the lungs of
allergen challenged mice. Cell proliferation was determined by incorporation of
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) together with 7-aminoactnomycin (7-AAD). The
immunohistochemical localisation of T cells in the lung microenvironments was
also quantified. Local expression of cytokines, chemokines and receptor genes was
measured using real-time RT-PCR array analysis in tissue sections isolated by
laser microdissection and pressure catapulting technology. Allergen exposure
increased the numbers of T-bet(+), GATA-3(+), ROR<U+03B3>t(+) and Foxp3(+) cells in
CD4(+)CD25(+) and CD4(+)CD25(-) T cells, with the greatest expansion of GATA-3(+)
cells. The majority of CD4(+)CD25(+) T-bet(+), GATA-3(+), ROR<U+03B3>t(+) and Foxp3(+)
cells had incorporated BrdU and underwent proliferation during allergen exposure.
Allergen exposure led to the accumulation of T-bet(+), GATA-3(+) and Foxp3(+)
cells in peribronchial and alveolar tissue, GATA-3(+) and Foxp3(+) cells in
perivascular tissue, and ROR<U+03B3>t(+) cells in alveolar tissue. A total of 28
cytokines, chemokines and receptor genes were altered more than 3 fold upon
allergen exposure, with expression of half of the genes claimed in all three
microenvironments. Our study shows that allergen exposure affects all T effector 
cells in lung, with a dominant of Th2 cells, but with different local cell
distribution, probably due to a distinguished local inflammatory milieu.

PMCID: PMC3098248
PMID: 21625544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nat Immunol. 2011 May 29;12(7):663-71. doi: 10.1038/ni.2046.

Transcription factor T-bet represses expression of the inhibitory receptor PD-1
and sustains virus-specific CD8+ T cell responses during chronic infection.

Kao C(1), Oestreich KJ, Paley MA, Crawford A, Angelosanto JM, Ali MA, Intlekofer 
AM, Boss JM, Reiner SL, Weinmann AS, Wherry EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Institute for Immunology, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

T cell exhaustion has a major role in failure to control chronic infection. High 
expression of inhibitory receptors, including PD-1, and the inability to sustain 
functional T cell responses contribute to exhaustion. However, the
transcriptional control of these processes remains unclear. Here we demonstrate
that the transcription factor T-bet regulated the exhaustion of CD8(+) T cells
and the expression of inhibitory receptors. T-bet directly repressed
transcription of the gene encoding PD-1 and resulted in lower expression of other
inhibitory receptors. Although a greater abundance of T-bet promoted terminal
differentiation after acute infection, high T-bet expression sustained exhausted 
CD8(+) T cells and repressed the expression of inhibitory receptors during
chronic viral infection. Persistent antigenic stimulation caused downregulation
of T-bet, which resulted in more severe exhaustion of CD8(+) T cells. Our
observations suggest therapeutic opportunities involving higher T-bet expression 
during chronic infection.

PMCID: PMC3306165
PMID: 21623380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 15;286(28):24896-905. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.245019. Epub
2011 May 25.

Functional involvement of dual specificity phosphatase 16 (DUSP16), a c-Jun
N-terminal kinase-specific phosphatase, in the regulation of T helper cell
differentiation.

Musikacharoen T(1), Bandow K, Kakimoto K, Kusuyama J, Onishi T, Yoshikai Y,
Matsuguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan.

Naïve CD4(+) T helper (Th) cells differentiate into distinct subsets of effector 
cells (Th1, Th2, Th17, and induced regulatory T cells (iTreg)) expressing
different sets of cytokines upon encounter with presented foreign antigens. It
has been well established that Th1/Th2 balance is critical for the nature of the 
following immune responses. Previous reports have demonstrated important roles of
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) in Th1/Th2 balance, whereas the regulatory
mechanisms of JNK activity in Th cells have not been elucidated. Here, we show
that dual specificity phosphatase 16 (DUSP16, also referred to as MKP-M or
MKP-7), which preferentially inactivates JNK, is selectively expressed in Th2
cells. In the in vitro differentiation assay of naïve CD4(+) cells, DUSP16
expression is up-regulated during Th2 differentiation and down-regulated during
Th1 differentiation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed the increased
acetylation of histone H3/H4 at the dusp16 gene promoter in CD4(+) T cells under 
the Th2 condition. Adenoviral transduction of naïve CD4(+) T cells with DUSP16
resulted in increased mRNA expression of IL-4 and GATA-3 in Th2 and decreased
expression of IFN<U+03B3> and T-bet in Th1 differentiation. In contrast, transduction of
a dominant negative form of DUSP16 had the reverse effects. Furthermore, upon
immunization, T cell-specific dusp16 transgenic mice produced antigen-specific
IgG2a at lower amounts, whereas DN dusp16 transgenic mice produced higher amounts
of antigen-specific IgG2a accompanied by decreased amounts of antigen-specific
IgG1 and IgE than those of control mice. Together, these data suggest the
functional role of DUSP16 in Th1/Th2 balance.

PMCID: PMC3137064
PMID: 21613215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Eur Respir J. 2011 Nov;38(5):1136-44. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00089910. Epub 2011
May 3.

T-helper cell type-1 transcription factor T-bet is upregulated in pulmonary
sarcoidosis.

Kriegova E(1), Fillerova R, Tomankova T, Hutyrova B, Mrazek F, Tichy T, Kolek V, 
du Bois RM, Petrek M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunogenomics and Proteomics, Faculty of Medicine and
Dentistry, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic.

Erratum in
    Eur Respir J. 2012 Jan;39(1):230.

Upregulation of genes for interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and CXC chemokine receptor (CXCR)3
expression, two crucial molecules in sarcoid inflammation and granuloma
formation, is directly controlled by the T-helper (Th)1 transcription factor
T-bet (T-box, expressed in T-cells). However, there is no information on T-bet
expression in sarcoidosis or its relationship with "sarcoidosis-associated"
genes. Therefore, we investigated expression of T-bet mRNA and, in parallel, a
spectrum of genes known to be involved in sarcoidosis pathogenesis. Transcripts
were determined in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells from 62 sarcoidosis
patients and 25 controls by quantitative RT-PCR; T-bet protein was localised by
immunohistochemistry. Patient's BAL cells expressed higher mRNA T-bet levels than
those of controls (mean ± sd fold change 3.64 ± 1.72; p = 0.00006). T-bet mRNA
expression did not vary between clinical phenotypes as assessed by chest
radiography stage, presence/absence of Löfgren's syndrome,
extrapulmonary/pulmonary involvement or progressing/remitting disease (p > 0.05).
T-bet mRNA expression correlated with expression of IFN-<U+03B3>, CC chemokine ligand 5,
CXC chemokine ligand (CXC)10, interleukin (IL)-2 receptor/IL-15 receptor ß, CXCR3
and CXCR6 (p < 0.01). T-bet protein was localised to alveolar macrophages and
lymphocytes, tissue multinucleated giant cells, macrophages and lymphocytes. In
pulmonary sarcoidosis, T-bet upregulation is associated with changes in
expression of IFN-<U+03B3>, CXCR3 and chemokines/receptors involved in the pathogenesis 
of sarcoidosis, which suggests a role for T-bet in this Th1 disease, including
modulation of some sarcoidosis-associated genes.

PMID: 21540308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Immunol. 2011 Jun 1;186(11):6597-606. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1004074. Epub 2011 
Apr 27.

Stat4 is critical for the balance between Th17 cells and regulatory T cells in
colitis.

Xu J(1), Yang Y, Qiu G, Lal G, Yin N, Wu Z, Bromberg JS, Ding Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vascular and Inflammatory Diseases, University of Maryland School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Th17 play a central role in autoimmune inflammatory responses. Th1 are also
necessary for autoimmune disease development. The interplay of Th1 signals and
how they coordinate with Th17 during inflammatory disease pathogenesis are
incompletely understood. In this study, by adding Stat4 deficiency to Stat6/T-bet
double knockout, we further dissected the role of Stat4 in Th1 development and
colitis induction. We showed that in the absence of the strong Th2 mediator
Stat6, neither Stat4 nor T-bet is required for IFN-<U+03B3> production and Th1
development. However, addition of Stat4 deficiency abolished colitis induced by
Stat6/T-bet double-knockout cells, despite Th1 and Th17 responses. The failure of
colitis induction by Stat4/Stat6/T-bet triple-knockout cells is largely due to
elevated Foxp3(+) regulatory T cell (Treg) development. These results highlight
the critical role of Stat4 Th1 signals in autoimmune responses in suppressing
Foxp3(+) Treg responses and altering the balance between Th17 and Tregs to favor 
autoimmune disease.

PMCID: PMC3098937
PMID: 21525389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Exp Med. 2011 May 9;208(5):1001-13. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102144. Epub 2011 Apr
25.

The lineage-defining factors T-bet and Bcl-6 collaborate to regulate Th1 gene
expression patterns.

Oestreich KJ(1), Huang AC, Weinmann AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The T-box transcription factor T-bet is important for the differentiation of
naive CD4(+) T helper cells (Th cells) into the Th1 phenotype. Much is known
about T-bet's role as a transcriptional activator, but less is known about the
mechanisms by which T-bet functionally represses alternative Th cell genetic
programs. In this study, we first identify Socs1, Socs3, and Tcf7 (TCF-1) as gene
targets that are negatively regulated by T-bet. Significantly, T-bet's role in
the repression of these genes is through a direct interaction with their
promoters. Consistent with this, we identified two T-bet DNA-binding elements in 
the Socs1 promoter that are functionally used to down-regulate transcription in
primary Th1 cells. Importantly, T-bet's novel role in transcriptional repression 
is because of its ability to physically associate with, and functionally recruit,
the transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 to a subset of promoters. Furthermore, T-bet 
functionally recruits Bcl-6 to the Ifng locus in late stages of Th1
differentiation to repress its activity, possibly to prevent the overproduction
of IFN-<U+03B3>, which could result in autoimmunity. Collectively, these data establish 
a novel mechanism for T-bet-mediated gene repression in which two
lineage-defining transcription factors, one a classical activator and one a
repressor, collaborate to promote and properly regulate Th1 development.

PMCID: PMC3092354
PMID: 21518797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Apr;19(2):546-9.

[Expression of T-bet and its regulation on CD4(+) T cell polarization in aplastic
anemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang HL(1), Wei W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shanxi Medical University Second Clinical Medical
College, Taiyuan 030001, Shanxi Province, China.

Aplastic anemia (AA) is an autoimmune disease which take hematopoietic tissue as 
target cells. T lymphocyte-mediated cellular immune abnormality plays a key role 
in the pathogenesis of AA. Increase and hyperfunction of Thl lymphocytes are main
feature of AA disease. The recent studies indicated that T-bet is Th1
cell-specific transcription factor, is crucial factor for polarization of CD4(+) 
T lymphocytes to Th1. High expression of T-bet in AA patients is an important
link in pathogenesis of AA. In this article, T-bet and its relation with AA,
including expression of T-bet in AA patients, the regulation of T-bet on
polarization of CD4(+) T lymphocytes are reviewed.

PMID: 21518527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nat Immunol. 2011 Jun;12(6):551-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.2030. Epub 2011 Apr 24.

Modulation of cytokine receptors by IL-2 broadly regulates differentiation into
helper T cell lineages.

Liao W(1), Lin JX, Wang L, Li P, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2011 Jun;12(6): 2 p following 559.

Helper T cells control host defense against pathogens. The receptors for
interleukin 12 (IL-12), IL-4 and IL-6 are required for differentiation into the
T(H)1, T(H)2 and T(H)17 subsets of helper T cells, respectively. IL-2 signaling
via the transcription factor STAT5 controls T(H)2 differentiation by regulating
both the T(H)2 cytokine gene cluster and expression of Il4ra, the gene encoding
the IL-4 receptor a-chain. Here we show that IL-2 regulated T(H)1
differentiation, inducing STAT5-dependent expression of the IL-12 receptor
ß2-chain (IL-12Rß2) and the transcription factor T-bet, with impaired human T(H)1
differentiation when IL-2 was blocked. T(H)1 differentiation was also impaired in
mouse Il2(-/-) T cells but was restored by IL-12Rß2 expression. Consistent with
the inhibition of T(H)17 differentiation by IL-2, treatment with IL-2 resulted in
lower expression of the genes encoding the IL-6 receptor a-chain (Il6ra) and the 
IL-6 signal transducer gp130 (encoded by Il6st), and retroviral transduction of
Il6st augmented T(H)17 differentiation even when IL-2 was present. Thus, IL-2
influences helper T cell differentiation by modulating the expression of cytokine
receptors to help specify and maintain differentiated states.

PMCID: PMC3304099
PMID: 21516110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Mar;16(3):531-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01329.x.

IL-10 production in non-small cell lung carcinoma patients is regulated by ERK,
P38 and COX-2.

Patel S(1), Vetale S, Teli P, Mistry R, Chiplunkar S.

Author information: 
(1)Chiplunkar Lab, Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research and Education in
Cancer (ACTREC), Tata Memorial Centre, Navi Mumbai, India.

Immune dysfunction is hallmark of patients with non-small cell lung carcinoma
(NSCLC). The molecular mechanism involved in COX-2- and PGE2-mediated production 
of immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10 is not well-understood. Our study addresses
the involvement of T cell downstream signalling intermediates, cytokines (IL-10
and IFN-<U+03B3>) and their transcription factors (T-bet and GATA-3) in COX-2-mediated
regulation of lymphocyte functions in NSCLC patients. In comparison to healthy
individual, a marked decrease in lymphocyte proliferation to anti-CD3 MAb was
observed in NSCLC patients by thymidine incorporation assay. Using flow
cytometry, decrease in intracellular calcium release with increase in reactive
oxygen species was observed in lymphocytes of NSCLC patients. These patients
showed increased IL-10 and PGE2 with reduced IFN-<U+03B3> production by ELISA. Results
demonstrated defect in regulation of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 as
analysed by Western blotting (WB), immunoprecipitation and EMSA. Overexpression
of p-p38, p-ERK and COX-2 were observed with diminished p-JNK by WB. IL-10/IFN-<U+03B3> 
levels were found to be differentially regulated via p38 and ERK
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways in cooperation with COX-2.
Inhibition of these pathways using selective inhibitors lead to increased
lymphocyte proliferative response to anti-CD3 MAb and IFN-<U+03B3> production with
decrease in IL-10 production. Studies showed involvement of ERK, p38 and COX-2
pathways in high IL-10 production, driven by lung tumour derived PGE2. The
selective COX-2 inhibitor rofecoxib showed ability to alter the cytokine balance 
by affecting regulation of T-bet and GATA-3 transcription factors.

© 2012 Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3822929
PMID: 21507199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Immunity. 2011 Apr 22;34(4):492-504. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.03.017. Epub 2011
Apr 14.

Asymmetric proteasome segregation as a mechanism for unequal partitioning of the 
transcription factor T-bet during T lymphocyte division.

Chang JT(1), Ciocca ML, Kinjyo I, Palanivel VR, McClurkin CE, Dejong CS, Mooney
EC, Kim JS, Steinel NC, Oliaro J, Yin CC, Florea BI, Overkleeft HS, Berg LJ,
Russell SM, Koretzky GA, Jordan MS, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. changj@ucsd.edu

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Jun;11(6):367.

Polarized segregation of proteins in T cells is thought to play a role in diverse
cellular functions including signal transduction, migration, and directed
secretion of cytokines. Persistence of this polarization can result in asymmetric
segregation of fate-determining proteins during cell division, which may enable a
T cell to generate diverse progeny. Here, we provide evidence that a
lineage-determining transcription factor, T-bet, underwent asymmetric
organization in activated T cells preparing to divide and that it was unequally
partitioned into the two daughter cells. This unequal acquisition of T-bet
appeared to result from its asymmetric destruction during mitosis by virtue of
concomitant asymmetric segregation of the proteasome. These results suggest a
mechanism by which a cell may unequally localize cellular activities during
division, thereby imparting disparity in the abundance of cell fate regulators in
the daughter cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3088519
PMID: 21497118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2011 Apr;144(4):506-13. doi:
10.1177/0194599810396133. Epub 2011 Feb 24.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma agonist induces regulatory T
cells in a murine model of allergic rhinitis.

Wang W(1), Zhu Z, Zhu B, Ma Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Shanghai East Hospital,
Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
(PPAR)-<U+03B3> agonist on the induction of regulatory T cells (Tregs) in a murine model
of allergic rhinitis.
STUDY DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial.
SETTING: Animal study.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: BALB/c mice that received ovalbumin sensitization and
challenge served as the ovalbumin group (n = 6). Two separate groups of 6 mice
received intragastric administration with PPAR-<U+03B3> agonist pioglitazone (30
mg/kg/d) or pioglitazone plus PPAR-<U+03B3> antagonist GW9662 (0.5 mg/d) before each
ovalbumin challenge. The control group (n = 6) was treated with drug vehicle
alone. Various allergic responses were assessed. Real-time polymerase chain
reaction was performed to investigate the mRNA expression of forkhead box P3
(Foxp3), T-bet, and GATA-3. Flow cytometry was used to determine the percentage
of Tregs.
RESULTS: Mice developed typical pathophysiological allergic rhinitis features
after the ovalbumin challenge. The frequencies of sneezing and scratching were
significantly decreased by pioglitazone treatment (P < .0001). Eosinophils
infiltration and the levels of interleukin-5 and interferon-<U+03B3> in nasal cavity
lavage fluid and sera immunoglobulin E were also markedly decreased by
pioglitazone (P < .001). The expression of Foxp3 mRNA and the population of Tregs
were significantly increased by pioglitazone (P < .05). Cotreatment with GW9662
reversed the anti-inflammatory effects of pioglitazone. The effects of PPAR-<U+03B3>
agonist on Foxp3 mRNA expression and Tregs induction were abrogated by
administration of GW9662.
CONCLUSION: PPAR-<U+03B3> agonist attenuates upper airway allergic inflammation in a
PPAR-<U+03B3>-dependent fashion, and the beneficial effects of pioglitazone in airway
allergic inflammation may be mediated by induction of Tregs.

PMID: 21493225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Jul;41(7):2086-96. doi: 10.1002/eji.201041130.

Rapamycin-sensitive signals control TCR/CD28-driven Ifng, Il4 and Foxp3
transcription and promoter region methylation.

Tomasoni R(1), Basso V, Pilipow K, Sitia G, Saccani S, Agresti A, Mietton F,
Natoli G, Colombetti S, Mondino A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Transplantation and Infectious Diseases, San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) controls T-cell differentiation in
response to polarizing cytokines. We previously found that mTOR blockade by
rapamycin (RAPA) delays the G1-S cell cycle transition and lymphocyte
proliferation. Here, we report that both mTOR complex 1 and mTOR complex 2 are
readily activated following TCR/CD28 engagement and are critical for early
expression of Ifng, Il4 and Foxp3, and for effector T cell differentiation in the
absence of polarizing cytokines. While inhibition of mTOR complex 1 and cell
division were evident at low doses of RAPA, inhibition of mTOR complex 2, Ifng,
Il4 and Foxp3 expression, and T-cell polarization required higher doses and more 
prolonged treatments. We found that while T-bet and GATA3 were readily induced
following TCR/CD28 engagement, administration of RAPA delayed their expression,
and interfered with the loss of DNA methylation within Ifng and Il4 promoter
regions. In contrast, RAPA prevented activation-dependent DNA methylation of the 
Foxp3 promoter favoring Foxp3 expression. As a result, RAPA-cultured cells lacked
immediate effector functions and instead were enriched for IL-2+ cells. We
propose that mTOR-signaling, by timing the expression of critical transcription
factors and DNA methylation of proximal promoter regions, regulates
transcriptional competence at immunologically relevant sites and hence lymphocyte
differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21480212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mucosal Immunol. 2011 Sep;4(5):574-83. doi: 10.1038/mi.2011.18. Epub 2011 Apr 6.

The endogenous cannabinoid system in the gut of patients with inflammatory bowel 
disease.

Di Sabatino A(1), Battista N, Biancheri P, Rapino C, Rovedatti L, Astarita G,
Vanoli A, Dainese E, Guerci M, Piomelli D, Pender SL, MacDonald TT, Maccarrone M,
Corazza GR.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo, Centro
per lo Studio e la Cura delle Malattie Infiammatorie Croniche Intestinali,
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. a.disabatino@smatteo.pv.it

Erratum in
    Mucosal Immunol. 2011 Jul4(4):479.

Activation of cannabinoid receptors (CBs) by endocannabinoids impacts on a number
of gastrointestinal functions. Recent data indicate that CB1 agonists improve
2,4-dinitrobenzene sulfonic acid-induced colitis in mice, thus suggesting a role 
for the endocannabinoid agonist anandamide (AEA) in protecting the gut against
inflammation. We here examined the gut endocannabinoid system in inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD) patients, and investigated the ex vivo and in vitro effects
of the non-hydrolysable AEA analog methanandamide (MAEA) on the mucosal
proinflammatory response. The content of AEA, but not of 2-arachidonoyl-glycerol 
and N-palmitoylethanolamine, was significantly lower in inflamed than uninflamed 
IBD mucosa, and this was paralleled by lower activity of the AEA-synthesizing
enzyme N-acyl-phosphatidylethanolamine-specific phospholipase D and higher
activity of the AEA-degrading enzyme fatty acid amide hydrolase. MAEA
significantly downregulated interferon-<U+03B3> and tumor necrosis factor-a secretion by
both organ culture biopsies and lamina propria mononuclear cells. Although these 
results are promising, further studies are needed to determine the role of
cannabinoid pathways in gut inflammation.

PMID: 21471961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Jun;41(6):1606-18. doi: 10.1002/eji.201041089. Epub 2011 May 
10.

Soluble flagellin, FliC, induces an Ag-specific Th2 response, yet promotes
T-bet-regulated Th1 clearance of Salmonella typhimurium infection.

Bobat S(1), Flores-Langarica A, Hitchcock J, Marshall JL, Kingsley RA, Goodall M,
Gil-Cruz C, Serre K, Leyton DL, Letran SE, Gaspal F, Chester R, Chamberlain JL,
Dougan G, López-Macías C, Henderson IR, Alexander J, MacLennan IC, Cunningham AF.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Immune Regulation, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

Clearance of disseminated Salmonella infection requires bacterial-specific Th1
cells and IFN-<U+03B3> production, and Th1-promoting vaccines are likely to help control
these infections. Consequently, vaccine design has focused on developing
Th1-polarizing adjuvants or Ag that naturally induce Th1 responses. In this
study, we show that, in mice, immunization with soluble, recombinant FliC protein
flagellin (sFliC) induces Th2 responses as evidenced by Ag-specific GATA-3, IL-4 
mRNA, and protein induction in CD62L(lo) CD4(+) T cells without associated IFN-<U+03B3> 
production. Despite these Th2 features, sFliC immunization can enhance the
development of protective Th1 immunity during subsequent Salmonella infection in 
an Ab-independent, T-cell-dependent manner. Salmonella infection in
sFliC-immunized mice resulted in augmented Th1 responses, with greater bacterial 
clearance and increased numbers of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing CD4(+) T cells, despite the
early induction of Th2 features to sFliC. The augmented Th1 immunity after sFliC 
immunization was regulated by T-bet although T-bet is dispensable for primary
responses to sFliC. These findings show that there can be flexibility in T-cell
responses to some subunit vaccines. These vaccines may induce Th2-type immunity
during primary immunization yet promote Th1-dependent responses during later
infection. This suggests that designing Th1-inducing subunit vaccines may not
always be necessary since this can occur naturally during subsequent infection.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21469112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Med Rep. 2011 Jul-Aug;4(4):663-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.469. Epub 2011 Mar
31.

Correlation between the ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 and the levels of IL-4 and IFN-<U+03B3> in
patients with allergic asthma.

Yong J(1), Chen GQ, Huang B, Wu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Dongnan University, Jiangyin, Jiangsu,
People's Republic of China. jiyongmyp@126.com

The aim of this study was to investigate the ratio of the transcription factors
T-bet/GATA-3 in patients with allergic asthma. Forty-seven individuals with
allergic asthma and 47 healthy control individuals provided 5 ml of
anticoagulated peripheral venous blood. Lymphocytes in peripheral blood were
isolated by Ficoll and treated with phytohemagglutinin (PHA) at a final
concentration of 100 mg/l for 48 h. Interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and interleukin-4 (IL-4)
levels were detected using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and the 
mRNA levels of both T-bet and GATA-3 were detected using reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). IFN-<U+03B3> levels in the lymphocytes of asthmatic 
patients were lower than those of the control group (P<0.05) and were positively 
correlated with the ratio of T-bet/GATA-3. By contrast, IL-4 levels were
significantly higher in asthmatic patients than in the control group (P<0.01) and
were negatively correlated with the ratio of T-bet/GATA-3. In conclusion, the
ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 can be used as an objective indicator of immune imbalance
in patients with allergic asthma.

PMID: 21468546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Apr 22;407(4):703-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.03.084. Epub 2011 Mar 23.

Intracellular free zinc up-regulates IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet essential for Th1
differentiation in Con-A stimulated HUT-78 cells.

Bao B(1), Prasad AS, Beck FW, Bao GW, Singh T, Ali S, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA. bbao@med.wayne.edu

Zinc deficiency impairs cellular immunity. Up-regulation of mRNA levels of IFN-<U+03B3>,
IL-12Rß2, and T-bet are essential for Th(1) differentiation. We hypothesized that
zinc increases Th(1) differentiation via up-regulation of IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet
expression. To test this hypothesis, we used zinc-deficient and zinc-sufficient
HUT-78 cells (a Th(0) cell line) under different condition of stimulation in this
study. We also used TPEN, a zinc-specific chelator, to decrease the
bioavailability of zinc in the cells. We measured intracellular free zinc,
cytokines, and the mRNAs of T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3>, and IL-12Rß2. In this study, we show
that in zinc-sufficient HUT-78 cells, mRNA levels of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-12Rß2, and T-bet
in PMA/PHA-stimulated cells were increased in comparison to zinc-deficient cells.
Although intracellular free zinc was increased slightly in PMA/PHA-stimulated
cells, Con-A-stimulated cells in 5µM zinc medium showed a greater sustained
increase in intracellular free zinc in comparison to cells incubated in 1µM zinc.
The cells pre-incubated with TPEN showed decreased mRNA levels of IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet
mRNAs in comparison to cells without TPEN incubation. We conclude that
stimulation of cells by Con-A via TCR, release intracellular free zinc which
functions as a signal molecule for generation of IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet, and IL-12Rß2
mRNAs required for Th(1) cell differentiation. These results suggest that zinc
increase Th(1) cell differentiation by up-regulation of IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet, and
IL-12Rbß2 mRNAs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3142693
PMID: 21439265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Reprod Immunol. 2011 Apr;89(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jri.2010.11.008. Epub 2011
Mar 15.

Regulated suppression of NF-<U+03BA>B throughout pregnancy maintains a favourable
cytokine environment necessary for pregnancy success.

Hadfield KA(1), McCracken SA, Ashton AW, Nguyen TG, Morris JM.

Author information: 
(1)Kolling Institute of Medical Research, Sydney University, Royal North Shore
Hospital, St. Leonards, NSW, Australia.

Th1 immune responses are suppressed in pregnancy, but the temporal regulation and
the mechanism(s) underlying this immune alteration are unknown. We assessed the
expression of Th1 cytokines IFN<U+03B3>, IL-2 and TNFa in response to stimulation in
isolated T-cells from pregnant women throughout gestation. Using flow cytometry
we demonstrated an early and sustained reduction in IFN<U+03B3> and IL-2 production in
CD3+ T-cells, but TNFa levels are not reduced until the third trimester. We
assessed the expression of NF-<U+03BA>B and T-bet, transcription factors that play a
central role in Th1 immune responses, throughout pregnancy. In isolated T-cells
levels of available p65 were suppressed early in pregnancy, but T-bet expression 
was suppressed only in the third trimester. In contrast to p65, T-bet expression 
was transcriptionally regulated, with diminished T-bet mRNA in third-trimester
samples. Re-expression of p65 in T-cells from third-trimester pregnant women
resulted in an induction of T-bet expression in response to PMA stimulation and a
concomitant increase in the production of IL-2 and IFN<U+03B3>. The suppressive effect
of pregnancy was ameliorated as early as 72h post-partum when p65 levels returned
to normal as did the level of inducible IFN<U+03B3> and IL-2. TNFa levels in post-partum
women were significantly increased relative to non-pregnant controls. The
pregnancy-specific suppression of p65 and subsequent loss of cytokine production 
suggest that this transcription factor acts specifically to regulate the cytokine
environment that is required for pregnancy success.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21411157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Immunotherapy. 2011 Mar;3(3):435-41. doi: 10.2217/imt.10.111.

More than just a T-box: the role of T-bet as a possible biomarker and therapeutic
target in autoimmune diseases.

Ji N(1), Sosa RA, Forsthuber TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, TX 78249, USA.

T-bet was initially described as a T-box transcription factor with an essential
role in orchestrating Th1 cell differentiation. Subsequently, it was determined
that T-bet controls the expression of numerous cytokines and their receptors,
adhesion molecules and chemokine receptors, and therefore determines the
differentiation and development status of many types of immune cells. The
critical role of T-bet in autoimmune diseases, particularly multiple sclerosis
and its animal model experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, implicates it as 
a potential biomarker for pathogenic T cells as well as a therapeutic drug
target.

PMCID: PMC3160828
PMID: 21395384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Clin Periodontol. 2011 Jun;38(6):509-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-051X.2011.01712.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 11.

Effect of non-surgical periodontal therapy on the levels of Th17/Th1/Th2
cytokines and their transcription factors in Chinese chronic periodontitis
patients.

Zhao L(1), Zhou Y, Xu Y, Sun Y, Li L, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stomatology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

AIM: A new subset of CD4(+) T cells, Th17, has been recently discovered
independent from Th1/Th2 paradigm. The aim of this study was to investigate the
effects of non-surgical periodontal therapy on the expression of Th17/Th1/Th2
cytokines and transcription factors, and Th17 cell vibration in Chinese chronic
periodontitis patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The levels of Th17/Th1/Th2 cytokines (IL-17,
IL-21/IFN-<U+03B3>/IL-4) in gingival crevicular fluid from 30 chronic periodontitis
patients before and after treatment were determined by ELISA. The expression of
transcription factors (RORC, T-bet and GATA-3) in peripheral blood was measured
by real-time PCR, and the levels of Th17 cells in CD4(+) T cells were determined 
by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: After treatment, the levels of IL-17 and IL-21 were down-regulated
(P<0.05), and IL-4 was increased (P<0.05), but there were no differences in the
level of IFN-<U+03B3> (P>0.05). Correspondingly, the expression of RORC was decreased
1.99-fold (P<0.05), and GATA-3 was increased 1.76-fold (P<0.05). However, there
were no differences in the level of T-bet (P>0.05). Moreover, the quantity of
Th17 cells in peripheral blood was decreased (P<0.05), especially IL-17(+)
IFN-<U+03B3>(+) subgroup.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that Th17 cells play a destructive role in the
immune balance of periodontitis, and the effect of Th1 cells is not significant, 
while Th2 cells have a protective effect.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21392046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Blood. 2011 Apr 28;117(17):4511-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-312264. Epub 2011
Mar 9.

Monocytes control natural killer cell differentiation to effector phenotypes.

Soderquest K(1), Powell N, Luci C, van Rooijen N, Hidalgo A, Geissmann F, Walzer 
T, Lord GM, Martín-Fontecha A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Transplantation, King's College London,
London, UK.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2013 Sep 26;122(13):2290.

Natural killer (NK) cells play a major role in immunologic surveillance of
cancer. Whether NK-cell subsets have specific roles during antitumor responses
and what the signals are that drive their terminal maturation remain unclear.
Using an in vivo model of tumor immunity, we show here that CD11b(hi)CD27(low) NK
cells migrate to the tumor site to reject major histocompatibility complex class 
I negative tumors, a response that is severely impaired in Txb21(-/-) mice. The
phenotypical analysis of Txb21-deficient mice shows that, in the absence of
Txb21, NK-cell differentiation is arrested specifically at the CD11b(hi)CD27(hi) 
stage, resulting in the complete absence of terminally differentiated
CD11b(hi)CD27(low) NK cells. Adoptive transfer experiments and radiation bone
marrow chimera reveal that a Txb21(+/+) environment rescues the CD11b(hi)CD27(hi)
to CD11b(hi)CD27(low) transition of Txb21(-/-) NK cells. Furthermore, in vivo
depletion of myeloid cells and in vitro coculture experiments demonstrate that
spleen monocytes mediate the terminal differentiation of peripheral NK cells in a
Txb21- and IL-15Ra-dependent manner. Together, these data reveal a novel,
unrecognized role for Txb21 expression in monocytes in promoting NK-cell
development and help appreciate how various NK-cell subsets are generated and
participate in antitumor immunity.

PMID: 21389319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Neuroimmunol. 2011 Apr;233(1-2):249-53. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2011.01.012.
Epub 2011 Mar 1.

RORC and Foxp3 axis in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with neuro-Behçet's
disease.

Hamzaoui K(1), Borhani Haghighi A, Ghorbel IB, Houman H.

Author information: 
(1)Tunis El Manar University, Medicine Faculty of Tunis, Homeostasis and Cell
Dysfunction Unit Research UR/99/08-40, Tunisia. kamel.hamzaoui@gmail.com

Neurological manifestations are present in 5% to 30% of patients with Behçet's
disease (BD). Neuro-Behçet's Disease (NBD) is hypothetically caused by T helper
(Th) cells, which development is dependent on the expression of lineage-specific 
transcription factors. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) mRNA expression of TBX21, GATA3,
RORC, FOXP3 and EBI3 were assessed in 18 NBD patients and 26 controls disease [16
noninflammatory neurological disease (NIND) and 10 headache attributed to
Behçet's disease (HaBD)]. Expression of TBX21 (Th1), RORC (Th17) and Foxp3 (Treg)
were increased in NBD patients compared to HaBD and NIND patients. EBI3 and
Th2-associated GATA3 expressions were found to be decreased (P<0.0001 and
P<0.0001) in NBD patients. Analysis of transcription factor ratios, revealed an
increase in the RORC/FOXP3 and TBX21/GATA3 ratios in NBD patients (P<0.0001;
P<0.0003). Our findings indicate that both Th1 and Th17 mRNA expressions
involving a possible impairment of Treg cells. This might play a role in CSF-NBD 
inflammation, permitting activation of harmful T cell subpopulations. The
TBX21/GATA3 and RORC/FOXP3 ratios dysregulations in NBD are consistent with those
reported in other inflammatory diseases and indicating the plasticity existing
between Th1, Th17 and Treg cells during inflammation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21367463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Feb;19(1):197-201.

[Conventional dose of prednisone regulates Th-associated gene expression in de
novo ITP patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Li F(1), Wu BT, Wang WG, Zhan YX, Zou SH, Cheng YF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200031, China.

This study was aimed to investigate the T cell (helper T cells) immune status in 
ITP patients and its relation with therapeutic response. 20 de novo ITP patients 
were enrolled (8 males, 12 females) with a median age of 41 (20 to 81). Real-time
RT-PCR method was used to measure the gene expression of Th cells including
T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3>, GATA-3, TGF-ß, Foxp3, IL-2, IL-4 in PBMNC of ITP patients before
and after conventional dose of prednisone therapy [1 mg/(kg·d)] and in PBMNC of
20 normal controls. The results showed that T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-2 were
significantly over-expressed in PBMNC of ITP patients before treatment compared
with that in normal controls (p < 0.01), and compared with that before treatment,
T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3>, and IL-2 were markedly down-regulated in ITP patients after
treatment. Before treatment, the expressions of Foxp3, TGF-ß, GATA3 and IL-4 in
ITP patients did not show difference from normal controls, while after treatment 
Foxp3 were more up-regulated than that before treatment (p < 0.05). After
treatment, TGF-ß expression showed a different pattern between old and young
patients. TGF-ß expression was down-regulated (p < 0.05) among ITP patients
younger than 60, while up-regulated in older patients. It is concluded that there
is an imbalance of Th1/Th2/Treg cytokines in ITP patients, which can be reversed 
by glucocorticoid treatment. The conventional dose of glucocorticoid may be
regarded as effective therapy for de novo ITP patients, it may correlate with
improvement of imbalance between Th1/The2/Treg cytokines.

PMID: 21362251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Infect Dis. 2011 May 15;203(10):1464-73. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir035. Epub 2011 
Feb 28.

Differential changes in expression of intestinal antimicrobial peptide genes
during Ascaris lumbricoides infection in Zambian adults do not respond to
helminth eradication.

Kapulu MC(1), Simuyandi M, Sianongo S, Mutale M, Katubulushi M, Kelly P.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Sciences Department, School of Natural Sciences, University of
Zambia, Lusaka.

BACKGROUND: Intestinal helminthiasis modulates immune responses to vaccines and
environmental allergens. To explore the impact on intestinal host defense, we
assessed expression of antimicrobial peptide genes, together with T cell subset
markers and cytokines, in patients with ascariasis before and after treatment.
METHODS: Case patients (n = 27) and control subjects (n = 44) underwent
enteroscopy for collection of jejunal biopsy specimens, which were used in
quantitative, real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction for a
range of host defense genes; blood samples were also analyzed simultaneously.
RESULTS: The level of gene expression (mRNA) of HD5, hBD1, and LL-37 was lower in
case patients than in control subjects, and the level of expression of HD6 was
increased. However, after successful eradication, there was no trend to values
seen in control subjects. Helminthiasis was associated with increased intestinal 
expression of the Th1 genes T-bet and interferon-<U+03B3>. In peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs), a mixed profile of T cell markers and cytokines was
increased. Ascaris-induced down-regulation of HD5 was observed in individuals
with higher ROR<U+03B3>t expression in PBMCs, but we found no evidence that this was
mediated by circulating interleukin-22.
CONCLUSIONS: Human ascariasis was associated with changes in antimicrobial
peptide gene expression and immunological markers. Such changes may have
implications for susceptibility to infectious disease and responsiveness to oral 
vaccines in tropical populations.

PMCID: PMC3080889
PMID: 21357944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Immunol Lett. 2011 Jun 30;137(1-2):70-7. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2011.02.020. Epub
2011 Feb 24.

Oxygen tension regulates NK cells differentiation from hematopoietic stem cells
in vitro.

Yun S(1), Lee SH, Yoon SR, Myung PK, Choi I.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Therapy Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

Natural killer (NK) cells are differentiated from hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
which are located at the lowest end of an oxygen gradient within the bone marrow 
(BM). In this report, we investigated whether oxygen tension could affect NK cell
differentiation from hematopoietic cells in vitro. We found that hypoxia led to
an inhibition of differentiation in NK cells, and increased oxygen supply
alleviated this inhibition and restored NK cell differentiation under hypoxic
condition. Hypoxia-treated cells demonstrated reduced mRNA expression of
transcription factors (TFs) that have important roles in NK cell differentiation,
such as EOMES, T-bet, GATA-3 and ETS-1. Moreover, hypoxia-pretreated cells
recovered mRNA expression of TFs when the oxygen tension was changed to normoxia.
Our findings suggest that oxygen tension modulates in vitro differentiation of NK
cells through the regulation of TF expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21354208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Hum Pathol. 2011 Sep;42(9):1319-28. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.11.022. Epub 2011
Feb 16.

Transcription factors engaged in development of NK cells are commonly expressed
in nasal NK/T-cell lymphomas.

Zhang S(1), Li T, Zhang B, Nong L, Aozasa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 100034,
China.

Extranodal natural killer/T (NK/T)-cell lymphoma, nasal type, is a prevailing
tumor in Asia with distinct clinical, pathologic, and immunophenotypic features. 
Previous study revealed amplification and overexpression of T-bet in extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type. As a transcription factor, T-bet functionally
cooperates with its family member eomesodermin (EOMES) or ETS family members
(ETS-1 and MEF) and positively regulates the development and cytotoxic function
of natural killer (NK) cells. To evaluate their role in extranodal NK/T-cell
lymphoma, nasal type, the expression status and clinical relevance of these genes
were analyzed in 40 cases of this tumor by in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry. Tumor cells in all 40 cases expressed cytotoxic granule
proteins, of which 39 contained the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) genome. Two (8.7%)
of 23 cases showed T-cell receptor (TCR) <U+03B3> gene clonal rearrangement, confirming 
cytotoxic T lineage of cell derivation. The expression level of T-bet as revealed
by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry was high in extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, (82.5% and 100%) and peripheral T-cell lymphomas 
(94.4% and 72.2%) but not in mature B-cell lymphomas in our control group (0% and
0%). By in situ hybridization, high expression of EOMES (80.0%), ETS-1 (82.5%),
and MEF (62.5%) was observed in cases of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal
type, but none of the control groups and cases expressed these molecules.
Coexpression of T-bet and EOMES, ETS-1, or MEF was found in 30 (75%), 25 (62.5%),
and 21 cases (52.5%), respectively. The frequency of coexpression of T-bet and
EOMES was significantly higher than that of other genes. Transcription factors
engaged in NK-cell development are highly expressed in extranodal NK/T-cell
lymphoma, nasal type, suggesting a role in the biologic behavior of this tumor.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21329961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Immunol Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;89(5):640-9. doi: 10.1038/icb.2010.144. Epub 2011 Feb
15.

Chromatin remodeling resets the immune system to protect against autoimmune
diabetes in mice.

Patel T(1), Patel V, Singh R, Jayaraman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Epigenetic alteration of the genome has been shown to provide palliative effects 
in mouse models of certain human autoimmune diseases. We have investigated
whether chromatin remodeling could provide protection against autoimmune diabetes
in NOD mice. Treatment of female mice during the transition from prediabetic to
diabetic stage (18-24 weeks of age) with the well-characterized histone
deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A effectively reduced the incidence of
diabetes. However, similar treatment of overtly diabetic mice during the same
time period failed to reverse the disease. Protection against diabetes was
accompanied by histone hyperacetylation in pancreas and spleen, enhanced
frequency of CD4(+) CD62L(+) cells in the spleen, reduction in cellular
infiltration of islets, restoration of normoglycemia and glucose-induced insulin 
release by beta cells. Activation of splenic T lymphocytes derived from protected
mice in vitro with pharmacological agents that bypass the antigen receptor or
immobilized anti-CD3 antibody resulted in enhanced expression of Ifng mRNA and
protein without altering the expression of Il4, Il17, Il18, Inos and Tnfa genes
nor the secretion of IL-2, IL-4, IL-17 and TNF-a proteins. Consistently,
expression of the transcription factor involved in Ifng transcription, Tbet/Tbx21
but not Gata3 and Rorgt, respectively, required for the transcription of Il4 and 
Il17, was upregulated in activated splenocytes of protected mice. These results
indicate that chromatin remodeling can lead to amelioration of diabetes by using 
multiple mechanisms including differential gene transcription. Thus, epigenetic
modulation could be a novel therapeutic approach to block the transition from
benign to frank diabetes.

PMID: 21321581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Immunol. 2011 Mar 15;186(6):3373-82. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003216. Epub 2011
Feb 9.

Epigenetic changes at Il12rb2 and Tbx21 in relation to plasticity behavior of
Th17 cells.

Bending D(1), Newland S, Krejcí A, Phillips JM, Bray S, Cooke A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QP, United
Kingdom.

Plasticity within Th cell populations may play a role in enabling site-specific
immune responses to infections while limiting tissue destruction. Epigenetic
processes are fundamental to such plasticity; however, to date, most
investigations have focused on in vitro-generated T cells. In this study, we have
examined the molecular mechanisms underpinning murine Th17 plasticity in vivo by 
assessing H3K4 and H3K27 trimethylation marks at Tbx21, Rorc, Il17a, Ifng, and
Il12rb2 loci in purified ex vivo-isolated and in vitro-generated Th17 cells.
Although both populations had largely comparable epigenetic signatures, including
bivalent marks at Tbx21, freshly isolated ex vivo Th17 cells displayed restricted
expression from Il12rb2 due to the presence of repressive chromatin
modifications. This receptor, however, could be upregulated on isolated ex vivo
Th17 cells after in vitro activation or by in vivo immunization and was augmented
by the presence of IFN-<U+03B3>. Such activated cells could then be deviated toward a
Th1-like profile. We show that IL-12 stimulation removes H3K27 trimethylation
modifications at Tbx21/T-bet leading to enhanced T-bet expression with in vitro
Th17 cells. Our study reveals important potential phenotypic differences between 
ex vivo- and in vitro-generated Th17 cells and provides mechanistic insight into 
Th17 cell plasticity.

PMID: 21307296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Br J Dermatol. 2011 Jun;164(6):1228-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10240.x.
Epub 2011 May 17.

Influence of the Notch system in the therapeutic response of American tegumentary
leishmaniasis.

Rodrigues KM(1), Oliveira MP, Maretti-Mira AC, Oliveira-Neto MP, Mattos MS, Silva
L, Soares DA, Dolci EL, Perico RA, Pirmez C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório Interdisciplinar de Pesquisas Médicas, and Instituto Oswaldo Cruz,
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Av. Brasil 4365, 21045-900 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The evolution and therapeutic outcome of American tegumentary
leishmaniasis (ATL) depend upon many factors, including the balance between Th1
and Th2 cytokines to control parasite multiplication and lesion extension. Other 
cytokines known for their role in inflammatory processes such as interleukin
IL-17 or IL-18 as well as factors controlling keratinocyte differentiation and
the inflammatory process in the skin, like the Notch system, could also be
involved in the disease outcome. Notch receptors are a group of transmembrane
proteins that regulate cell fate decisions during development and adulthood in
many tissues, including keratinocyte differentiation and T-cell lineage
commitment, depending on their activation by specific groups of ligands
(Delta-like or Jagged).
OBJECTIVES: To compare the in situ expression of Notch system proteins
(receptors, ligands and transcriptional factors) and cytokines possibly involved 
in the disease outcome (IL-17, IL-18, IL-23 and transforming growth factor-ß) in 
ATL cutaneous and mucosal lesions, according to the response to therapy with
N-methyl glucamine.
METHODS: Cutaneous and mucosal biopsies obtained from patients prior to therapy
with N-methyl glucamine were analysed by immunohistochemistry and real-time
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Notch receptors and Delta-like ligands were found increased in patients 
with ATL, particularly those with poor response to therapy or with mucosal
lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: The increase of Notch receptors and Delta-like ligands in patients
with a poor response to treatment suggests that these patients would require a
more aggressive therapeutic approach or at least a more thorough and rigorous
follow-up.

© 2011 The Authors. BJD © 2011 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 21299543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Blood. 2011 Apr 7;117(14):3799-808. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-322727. Epub 2011 
Feb 2.

Increased HIV-specific CD8+ T-cell cytotoxic potential in HIV elite controllers
is associated with T-bet expression.

Hersperger AR(1), Martin JN, Shin LY, Sheth PM, Kovacs CM, Cosma GL, Makedonas G,
Pereyra F, Walker BD, Kaul R, Deeks SG, Betts MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania, 3610 Hamilton Walk,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Recent data suggest that CD8+ T-cell effector activity is an important component 
in the control of HIV replication in elite controllers (ECs). One critical
element of CD8+ T-cell effector function and differentiation is the T-box
transcription factor T-bet. In the present study, we assessed T-bet expression,
together with the effector proteins perforin, granzyme A (Grz A), granzyme B (Grz
B), and granulysin, in HIV-specific CD8+ T cells from ECs (n = 20), chronically
infected progressors (CPs; n = 18), and highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART)-suppressed individuals (n = 19). Compared with the other cohort groups,
HIV-specific CD8+ T cells among ECs demonstrated a superior ability to express
perforin and Grz B, but with no detectable difference in the levels of Grz A or
granulysin. We also observed higher levels of T-bet in HIV-specific CD8+ T cells 
from ECs, with an ensuing positive correlation between T-bet and levels of both
perforin and Grz B. Moreover, HIV-specific CD8+ T cells in ECs up-regulated T-bet
to a greater extent than CPs after in vitro expansion, with concomitant
up-regulation of perforin and Grz B. These results suggest that T-bet may play an
important role in driving effector function, and its modulation may lead to
enhanced effector activity against HIV.

PMCID: PMC3083297
PMID: 21289310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011 Feb;22(2):246-52. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010050471.

Predominance of intraglomerular T-bet or GATA3 may determine mechanism of
transplant rejection.

Sun Q(1), Cheng D, Zhang M, He Q, Chen Z, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Nephrology, Jinling Hospital, 305 East Zhong Shan Road, 
Nanjing 210002, China.

The transcription factors T-bet and GATA3 determine the differentiation of helper
T cells into Th1 or Th2 cells, respectively. An altered ratio of their relative
expression promotes the pathogenesis of certain immunological diseases, but
whether this may also contribute to the pathogenesis of antibody-mediated
rejection (ABMR) versus T cell-mediated rejection (TCMR) is unknown. Here, we
characterized the intragraft expression of T-bet and GATA3 and determined the
correlation of their levels with the presence of typical lesions of ABMR and
TCMR. We found a predominant intraglomerular expression of T-bet in patients with
ABMR, which was distinct from that in patients with TCMR. In ABMR, interstitial
T-bet expression was typically located in peritubular capillaries, although the
overall quantity of interstitial T-bet was less than that observed in TCMR. The
expression of intraglomerular T-bet correlated with infiltration of CD4+ and CD8+
lymphocytes, which express T-bet, as well as intraglomerular CD68+
monocyte/macrophages, which do not express T-bet. The predominance of
intraglomerular T-bet expression relative to GATA3 expression associated with
poor response to treatment with bolus steroid. In summary, predominance of
intraglomerular T-bet expression correlates with antibody-mediated rejection and 
resistance to steroid treatment.

PMCID: PMC3029897
PMID: 21289214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Scand J Immunol. 2011 Jun;73(6):536-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02526.x.

Glucosamine improved atopic dermatitis-like skin lesions in NC/Nga mice by
inhibition of Th2 cell development.

Kim CH(1), Cheong KA, Park CD, Lee AY.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Science Research Center, Dongguk University Research Institute of
Biotechnology, Goyang, South Korea.

Dysregulated Th subset responses, characterized by Th2-dominant allergic
inflammation, are thought to be central to the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis 
(AD). Glucosamine has been shown to have immunosuppressive properties, but its
effect on AD has not been examined. In this study, the immunoregulatory effects
of glucosamine, using dermatophagoides farinae (Df)-induced AD-like skin lesions 
in NC/Nga mice, were investigated. The clinical scores were reduced significantly
by the treatment with glucosamine at 10 and 20 mg/day. Histological analysis of
the skin also revealed that treatment of glucosamine at 10 and 20 mg/day
significantly reduced the inflammatory cellular infiltrate, including mast cells 
and eosinophils. The levels of serum IgE and Th2 cytokines in spleen cells were
reduced, whereas no significant change was detected in IFN-<U+03B3>, a Th1 cytokine. To 
determine the mechanism associated with inhibition of the Th2 immune response,
the effects of glucosamine on the selective differentiation pathway of the Th
subset in vitro was examined in NC/Nga mice. The results showed that glucosamine 
suppressed the differentiation of naïve CD4(+) T cells to Th2 cells in vitro. On 
the basis of in vivo and in vitro results of the NC/Nga mice, the
immunobiological effects of glucosamine on peripheral blood mononuclear cells
from patients with AD were examined. The production of Th2 cytokines, such as
IL-4 and IL-5, was significantly decreased after in vitro administration of
glucosamine, which suggest that glucosamine might be a useful immunomodulatory
agent for the treatment of human AD.

© 2011 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2011 Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21284687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Scand J Immunol. 2011 May;73(5):449-58. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02520.x.

A common promoter variant of TBX21 is associated with allele specific binding to 
Yin-Yang 1 and reduced gene expression.

Li JR(1), Li JG, Deng GH, Zhao WL, Dan YJ, Wang YM, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

T-bet is a key regulator for the lineage commitment in CD4 T helper (Th) 1 cells 
by activating the hallmark production of interferon-<U+03B3>, and its expression level
is linked to autoimmune, infectious, and allergic diseases. A T to C base
substitution has been identified at position -1993 in the TBX21 (encoding T-bet) 
promoter and has been associated with asthma and systemic lupus erythematosus.
This study aimed to investigate the molecular mechanisms responsible for the
influence of the T-1993C polymorphism on transcription and its functional effect 
by luciferase reporter, EMSAs, Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, and flow
cytometric analysis of intracellular T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-4 expression in
activated CD4(+) T cells. The presence of a -1993T allele obviously increases
promoter activity compared with that of a promoter with a -1993C allele. TBX21
promoter carrying -1993C allele possesses significantly stronger binding affinity
to the Yin Yang 1 (YY1) transcription factor than that carrying -1993T allele.
YY1 overexpression decreased TBX21 promoter function in a T cell line,
demonstrating that this element functions as a repressor. The C to T base
exchange relieves the repression mediated by YY1. The individuals carrying -1993C
allele were determined to have significantly diminished expression of TBX21 and
IFN-<U+03B3> and increased IL-4 production in cells compared with the individuals
carrying -1993T allele (P < 0.05). These findings demonstrate that the TBX21
T-1993C polymorphism represses TBX21 expression and Th1 cytokine production
through control of YY1, which might result in the imbalance between Th1 and Th2
immune responses in autoimmune or allergic diseases.

© 2011 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2011 Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21272048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Leuk Lymphoma. 2011 Apr;52(4):668-79. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2010.550074. Epub
2011 Jan 27.

A molecular and functional analysis of large granular lymphocyte expansions in
patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia treated with tyrosine kinase
inhibitors.

Powers JJ(1), Dubovsky JA, Epling-Burnette PK, Moscinski L, Zhang L, Mustjoki S, 
Sotomayor EM, Pinilla-Ibarz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Experimental Therapeutics, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer 
Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2011 Apr;52(4):556-7.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy has become the standard treatment for
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Off-target kinase inhibition has been
implicated in the appearance of unique adverse effects, such as colitis and
pleural effusions. In addition, some patients present oligoclonal expansions of
large granular lymphocytes (LGLs). We sought to further investigate this
phenomenon in 64 patients treated with five different TKIs. Clonal expansions of 
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) were identified in all TKI-treated patient groups,
but only in dasatinib-treated patients were these expansions characterized as
LGLs. Survival factors known to be important in LGL leukemia (interleukin-15
[IL-15] transpresentation, plasma platelet-derived growth factor [PDGF]-BB
levels, nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B [NF-<U+03BA>B] and T-bet activation) were found to be
associated with TKI-induced LGL expansions. Interestingly, patients with LGL
expansions had increased cytotoxicity against non-transformed endothelial cells, 
which may play a role in observed autoimmune-like side effects. Our results
indicate that patients with CML treated with TKIs can develop T cell expansions, 
which can in certain cases be related to some adverse effects.

PMCID: PMC4487410
PMID: 21271862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Apr 1;317(6):849-58. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.01.006. Epub
2011 Jan 19.

Impaired IFN-<U+03B3> production after stimulation with bacterial components by natural 
killer cells from gastric cancer patients.

Lindgren Å(1), Yun CH, Sjöling Å, Berggren C, Sun JB, Jonsson E, Holmgren J,
Svennerholm AM, Lundin SB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and
Mucosal Immunobiology and Vaccine Institute for Strategic Research, University of
Gothenburg, Box 435, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden. asa.lindgren@microbio.gu.se

Gastric adenocarcinoma is a major health problem world-wide, as this is the
second most common cause of cancer death in the world. It has been estimated that
infection by Helicobacter pylori cause at least half of the gastric cancers.
Previously, we have demonstrated that H. pylori antigens directly activate NK
cells to secrete IFN-<U+03B3>. There is also a marked synergistic effect in NK cells
stimulated with bacterial lysate and low levels of IL-12, a cytokine which is
produced by macrophages and dendritic cells in the H. pylori-infected stomach.
The present study was designed to investigate whether NK cells from gastric
cancer patients display an altered ability to respond to components from H.
pylori and other bacteria. The results show that NK cells from peripheral blood
of gastric cancer patients have a severely suppressed ability to produce IFN-<U+03B3>
after stimulation with H. pylori lysate and the synthetic bacterial lipoprotein
FSL-1. Furthermore, the synergistic effect of IL-12 and lysate is absent in
gastric cancer patients, unless the concentration of IL-12 is increased 10-fold. 
We also demonstrate that there is a similar lack of IFN-<U+03B3> production from NK
cells isolated from the gastric mucosa of cancer patients. In addition, we
propose that the observed suppression is due to tumour-derived TGF-ß and that
increased expression of the transcription factor GATA-3 may be responsible for
the TGF-ß induced suppression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21255568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2011 Apr;300(4):L633-41. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00163.2010. Epub 2011 Jan 14.

T-bet is induced by interferon-<U+03B3> to mediate chemokine secretion and migration in 
human airway smooth muscle cells.

Singer CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Univ. of Nevada School of Medicine, Dept. of Pharmacology CMM MS-0573, Reno,
NV 89557-0046, USA. csinger@medicine.nevada.edu

An inappropriate balance between T-helper (Th)1 and Th2 cytokine production
underlies inflammatory changes that result in airway disease. Expression of the
T-box transcription factor T-bet regulates differentiation of Th cells and
production of Th1 cytokines, particularly IFN<U+03B3>. T-bet-deficient mice develop
airway hyperreactivity, undergo airway remodeling, and exhibit defects in IFN<U+03B3>
production while overproducing Th2 cytokines. T-bet is also reduced in the
airways of asthmatic patients, suggesting loss of T-bet expression or activity
promotes development of inflammatory airway disease. We present novel data
demonstrating T-bet expression is induced in human airway smooth muscle cells
(ASMC) by IFN<U+03B3>. This IFN<U+03B3>-stimulated expression of T-bet is dependent on
signaling through JAK2 and signal transducers and activators of transcription 1
(STAT1) and activates T-bet-dependent DNA binding activity. Expression of T-bet
stimulates IFN<U+03B3>-stimulated IFN<U+03B3> expression, secretion, and promoter activity,
while inhibiting IFN<U+03B3>-stimulated release of chemokines including monocyte
chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1/CCL2, regulated on activation normal T-expressed 
and secreted (RANTES)/CCL5, and eotaxin/CCL11. This is accompanied by changes in 
expression of the chemokine receptors CCR3 and IL12Rß2 and TNFa. T-bet expression
also reduces chemotactic migration of ASMC in response to serum and PDGF, which
contributes to airway hyperplasia. These results are the first to identify T-bet 
expression and activity in a structural cell of the lung and may provide new
insights into therapeutic targets for inflammatory airway disease.

PMCID: PMC3075099
PMID: 21239533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Mar 24;134(2):281-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2010.12.021. Epub 
2010 Dec 21.

Cho-kyung-jong-ok-tang, a traditional Korean herbal formula induces type 2 shift 
in murine natural killer cell cytokine production.

Lee HS(1), Cho KH, Kim TK, Kim CH, Ahn SJ, Lee EH, Ahn KS, Jung YJ.

Author information: 
(1)With-Nature Oriental Clinic Group, Republic of Korea.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Cho-kyung-jong-ok-tang (CKJOT) is a traditional
Korean herbal formula specifically used for female infertility including
unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL).
AIM OF THE STUDY: The present study aims to evaluate the effects of CKJOT on
mouse natural killer (NK) cells to address the possible immunological basis of
protective effects of this herbal medicine on unexplained RPL.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: NK cells isolated from spleens of 6-week-old C57BL/6 mice 
were differentiated into NK0, NK1, and NK2 cells in the presence of various
concentrations of CKJOT-extract. Apoptotic cell number, level of intracellular
cytokines, and expression of cytokine-related transcription factors were
measured.
RESULTS: CKJOT had little effect in improving viability of NK0, NK1, and NK2
cells. However, CKJOT addition during NK cell differentiation suppressed the
production of interferon-gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>), and enhanced that of interleukin-5, in
the NK1 and NK2 subsets, respectively. T-bet, a transcription factor associated
with IFN-<U+03B3> expression was down-regulated; while Th2 linked transcription factors 
(STAT6 and GATA3) were up-regulated especially with 100 µg/mL treatment of CKJOT.
CONCLUSION: The type 2 shift in NK cell-secreted cytokines induced by CKJOT in
mouse NK cells may explain the protective effect associated with its traditional 
use in unexplained RPL.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21182916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Jan;41(1):128-39. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040724. Epub 2010 Dec
1.

Generation of human Th1-like regulatory CD4+ T cells by an intrinsic IFN-<U+03B3>- and
T-bet-dependent pathway.

Zheng J(1), Liu Y, Qin G, Lam KT, Guan J, Xiang Z, Lewis DB, Lau YL, Tu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine,
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, P R China.

Murine Foxp3(+) Treg have recently been shown to express T-bet, a transcription
factor characteristic of Th1 effector cells. A human Treg phenotype equivalent
has not been reported. Here, we show that naïve human CD4(+) T cells incubated
with low numbers of CD40-activated allogeneic B cells preferentially
differentiate into alloantigen-specific CD4(hi) CD25(hi) Treg. These
differentiated cells potently suppress effector T-cell responses and express
T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3>, and CXCR3, the features of Th1 effector cells. In contrast,
co-culture of naïve CD4(+) T cells with high numbers of allogeneic B cells
results in CD4(+) CD25(+) T cells that promote, rather than inhibit, effector
T-cell responses, demonstrating the plasticity of CD4(+) T-cell differentiation
in response to alloantigen-presenting B cells. The optimal accumulation of
CD4(hi) CD25(hi) Treg induced using higher T cell:B cell co-culture ratios was
dependent on the expression of T-bet and endogenously produced IFN-<U+03B3>. Induction
of Treg-mediated suppression function in the Treg population was not. As CXCR3
confers the preferential trafficking of T cells to tissue sites of IFN-<U+03B3>, these
human Th1-like Treg might be useful for modulating pathological Th1 effector
responses, such as that occurring during graft-versus-host disease or graft
rejection.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21182084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Jan;41(1):60-6. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040873. Epub 2010 Dec 9.

T-bet-mediated differentiation of the activated CD8+ T cell.

Yeo CJ(1), Fearon DT.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Immunology Unit, Department of Medicine, University of
Cambridge, Medical Research Council Centre, Cambridge, UK. jjcy2@cam.ac.uk.

The T-box transcription factor, T-bet promotes the differentiation of short-lived
effector CD8(+) T cells at the expense of central memory cells. How T-bet
mediates these effects, and whether they are directly caused by T-bet alone are
unknown, because expression of T-bet requires stimulation of the T cell by
inflammatory and growth cytokines, which may have T-bet-independent functions
involving T-cell differentiation. We developed an in vitro system of ectopic
T-bet expression that avoids the effects of inflammatory cytokines to determine
which aspects of the T-bet phenotype may be accounted for by T-bet alone. Ectopic
T-bet expression by OT-I CD8(+) T cells stimulated by the H2-Kb (SIINFEKL)
complex and cultured with 2 ng/mL IL-2 induced a coordinated change in gene
expression leading to down-regulation of CD127 and SOCS-1 and up-regulation of
CD122 and IL-15 receptor a, switching the cellular survival cytokine from IL-7 to
IL-15. T-bet expression and 2 ng/mL IL-2 also led to a capacity for IFN-<U+03B3> and Fas
ligand expression, confirming a role in eliciting these effector functions.
Finally, ectopic T-bet promoted the expression of B lymphocyte-induced maturation
protein 1 by OT-I cells in the presence of 20 ng/mL IL-2, providing a mechanism
for the role of T-bet in driving terminal differentiation in concert with a high 
level of IL-2 receptor signalling.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3130140
PMID: 21182077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2010 Sep;30(9):922-7.

[Influence of Shengxue mixture on the expression of T-bet/GATA-3, their relevant 
signal transduction molecules, cytokines, and Th1/Th2 balance in patients with
chronic aplastic anemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Zhou YM, Hu MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jiangsu Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Nanjing University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanjing.

OBJECTIVE: To study the actions of transcription factors, T-bet and GATA-3, and
their relevant signal transduction pathways on the immune-related pathogenesis
with chronic aplastic anemia (CAA), and to investigate the immunological
regulation mechanism of Shengxue Mixture (SXM) in regulating levels of Th cell
imbalance, transcriptional factor and relevant signal pathways.
METHODS: All CAA patients selected from Yueyang Hospital of Shanghai University
of traditional Chinese medicine were equally randomized into the treated group
and the control group, 20 patients in each group, and 20 healthy persons were
selected as normal group, the former was treated with SXM according to patients' 
syndrome patterns, namely, SXM-1 was given to patients of Pi-Shen yang-deficiency
pattern, and SXM-2 to those of Pi-Shen yin-deficiency pattern. Patients in the
control group were treated with cyclosporin A (CsA). The mRNA expressions of
T-bet, GATA-3, signal transducers and activators of transcription 4 (STAT4) and 6
(STAT6) in peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMNC) of patients were determined 
using real-time fluorescent quantitation polymerase chain reaction before and
after treatment, meantime, the Th1/Th2 proportion in peripheral blood, and levels
of IFN-gamma, IL-12 and IL-4 in PBMNC-cultured supernatant were detected by flow 
cytometry and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: The mRNA expressions of PBMNC T-bet and STAT4, ratios of T-bet/GATA-3,
Th1 proportion and Th1/Th2 ratio, levels of IFN-gamma and IL-12 in PBMNC-cultured
supernatant were all significantly higher in CAA patients than in healthy
controls (P < 0.01), which were lowered after treatment but didn't reach the
normal range (all P < 0.01), excepting for IL-12 level. Comparisons of the
changes between the two treated groups showed insignificant difference (P >
0.05). While the difference between patients and healthy persons in terms of
GATA-3, STAT6, Th2 proportion, and IL-4 were insignificant (P > 0.05), either
before or after treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal activation of IFN-gamma/T-bet and IL-12/ STAT4 pathways, as
well as Th1/Th2 balance deviating to Th1 excursion play vital roles in the
immunological pathogenesis of CAA. SXM and CsA could lower the aforesaid abnormal
activation and correct Th1 hyper-polarization, so as to alleviate the
over-activated cell-mediated immunity to eliminate hematopoietic depression in
CAA patients.

PMID: 21179729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mult Scler. 2011 May;17(5):556-66. doi: 10.1177/1352458510392263. Epub 2010 Dec
21.

CD4+T-bet+, CD4+pSTAT3+ and CD8+T-bet+ T cells accumulate in peripheral blood
during NZB treatment.

Frisullo G(1), Iorio R, Plantone D, Marti A, Nociti V, Patanella AK, Batocchi AP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology, Department of Neurosciences, Catholic University,
Rome, Italy.

Circulating T cells and monocytes expressing T-bet, pSTAT1 and pSTAT3 increase in
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) during relapse. Natalizumab (NZB)
is an effective drug in RRMS, but exacerbation of the disease after its
discontinuation has been described in some patients. The aim of this research was
to study the effect of NZB treatment on circulating lymphomonocyte subpopulations
expressing T-bet, pSTAT1, pSTAT3 and CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells. Flow
cytometry was used to evaluate the percentages of circulating CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells, CD14+ monocytes and B cells expressing T-bet, pSTAT1, and pSTAT3, and
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells from RRMS patients before and after 6-12 NZB
infusions. In NZB-treated RRMS patients, the percentages of CD4+pSTAT1+ and
CD8+pSTAT1+ T cells, CD14+pSTAT1+ monocytes, CD4+T-bet+, CD8+T-bet+ and
CD4+pSTAT3+ T cells and CD14+pSTAT3+ monocytes increased after 12 drug infusions 
and were similar to those observed in untreated relapsing RRMS patients.
Otherwise in vitro NZB exposure of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
untreated RRMS patients and controls had no effect. It was concluded that NZB
treatment determines an accumulation of CD4+pSTAT1+, CD8+pSTAT1+, CD4+T-bet+,
CD8+T-bet+ and CD4+STAT3+ T cells in peripheral blood that may account for the
exacerbation of the disease observed in some patients after the discontinuation
of the drug.

PMID: 21177324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Immunity. 2010 Dec 14;33(6):890-904. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.12.002.

Foxo transcription factors control regulatory T cell development and function.

Kerdiles YM(1), Stone EL, Beisner DR, McGargill MA, Ch'en IL, Stockmann C,
Katayama CD, Hedrick SM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Section, Division of Biological Sciences and Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92093-0377, USA.

Erratum in
    Immunity. 2011 Jan 28;34(1):135. Beisner, Daniel L [corrected to Beisner, Daniel 
R].

Comment in
    Immunity. 2010 Dec 14;33(6):835-7.

Foxo transcription factors integrate extrinsic signals to regulate cell division,
differentiation and survival, and specific functions of lymphoid and myeloid
cells. Here, we showed the absence of Foxo1 severely curtailed the development of
Foxp3(+) regulatory T (Treg) cells and those that developed were nonfunctional
in vivo. The loss of function included diminished CTLA-4 receptor expression as
the Ctla4 gene was a direct target of Foxo1. T cell-specific loss of Foxo1
resulted in exocrine pancreatitis, hind limb paralysis, multiorgan lymphocyte
infiltration, anti-nuclear antibodies and expanded germinal centers.
Foxo-mediated control over Treg cell specification was further revealed by the
inability of TGF-ß cytokine to suppress T-bet transcription factor in the absence
of Foxo1, resulting in IFN-<U+03B3> secretion. In addition, the absence of Foxo3
exacerbated the effects of the loss of Foxo1. Thus, Foxo transcription factors
guide the contingencies of T cell differentiation and the specific functions of
effector cell populations.

PMCID: PMC3034255
PMID: 21167754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Arch Oral Biol. 2011 May;56(5):499-505. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2010.11.006.
Epub 2010 Dec 15.

Expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients 
with oral lichen planus.

Lu R(1), Zhou G, Du G, Xu X, Yang J, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology
(Hubei-MOST), & Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, School 
& Hospital of Stomatology,Wuhan University, PR China

OBJECTIVE: Oral lichen planus (OLP) is a T-cell-mediated chronic inflammatory
oral disease of unknown aetiology. Imbalanced cytokine production by Th1 and Th2 
probably contributes to the pathogenesis of OLP. Growing evidence has suggested
that two Th1/Th2-specific transcription factors, T-bet and GATA-3, may play a
critical role in the development of Th1 and Th2 immunity. The aim of the present 
study was to investigate the mRNA expressions of T-bet and GATA-3 in the
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of OLP subjects, and their expression patterns
in relation to several clinical features.
DESIGN: Expressions of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells isolated from twenty-eight OLP subjects and sixteen controls were detected 
by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: When OLP subjects were regarded as a whole group, T-bet mRNA level and
the ratio of T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA in OLP subjects were significantly higher (P<0.05)
than those in controls. When the OLP subjects were divided according to different
clinical forms, genders or age groups, T-bet, but not GATA-3, mRNA levels in
reticular (P<0.01), female (P<0.05) and elder (age>55, P<0.05) OLP patients were 
significantly higher than those in control subjects. T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA ratio only
in reticular (P<0.05) OLP subjects was significantly higher than that in control 
subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: The results implicate a predominant role of Th1-type immune response
in pathogenesis of OLP. Different gene expressions of T-bet in different clinical
features may indicate different immunoregulatory mechanisms of OLP.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21163465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nat Immunol. 2011 Jan;12(1):96-104. doi: 10.1038/ni.1969. Epub 2010 Dec 12.

T-bet represses T(H)17 differentiation by preventing Runx1-mediated activation of
the gene encoding ROR<U+03B3>t.

Lazarevic V(1), Chen X, Shim JH, Hwang ES, Jang E, Bolm AN, Oukka M, Kuchroo VK, 
Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard School of Public Health, Department of Immunology and Infectious
Diseases, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. vlazarev@hsph.harvard.edu

Overactive responses by interleukin 17 (IL-17)-producing helper T cells (T(H)17
cells) are tightly linked to the development of autoimmunity, yet the factors
that negatively regulate the differentiation of this lineage remain unknown. Here
we report that the transcription factor T-bet suppressed development of the
T(H)17 cell lineage by inhibiting transcription of Rorc (which encodes the
transcription factor ROR<U+03B3>t). T-bet interacted with the transcription factor
Runx1, and this interaction blocked Runx1-mediated transactivation of Rorc. T-bet
Tyr304 was required for formation of the T-bet-Runx1 complex, for blockade of
Runx1 activity and for inhibition of the T(H)17 differentiation program. Our data
reinforce the idea of master regulators that shape immune responses by
simultaneously activating one genetic program while silencing the activity of
competing regulators in a common progenitor cell.

PMCID: PMC3077962
PMID: 21151104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Am J Gastroenterol. 2011 Mar;106(3):519-27. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2010.450. Epub 2010 
Dec 7.

Involvement of CD40-CD40 ligand in uncomplicated and refractory celiac disease.

Di Sabatino A(1), Rovedatti L, Vetrano S, Vidali F, Biancheri P, Rescigno M,
Danese S, Macdonald TT, Corazza GR.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo, Centro
per lo Studio e Cura della Malattia Celiaca, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
a.disabatino@smatteo.pv.it

OBJECTIVES: Cognate interaction between CD40 on antigen-presenting cells and CD40
ligand (CD40L) on T cells is a crucial costimulatory signal in T-cell activation.
In this study, we investigated CD40-CD40L expression in the duodenum of
uncomplicated and refractory celiac disease patients, and explored the ex vivo
effects of CD40L blockade on cytokine production and the T-helper cell type
1-specific transcription factor T-bet.
METHODS: CD40L and colocalization of CD40 with the dendritic cell markers CD11c
and CD123 were investigated by confocal microscopy on tissue sections of duodenal
biopsy samples obtained from 14 uncomplicated celiac patients before and after 12
months of gluten-free diet, 5 refractory celiac patients, and 12 controls. CD40
was also analyzed by flow cytometry on single cell suspension of mucosal
biopsies. Treated celiac biopsies were stimulated with peptic-tryptic digest of
gliadin (PT-gliadin) with or without an anti-CD40L-neutralizing antibody.
Interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and interleukin (IL)-17 were measured by ELISA (enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay). T-bet, CD40, and CD40L were determined by immunoblotting.
RESULTS: CD40 and CD40L expression was higher in uncomplicated untreated and
refractory celiac patients than in controls; the expression returned to normal
after gluten-free diet in uncomplicated patients. Flow cytometric analysis
confirmed that most CD40(+) cells were dendritic cells. The addition of the
anti-CD40L antibody to treated celiac biopsies significantly inhibited the
PT-gliadin-induced production of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17, and mucosal T-bet.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the CD40-CD40L pathway has a key role in
celiac disease. Disruption of CD40-CD40L interaction may offer a therapeutic
alternative in refractory celiac disease.

PMID: 21139574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Int Immunol. 2011 Jan;23(1):1-15. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxq451. Epub 2010 Dec 6.

Induction of tolerogenic lung CD4+ T cells by local treatment with a pSTAT-3 and 
pSTAT-5 inhibitor ameliorated experimental allergic asthma.

Hausding M(1), Tepe M, Ubel C, Lehr HA, Röhrig B, Höhn Y, Pautz A, Eigenbrod T,
Anke T, Kleinert H, Erkel G, Finotto S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology of Lung, Institute of
Molecular Medicine, Universitätsmedizin Mainz, 55131 Mainz, Germany.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-3 inhibitors play an
important role in regulating immune responses. Galiellalactone (GL) is a fungal
secondary metabolite known to interfere with the binding of phosphorylated signal
transducer and activator of transcription (pSTAT)-3 as well of pSTAT-6 dimers to 
their target DNA in vitro. Intra nasal delivery of 50 µg GL into the lung of
naive Balb/c mice induced FoxP3 expression locally and IL-10 production and
IL-12p40 in RNA expression in the airways in vivo. In a murine model of allergic 
asthma, GL significantly suppressed the cardinal features of asthma, such as
airway hyperresponsiveness, eosinophilia and mucus production, after
sensitization and subsequent challenge with ovalbumin (OVA). These changes
resulted in induction of IL-12p70 and IL-10 production by lung CD11c(+) dendritic
cells (DCs) accompanied by an increase of IL-3 receptor a chain and
indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase expression in these cells. Furthermore, GL inhibited 
IL-4 production in T-bet-deficient CD4(+) T cells and down-regulated the
suppressor of cytokine signaling-3 (SOCS-3), also in the absence of STAT-3 in T
cells, in the lung in a murine model of asthma. In addition, we found reduced
amounts of pSTAT-5 in the lung of GL-treated mice that correlated with decreased 
release of IL-2 by lung OVA-specific CD4(+) T cells after treatment with GL in
vitro also in the absence of T-bet. Thus, GL treatment in vivo and in vitro
emerges as a novel therapeutic approach for allergic asthma by modulating lung DC
phenotype and function resulting in a protective response via CD4(+)FoxP3(+)
regulatory T cells locally.

PMID: 21135031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Blood. 2011 Feb 10;117(6):1869-79. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-303123. Epub 2010
Dec 3.

A role for Blimp1 in the transcriptional network controlling natural killer cell 
maturation.

Kallies A(1), Carotta S, Huntington ND, Bernard NJ, Tarlinton DM, Smyth MJ, Nutt 
SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia. kallies@wehi.edu.au

Natural killer (NK) cells are innate lymphocytes capable of immediate effector
functions including cytokine production and cytotoxicity. Compared with B and T
cells, the factors that control the peripheral maturation of NK cells are poorly 
understood. We show that Blimp1, a transcriptional repressor required for the
differentiation of plasma cells and short-lived effector T cells, is expressed by
NK cells throughout their development. Interleukin 15 (IL-15) is required for the
early induction of Blimp1 in NK cells, with expression increasing in the most
mature subsets of mouse and human NK cells. We show that Blimp1 is required for
NK-cell maturation and homeostasis and for regulating their proliferative
potential. It is also essential for high granzyme B expression, but not for most 
cytokine production and cytotoxicity. Surprisingly, interferon regulatory factor 
4 (IRF4) and B-cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6), 2 transcription factors crucial for the
regulation of Blimp1 in B and T cells, are largely dispensable for Blimp1
expression in NK cells. T-bet deficiency, however, leads to attenuated Blimp1
expression. We have identified NK cells as the first hematopoietic cell type in
which the IRF4-Blimp1-Bcl6 regulatory axis is not in operation, highlighting the 
distinct nature of the NK-cell gene-regulatory network.

PMID: 21131593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Oct;18(5):1211-9.

[Impact of cyclosporine A on the expression of T-bet, GATA-3, relevant signal
transduction molecules, cytokine and Th1/Th2 balance in patients with chronic
aplastic anemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Zhou YM, Hu MH, Sun WL, Xue ZZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jiangsu Provincial Hospital of Chinese Traditional
Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese Traditional Medicine, Nanjing 210029,
Jiangsu Province, China.

The study was aimed to explore the effects of T-bet (T-box expressed in T cell), 
GATA-3(GATA binding protein 3) and relevant signal transduction pathways on the
immune-related pathogenesis of chronic aplastic anemia (CAA), and to investigate 
the immunological regulation mechanism in the treatment of CAA by using
cyclosporine A (CsA) at the level of Th cell imbalance, transcriptional factors, 
and relevant signal pathways. The real-time fluorescent quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (real-time FQ-PCR) was used to determine the mRNA expression of
T-bet, GATA-3, signal transducers and activators of transcription 4 (STAT4) and
signal transducers and activators of transcription 6 (STAT6) in peripheral blood 
mononuclear cell (PBMNC) of CAA patients before and after treatment with CsA; the
flow cytometry (FCM) and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were used to
determine the Th1/Th2 proportion in peripheral blood, and levels of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-12 
and IL-4 in PBMNC-cultured supernatant. Healthy people were included to test the 
above indexes. The results showed that the mRNA expression of PBMNC T-bet, STAT4,
T-bet/GATA-3 ratio, Th1 proportion, Th1/Th2 ratio and levels of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-12
in PBMNC-cultured supernatant of CAA patients were significantly higher than
those of healthy people (p < 0.01). After treating with CsA for 6 months of CsA
treatment, expression of T-bet, STAT4, T-bet/GATA-3 ratio, Th1 proportion, IFN-<U+03B3> 
and IL-12 levels were lower than before, however, the expression of T-bet, STAT4,
T-bet/GATA-3 ratio, Th1 proportion and IFN-<U+03B3> had not been reduced to normal
state. Compared to healthy people, no significant difference existed in the mRNA 
expression of GATA-3, STAT6, Th2 proportion, as well as level of IL-4 before and 
after treatment (p>0.05). It is concluded that the abnormal activation of
IFN-<U+03B3>/T-bet and IL-12/STAT4 pathways, as well as Th balance deviating to Th1
excursion play vital roles in the immunological pathogenesis of AA. CsA lowers
the abnormal activation of IFN-<U+03B3>/T-bet and IL-12/STAT4 pathways to correct Th1
hyperpolarization, which may reduce the abnormally activated cell-mediated
immunity and relax hematopoietic depression of AA patients.

PMID: 21129263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Immunol Lett. 2011 Apr 30;136(1):29-36. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2010.11.008. Epub
2010 Nov 30.

TOX regulates the differentiation of human natural killer cells from
hematopoietic stem cells in vitro.

Yun S(1), Lee SH, Yoon SR, Kim MS, Piao ZH, Myung PK, Kim TD, Jung H, Choi I.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Therapy Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.

Natural killer (NK) cells act important roles in innate immunity and adaptive
immunity. However, the mechanisms governing NK cell development have not been
clearly elucidated. Previous studies have shown that an HMG (high-mobility group)
protein, TOX, is important for regulating the differentiation program of
developing T cells in mice. In this study, we examined the role of TOX in
differentiation of human NK cells. Knockdown of TOX in differentiating cells
decreased the NK cell population identified by expression of NK surface markers
and receptors. In addition, over-expression of TOX enhanced the differentiation
of NK cells which give rise to a population showing effector functions of mature 
NK cells. Moreover, TOX influenced expression of T-bet (T-box expressed in T
cells, also as known as Tbx21) during NK cell development. Overall, these results
suggest that TOX is required for IL-15-mediated NK cell differentiation and
affected expression of T-bet that plays critical roles in NK differentiation and 
maturation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21126536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Clin Exp Allergy. 2011 Apr;41(4):490-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2010.03640.x.
Epub 2010 Nov 28.

FoxP3, GATA-3 and T-bet expression in elderly asthma.

Vale-Pereira S(1), Todo-Bom A, Geraldes L, Schmidt-Weber C, Akdis CA, Mota-Pinto 
A.

Author information: 
(1)General Pathology Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal. spereira@fmed.uc.pt

Comment in
    Clin Exp Allergy. 2011 Apr;41(4):457-8.

BACKGROUND: Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder in which Th2, Th1 and
suppressive T cells (Tregs) play a role. The transcription factor FoxP3 plays a
role in Treg differentiation while T-bet is important for Th1 and GATA-3 for Th2 
differentiation from naïve T cells. Recent data show that age-related
deregulation of Treg cells is a mechanism of senescence affecting several chronic
diseases. It is crucial to understand the behaviour of these cell populations in 
asthma for elderly patients.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate FoxP3, GATA-3 and T-bet gene expression under basal
conditions and after in vitro activation in a group of elderly asthmatic compared
with age-matched healthy individuals.
METHODS: Thirty-two elderly asthmatics and 17 healthy elderly individuals were
selected. Serum total IgE was measured, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) were isolated and stimulated in vitro with anti-CD3/anti-CD28, followed
by mRNA isolation. After reverse transcription, real-time quantitative PCR was
performed and relative quantification was determined 2(-<U+0394><U+0394>Ct)(2(-<U+0394><U+0394>Ct) method).
RESULTS: The mean values and standard deviation of FoxP3, GATA-3 and T-bet
relative expression for control vs. asthma were 10.2±6.8 vs. 4.8±3.8, 2.4±2.9 vs.
1.7±0.9 and 3.3±2.1 vs. 2.1±1.5, respectively. Healthy individuals showed
significantly higher expression of FoxP3 and T-bet; asthmatics had a lower
T-bet/GATA-3 ratio, higher serum IgE and a positive significant correlation
between total IgE and GATA-3 expression.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Elderly asthmatic patients have lower FoxP3
mRNA expression in PBMC, which can be associated with the sustained inflammatory 
process and with the decreased immune tolerance by Treg cells. The T-bet
deficiency and the correlation of GATA-3 expression with the increase of IgE are 
characteristics of long-lasting asthma. Changes related to the immunosenescence
process could provide an explanation for the minor differences observed between
the groups. It is important to clarify persistent modifications in long-lasting
asthma in the elderly and adequate future therapeutic approaches.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21114556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Immunobiology. 2011 Jan-Feb;216(1-2):200-7. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2010.05.005.
Epub 2010 May 19.

Helicobacter pylori-infected macrophages induce Th17 cell differentiation.

Zhuang Y(1), Shi Y, Liu XF, Zhang JY, Liu T, Fan X, Luo J, Wu C, Yu S, Chen L,
Luo P, Guo G, Liu Z, Tang B, Mao XH, Guo Y, Zou QM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medical
Laboratory Science, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, PR
China.

Th17 cells represent a novel subset of CD4(+) T cells, which is associated with
chronic inflammation. The present study evaluated Th17 cell responses to
Helicobacter pylori infection in mouse model and CD4(+) T cell differentiation in
response to H. pylori-infected macrophages. Th17 cells were observed in the H.
pylori-infected gastric tissue. Co-culture of CD4(+) T cells with H.
pylori-infected macrophages elevated IL-17 and IFN-<U+03B3> secretion, up-regulated
retinoid-related orphan receptor gamma t (ROR<U+03B3>t) and T box expressed in T cells
(T-bet) expression and increased the numbers of Th17 and Th1 cells. The
expression of CD40, CD80, and CD86 and the secretion of IL-6, TGF-ß1, IL-23, and 
CCL20 were significantly increased in H. pylori-stimulated macrophages. NF-<U+03BA>B
pathway participated in the production of IL-6, IL-23, and CCL20 from macrophages
in response to H. pylori, and inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B pathway of macrophages resulted
in less Th17 cell differentiation. Taken together, these results suggest that H. 
pylori induces Th17 cell differentiation via infected macrophages.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21112468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Reproduction. 2011 Feb;141(2):249-58. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0362. Epub 2010 Nov 25.

CD4+ and CD8+ T cells producing Th1 and Th17 cytokines are involved in the
pathogenesis of autoimmune orchitis.

Jacobo P(1), Pérez CV, Theas MS, Guazzone VA, Lustig L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Institute for Research in Reproduction, University of
Buenos Aires, Paraguay 2155 piso 10, C1121 ABG, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Experimental autoimmune orchitis (EAO) is a useful model to study chronic
testicular inflammation and infertility. EAO is characterized by severe damage of
seminiferous tubules with germ cells that undergo apoptosis and sloughing. We
previously reported an increase in CD4+ and CD8+ effector T cells in the testes
of rats with EAO. Since cytokine patterns determine T cell effector functions, in
the present work we analyzed the cytokines expressed by these cells during
disease development. By flow cytometry, we detected an increase in the number of 
tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF) and interferon -<U+03B3> (IFNG)-producing CD4+ T cells in 
the testis at EAO onset. As the severity of the disease progressed, these cells
declined while CD8+ T cells producing TNF and IFNG increased, with the
predominance of IFNG expression. As a novel finding, we identified by
immunofluorescence CD4+ interleukin 17 (IL17)+ and CD8+ IL17+ cells in the testes
of EAO rats, with CD4+ and CD8+ T cells predominating at the onset and in the
chronic phase of EAO respectively. Moreover, IL17 (western blot) and IL23 content
(ELISA) increased in EAO, with maximum levels in the chronic phase. These results
suggest the involvement of CD4+ T helper (Th) 1 and Th17 subsets as co-effector
cells governing EAO onset, as well as the central contribution of CD8+ T cells
producing Th1 and Th17 cytokines in the maintenance of chronic inflammation. The 
expression of T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t (western blot) in the testis over the course of
disease also supports the presence of Th1 and Th17 cells in the testes of EAO
rats.

PMID: 21109610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Cell. 2010 Nov 24;40(4):594-605. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.10.028.

Jmjd3 and UTX play a demethylase-independent role in chromatin remodeling to
regulate T-box family member-dependent gene expression.

Miller SA(1), Mohn SE, Weinmann AS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The stable and heritable H3K27-methyl mark suppresses transcription of
lineage-specific genes in progenitor cells. During developmental transitions,
histone demethylases are required to dramatically alter epigenetic and gene
expression states to create new cell-specific profiles. It is unclear why
demethylase proteins that antagonize polycomb-mediated repression continue to be 
expressed in terminally differentiated cells where further changes in
H3K27 methylation could be deleterious. In this study, we show that the H3K27
demethylases, Jmjd3 and UTX, mediate a functional interaction between the
lineage-defining T-box transcription factor family and a Brg1-containing SWI/SNF 
remodeling complex. Importantly, Jmjd3 is required for the coprecipitation of
Brg1 with the T-box factor, T-bet, and this interaction is necessary for Ifng
remodeling in differentiated Th1 cells. Thus, Jmjd3 has a required role in
general chromatin remodeling that is independent from its H3K27 demethylase
potential. This function for H3K27 demethylase proteins may explain their
presence in differentiated cells where the epigenetic profile is already
established.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3032266
PMID: 21095589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Jan 25;651(1-3):205-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.10.068. 
Epub 2010 Nov 18.

Jaceosidin inhibits contact hypersensitivity in mice via down-regulating
IFN-<U+03B3>/STAT1/T-bet signaling in T cells.

Yin Y(1), Sun Y, Gu L, Zheng W, Gong F, Wu X, Shen Y, Xu Q.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China.

In the present study, we aimed to investigate the immunosuppressive activity of
jaceosidin, a flavone isolated from Artemisia vestita, on T lymphocytes both in
vitro and in vivo, and further explore its potential molecular mechanism.
Jaceosidin exerted a significant inhibition on the T cell proliferation and
activation induced by concanavalin A (Con A) in a concentration-dependent manner 
and it also inhibited the secretion of the proinflammatory cytokines such as
IL-2, TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3> of activated T cells. Further study showed that jaceosidin 
down-regulated STAT1 activation and T-bet expression in activated T cells.
Moreover, in order to investigate the immunosuppressive effect of jaceosidin in
vivo, the picryl chloride (PCl)-induced ear contact dermatitis model was
performed on BALB/c mice. Jaceosidin significantly ameliorated PCl-induced ear
swelling in a dose-dependent manner, which was due to its inhibition of the
STAT1/T-bet signaling pathway. In summary, these findings suggest that jaceosidin
exerts its immunosuppressive effect both in vitro and in vivo through inhibiting 
T cell proliferation and activation, which is closely associated with its potent 
down-regulation of the IFN-<U+03B3>/STAT1/T-bet signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21093428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Clin Immunol. 2011 Apr;31(2):155-66. doi: 10.1007/s10875-010-9474-6. Epub 2010 
Nov 10.

CD8(+) T cells in facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy patients with
inflammatory features at muscle MRI.

Frisullo G(1), Frusciante R, Nociti V, Tasca G, Renna R, Iorio R, Patanella AK,
Iannaccone E, Marti A, Rossi M, Bianco A, Monforte M, Tonali PA, Mirabella M,
Batocchi AP, Ricci E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology, Department of Neurosciences, Catholic University of
Rome, largo Gemelli 8, 00168 Rome, Italy.

Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is an inherited disease, and
although strongly suggested, a contribution of inflammation to its pathogenesis
has never been demonstrated. In FSHD patients, we found by immunohistochemistry
inflammatory infiltrates mainly composed by CD8(+) T cells in muscles showing
hyperintensity features on T2-weighted short tau inversion recovery magnetic
resonance imaging (T2-STIR-MRI) sequences. Therefore, we evaluated the presence
of circulating activated immune cells and the production of cytokines in patients
with or without muscles showing hyperintensity features on T2-STIR-MRI sequences 
and from controls. FSHD patients displaying hyperintensity features in one or
more muscles showed higher CD8(+)pSTAT1(+), CD8(+)T-bet(+) T cells and
CD14(+)pSTAT1(+), CD14(+)T-bet(+) cells percentages and IL12p40, IFN<U+03B3> and TNFa
levels than patients without muscles displaying hyperintense features and
controls. Moreover, the percentages of CD8(+)pSTAT1(+), CD8(+)T-bet(+) and
CD14(+)pSTAT1(+) cells correlated with the proportion of muscles displaying
hyperintensity features at T2-STIR sequences. These data indicate that
circulating activated immune cells, mainly CD8(+) T cells, may favour FSHD
progression by promoting active phases of muscle inflammation.

PMID: 21063901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Nov;40(11):3210-9. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040699. Epub 2010 Oct 
27.

Lck regulates IL-10 expression in memory-like Th1 cells.

Kemp KL(1), Levin SD, Stein PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

The Src family kinase Lck is thought to facilitate Th2 differentiation; however, 
its role in Th1 cells has not been well explored. Using mice that lack Lck in
mature T cells, we find that lck(-/-) Th1 skewed cells have normal expression of 
T-bet and produce IFN-<U+03B3> at WT levels. However, there is a 3-fold increase in
IL-10 producing cells in the mutant cultures. These cells do not have elevated
levels of IL-4, GATA3, IL-17 or Foxp3, indicating that they are not Th2, Th17, or
Foxp3(+) T regulatory cells (Treg). Nor do these cells behave in a similar manner
as the type 1 Treg. Most of the IL-10 in the lck(-/-) Th1 cultures is derived
from the memory/activated subset, as the cytokine profile from Th1 cultures
established from purified CD62L(+) (naïve) cells are similar to WT cells.
Furthermore, this IL-10 expression appears to be dependent on IL-12 and
correlates with elevated c-Maf. These data highlight a previously unappreciated
role for Lck in regulating IL-10 in Th1 cells.

Copyright © 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3517127
PMID: 21061443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Nov;40(11):3017-27. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040539.

IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-12 synergize to convert in vivo generated Th17 into Th1/Th17 cells.

Lexberg MH(1), Taubner A, Albrecht I, Lepenies I, Richter A, Kamradt T, Radbruch 
A, Chang HD.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum Berlin, A Leibniz Institute, Berlin,
Germany.

Th1 and Th17 cells are distinct lineages of effector/memory cells, imprinted for 
re-expression of IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17, by upregulated expression of T-bet and retinoic
acid-related orphan receptor <U+03B3>t (ROR<U+03B3>t), respectively. Apparently, Th1 and Th17
cells share tasks in the control of inflammatory immune responses. Th cells
coexpressing IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 have been observed in vivo, but it remained elusive,
how these cells had been generated and whether they represent a distinct lineage 
of Th differentiation. It has been shown that ex vivo isolated Th1 and Th17 cells
are not interconvertable by TGF-ß/IL-6 and IL-12, respectively. Here, we show
that ex vivo isolated Th17 cells can be converted into Th1/Th17 cells by combined
IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-12 signaling. IFN-<U+03B3> is required to upregulate expression of the
IL-12Rß2 chain, and IL-12 for Th1 polarization. These Th1/Th17 cells stably
coexpress ROR<U+03B3>t and T-bet at the single-cell level. Our results suggest a
molecular pathway for the generation of Th1/Th17 cells in vivo, which combine the
pro-inflammatory potential of Th1 and Th17 cells.

Copyright © 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21061434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Jun;39(6):366-71.

[Expression of natural killer cell development-associated transcription factors
in nasal NK/T-cell lymphomas occurring in Chinese population].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang S(1), Nong L, Zhang Y, Wang Y, Li T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the expression and prognostic significance of T-bet and
its cofactors EOMES, ETS-1 and MEF [which are transcription factors and
responsible for development of natural killer (NK) cells] in the extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type (EN-NK/T-NT).
METHODS: The expression status of T-bet, EOMES, ETS-1 and MEF in 40 cases of
EN-NK/T-NT occurring in Chinese population was studied by immunohistochemistry
and in-situ hybridization (ISH). The clinical relevance was also evaluated. The
control cases included 18 cases of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, 10 cases of B-cell
lymphoma, 5 cases of normal spleen, 5 cases of normal thymus and 10 cases of
nasal mucosal tissues affected by chronic inflammation.
RESULTS: The expression levels of T-bet mRNA and protein were high in EN-NK/T-NT 
(82.5% and 100%, respectively) and in peripheral T cell lymphoma (17/18 and
72.2%, respectively). There was no expression in B-cell lymphoma. The expression 
of EOMES (80.0% by ISH), ETS-1 (82.5% by ISH) and MEF (62.5% by ISH) was high in 
EN-NK/T-NT, but not in the control group. The frequency of co-expression of T-bet
and EOMES (75%, 30/40) was significantly higher than that of the other genes.
Follow-up study showed that the mean and median survival of the 19 cases of
EN-NK/ T-NT was 33 months and 10 months, respectively. The five-year survival
rate was 10.5%. Statistical analysis showed that only treatment modalities
significantly affected the patients' overall survival; and none of the four
transcription factors had significant impact on survival. The expression rates of
T-bet, EOMES, ETS-1 or MEF had no significant difference between the 9 alive and 
the 10 dead cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of T-bet correlates with the lymphoma types. It is
mainly expressed in peripheral NK and T-cell lymphomas. The important functional 
gene engaged in NK cells development is highly expressed in EN-NK/T-NT. They may 
play a crucial role in pathogenesis and aggressive biologic behavior.

PMID: 21055151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Immunology. 2011 Feb;132(2):273-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2010.03363.x. Epub
2010 Oct 29.

Phenotypic and functional profiling of malaria-induced CD8 and CD4 T cells during
blood-stage infection with Plasmodium yoelii.

Chandele A(1), Mukerjee P, Das G, Ahmed R, Chauhan VS.

Author information: 
(1)Joint ICGEB-Emory Vaccine Center, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, India.

It is widely accepted that antibodies and CD4 T cells play critical roles in the 
immune response during the blood stage of malaria, whereas the role of CD8 T
cells remains controversial. Here, we show that both CD8 and CD4 T cells robustly
responded to an acute self-limiting blood-stage infection with Plasmodium yoelii.
Similar to antigen-specific T cells, both CD8 and CD4 T cells showed dynamic
expression of the surface proteins interleukin (IL)-7R and programmed death-1
(PD-1). Additionally, activated CD8 T cells showed differences in the expression 
of Killer cell lectin-like receptor G1, L-selectin and B cell lymphoma-2 and
produced granzyme B, indicating cytotoxic activity, and the initially high
expression of T-box transcription factor TBX21 in malaria-activated CD4 T cells
indicated an early T helper type 1 (Th1)-skewed immune response. Our data
demonstrate that blood-stage malaria infection results in a striking T-cell
response and that activated CD8 and CD4 T cells have phenotypic and functional
characteristics that are consistent with conventional antigen-specific effector
and memory T cells. Therefore, a better understanding of the CD8 and CD4 T-cell
response induced by blood-stage infection may prove to be essential in the
development of a vaccine that targets the erythrocytic stage of the malarial
parasite.

PMCID: PMC3050450
PMID: 21039472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 7;286(1):138-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.148205. Epub 2010
Oct 29.

Interleukin-2-inducible T cell kinase (Itk) network edge dependence for the
maturation of iNKT cell.

Qi Q(1), Xia M, Bai Y, Yu S, Cantorna M, August A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Immunology & Infectious Disease and Department of
Veterinary & Biomedical Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are a unique subset of innate T
lymphocytes that are selected by CD1d. They have diverse immune regulatory
functions via the rapid production of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and interleukin-4
(IL-4). In the absence of signaling nodes Itk and Txk, Tec family non-receptor
tyrosine kinases, mice exhibit a significant block in iNKT cell development. We
now show here that although the Itk node is required for iNKT cell maturation,
the kinase domain edge of Itk is not required for continued maturation iNKT cells
in the thymus compared with Itk-null mice. This rescue is dependent on the
expression of the Txk node. Furthermore, this kinase domain independent edge
rescue correlates with the increased expression of the transcription factors
T-bet, the IL-2/IL-15 receptor ß chain CD122, and suppression of eomesodermin
expression. By contrast, a-galactosyl ceramide induced cytokine secretion is
dependent on the kinase domain edge of Itk. These findings indicate that the Itk 
node uses a kinase domain independent edge, a scaffolding function, in the
signaling pathway leading to the maturation of iNKT cells. Furthermore, the
findings indicate that phosphorylation of substrates by the Itk node is only
partially required for maturation of iNKT cells, while functional activation of
iNKT cells is dependent on the kinase domain/activity edge of Itk.

PMCID: PMC3012968
PMID: 21036902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Sci Transl Med. 2010 Oct 27;2(55):55ra78. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3000448.

The inducible costimulator (ICOS) is critical for the development of human T(H)17
cells.

Paulos CM(1), Carpenito C, Plesa G, Suhoski MM, Varela-Rohena A, Golovina TN,
Carroll RG, Riley JL, June CH.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA. paulosc@mail.med.upenn.edu

Comment in
    Sci Transl Med. 2010 Oct 27;2(55):55ps52.

Human T helper 17 (T(H)17) cells regulate host defense, autoimmunity, and tumor
immunity. Although cytokines that control human T(H)17 cell development have been
identified, the costimulatory molecules important for T(H)17 cell generation are 
unknown. Here, we found that the inducible costimulator (ICOS) was critical for
the differentiation and expansion of human T(H)17 cells. Human cord blood
contained a subset of CD161(+)CD4(+) T cells that were recent emigrants from the 
thymus, expressed ICOS constitutively, and were imprinted as T(H)17 cells through
ICOS signaling. ICOS stimulation induced c-MAF, RORC2, and T-bet expression in
these cells, leading to increased secretion of interleukin-21 (IL-21), IL-17, and
interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) compared with cells stimulated with CD28. Conversely, CD28
ligation abrogated ICOS costimulation, dampening RORC2 expression while promoting
the expression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, which led to reduced secretion
of IL-17 and enhanced production of IL-22 compared with cells stimulated with
ICOS. Moreover, ICOS promoted the robust expansion of IL-17(+)IFN-<U+03B3>(+) human T
cells, and the antitumor activity of these cells after adoptive transfer into
mice bearing large human tumors was superior to that of cells expanded with CD28.
The therapeutic effectiveness of ICOS-expanded cells was associated with enhanced
functionality and engraftment in vivo. These findings reveal a vital role for
ICOS signaling in the generation and maintenance of human T(H)17 cells and
suggest that components of this pathway could be therapeutically targeted to
treat cancer or chronic infection and, conversely, that interruption of this
pathway may have utility in multiple sclerosis and other autoimmune syndromes.
These findings have provided the rationale for designing new clinical trials for 
tumor immunotherapy.

PMID: 20980695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hum Immunol. 2011 Jan;72(1):69-73. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2010.10.019. Epub 2010
Oct 25.

Association of TBX21 promoter polymorphisms with type 1 autoimmune hepatitis in a
Chinese population.

Chen S(1), Zhao W, Tan W, Luo X, Dan Y, You Z, Kuang X, Wang Y, Deng G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, the Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing, China.

The T-box transcription factor T-bet is a key regulator for the lineage
commitment in CD4 Th1 cells and CD8 T cells by activating the hallmark production
of interferon-<U+03B3>, and its expression level is linked to autoimmune diseases.
T-1993C and T-1514C polymorphisms in the TBX21 gene (encoding T-bet) promoter can
affect transcription activity. We investigated the distributions of these
functional polymorphisms in 84 adult patients with type 1 autoimmune hepatitis
(AIH-1) and 318 healthy controls. Intracellular T-bet staining of polarized CD4
Th1 cells from healthy controls corresponding to T-1993C genotypes were analyzed 
by flow cytometry. The -1993C allele frequency was 3.0% in AIH-1 and 11.8% in
controls (p = 0.000 25). Individuals carrying the -1993C allele had a decreased
risk to AIH-1 compared with those without the -1993C allele (p = 0.0016, odds
ratio [OR] = 0.22, 95% confidence interval = 0.09-0.56). No association was found
between the T-1514C polymorphism and AIH-1. The onset age of AIH-1 was also
accelerated among -1993TT homozygotic individuals (p = 0.013). The fractions of
T-bet positive Th1 cells in the -1993TT homozygotes were 2.2-fold higher than
those in -1993CC homozygotes (p = 0.002). Our results suggest that the T-1993C
polymorphism in the TBX21 promoter influences susceptibility to AIH-1 in a
Chinese population.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20977921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Immunol Rev. 2010 Nov;238(1):233-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2010.00952.x.

Molecular mechanisms by which T-bet regulates T-helper cell commitment.

Miller SA(1), Weinmann AS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington, Seattle, WA,
USA.

Current research suggests that a number of newly identified T-helper cell subsets
retain a degree of context-dependent plasticity in their signature cytokine
expression patterns. To understand this process, a major challenge is to
determine the molecular mechanisms by which lineage-defining transcription
factors regulate gene expression profiles in T-helper cells. This mechanistic
information will aid in our interpretation of whether a T-helper cell state that 
expresses or retains the capacity to re-express a combination of lineage-defining
transcription factors will have a stable or more flexible gene expression
profile. Studies examining the developmental T-box transcription factor T-bet
demonstrate the powerful information that is gained from combining in vivo
analysis with basic biochemical and molecular mechanism approaches.
Significantly, T-bet's ability to physically recruit epigenetic modifying
complexes, in particular a Jmjd3 H3K27-demethylase and a Set7/9
H3K4-methyltransferase complex, to its target genes allows T-bet to effectively
reverse and establish new epigenetic states. This observation suggests that until
T-bet is permanently extinguished, T-helper cells will retain some plasticity
toward a T-helper 1-like program. Therefore, insight into the complexity of
T-helper cell commitment decisions will be aided by determining the molecular
mechanisms for lineage-defining transcription factors.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC2988494
PMID: 20969596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Immunol. 2010 Nov 1;185(9):4988-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002042. Epub 2010
Oct 8.

Cutting edge: The transcription factor eomesodermin enables CD8+ T cells to
compete for the memory cell niche.

Banerjee A(1), Gordon SM, Intlekofer AM, Paley MA, Mooney EC, Lindsten T, Wherry 
EJ, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

CD8(+) T cells responding to intracellular infection give rise to cellular
progeny that become terminally differentiated effector cells and self-renewing
memory cells. T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes) are key transcription factors of
cytotoxic lymphocyte lineages. We show in this study that CD8(+) T cells lacking 
Eomes compete poorly in contributing to the pool of Ag-specific central memory
cells. Eomes-deficient CD8(+) T cells undergo primary clonal expansion but are
defective in long-term survival, populating the bone marrow niche and
re-expanding postrechallenge. The phenotype of Eomes-deficient CD8(+) T cells
supports the hypothesis that T-bet and Eomes can act redundantly to induce
effector functions, but can also act to reciprocally promote terminal
differentiation versus self-renewal of Ag-specific memory cells.

PMCID: PMC2975552
PMID: 20935204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Clin Invest. 2010 Nov;120(11):4077-90. doi: 10.1172/JCI42758.

Molecular profiling of cytomegalovirus-induced human CD8+ T cell differentiation.

Hertoghs KM(1), Moerland PD, van Stijn A, Remmerswaal EB, Yong SL, van de Berg
PJ, van Ham SM, Baas F, ten Berge IJ, van Lier RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.

CD8+ T cells play a critical role in the immune response to viral pathogens.
Persistent human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection results in a strong increase in
the number of virus-specific, quiescent effector-type CD8+ T cells with
constitutive cytolytic activity, but the molecular pathways involved in the
induction and maintenance of these cells are unknown. We show here that HCMV
infection induced acute and lasting changes in the transcriptomes of
virus-reactive T cells collected from HCMV-seropositive patients at distinct
stages of infection. Enhanced cell cycle and metabolic activity was restricted to
the acute phase of the response, but at all stages, HCMV-specific CD8+ T cells
expressed the Th1-associated transcription factors T-bet (TBX21) and eomesodermin
(EOMES), in parallel with continuous expression of IFNG mRNA and IFN-<U+03B3>-regulated 
genes. The cytolytic proteins granzyme B and perforin as well as the
fractalkine-binding chemokine receptor CX3CR1 were found in virus-reactive cells 
throughout the response. During HCMV latency, virus-specific CD8+ T cells lacked 
the typical features of exhausted cells found in other chronic infections.
Persistent effector cell traits together with the permanent changes in chemokine 
receptor usage of virus-specific, nonexhausted, long-lived CD8+ T cells may be
crucial to maintain lifelong protection from HCMV reactivation.

PMCID: PMC2964975
PMID: 20921622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 5;107(40):17292-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1004879107. Epub 2010 Sep 20.

IFN-{gamma} produced by CD8 T cells induces T-bet-dependent and -independent
class switching in B cells in responses to alum-precipitated protein vaccine.

Mohr E(1), Cunningham AF, Toellner KM, Bobat S, Coughlan RE, Bird RA, MacLennan
IC, Serre K.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Immune Regulation, School of Immunity and 
Infection, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.
emohr@igc.gulbenkian.pt

Alum-precipitated protein (alum protein) vaccines elicit long-lasting
neutralizing antibody responses that prevent bacterial exotoxins and viruses from
entering cells. Typically, these vaccines induce CD4 T cells to become T helper 2
(Th2) cells that induce Ig class switching to IgG1. We now report that CD8 T
cells also respond to alum proteins, proliferating extensively and producing
IFN-<U+03B3>, a key Th1 cytokine. These findings led us to question whether adoptive
transfer of antigen-specific CD8 T cells alters the characteristic CD4 Th2
response to alum proteins and the switching pattern in responding B cells. To
this end, WT mice given transgenic ovalbumin (OVA)-specific CD4 (OTII) or CD8
(OTI) T cells, or both, were immunized with alum-precipitated OVA. Cotransfer of 
antigen-specific CD8 T cells skewed switching patterns in responding B cells from
IgG1 to IgG2a and IgG2b. Blocking with anti-IFN-<U+03B3> antibody largely inhibited this
altered B-cell switching pattern. The transcription factor T-bet is required in B
cells for IFN-<U+03B3>-dependent switching to IgG2a. By contrast, we show that this
transcription factor is dispensable in B cells both for IFN-<U+03B3>-induced switching
to IgG2b and for inhibition of switching to IgG1. Thus, T-bet dependence
identifies distinct transcriptional pathways in B cells that regulate
IFN-<U+03B3>-induced switching to different IgG isotypes.

PMCID: PMC2951392
PMID: 20855629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mult Scler. 2011 Jan;17(1):57-66. doi: 10.1177/1352458510381256. Epub 2010 Sep
16.

Transcriptional characteristics of CD4+ T cells in multiple sclerosis: relative
lack of suppressive populations in blood.

Edström M(1), Mellergård J, Mjösberg J, Jenmalm M, Vrethem M, Press R, Dahle C,
Ernerudh J.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Division of
Clinical Immunology, Unit of Autoimmunity and Immune Regulation, Linköping
University, Sweden. mans.edstrom@liu.se

BACKGROUND: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is hypothetically caused by autoreactive Th1 
and Th17 cells, whereas Th2 and regulatory T cells may confer protection. The
development of Th subpopulations is dependant on the expression of
lineage-specific transcription factors.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the balance of CD4(+)T cell
populations in relapsing-remitting MS.
METHODS: Blood mRNA expression of TBX21, GATA3, RORC, FOXP3 and EBI3 was assessed
in 33 patients with relapsing-remitting MS and 20 healthy controls. In addition, 
flow cytometry was performed to assess T lymphocyte numbers.
RESULTS: In relapsing-remitting MS, diminished expression of FOXP3 (Treg) was
found (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), despite normal numbers of CD4(+)CD25(hi)Treg. Immunoregulatory 
EBI3 and Th2-associated GATA3 ([a-z]+) was also decreased in MS (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005 and
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05, respectively). Expression of TBX21 (Th1) and RORC (Th17) did not differ
between patients and controls. Similar changes were observed when analysing
beta-interferon treated (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>12) or untreated (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>21) patients. Analysis of
transcription factor ratios, comparing TBX21/GATA3 and RORC/FOXP3, revealed an
increase in the RORC/FOXP3 ratio in patients with relapsing-remitting MS
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005).
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate systemic defects at the mRNA level, involving
downregulation of beneficial CD4(+)phenotypes. This might play a role in disease 
development by permitting activation of harmful T cell populations.

PMID: 20847001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mucosal Immunol. 2010 Nov;3(6):567-77. doi: 10.1038/mi.2010.53. Epub 2010 Sep 15.

Transcriptional regulation of the mucosal immune system mediated by T-bet.

Powell N(1), Canavan JB, MacDonald TT, Lord GM.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Comprehensive Biomedical
Research Centre at Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, Guy's Hospital,
King's College London, London, UK.

The immune system faces the arduous task of defending the mucosal surfaces from
invading pathogens, but must simultaneously repress responses against commensal
organisms and other inert antigens that are abundant in the external environment,
as inappropriate immune activation might expose the host to increased risk of
autoimmunity. The behavior of individual immune cells is governed by the
expression of transcription factors that are responsible for switching immune
response genes on and off. T-bet (T-box expressed in T cells) has emerged as one 
of the key transcription factors responsible for controlling the fate of both
innate and adaptive immune cells, and its expression in different immune cells
found at mucosal surfaces is capable of dictating the critical balance between
permitting robust host immunity and limiting susceptibility to autoimmunity and
allergy.

PMID: 20844482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol. 2010;20(4):324-30.

Effects of cigarette smoke extract and nicotine on bronchial tone and
acetylcholine-induced airway contraction in mouse lung slices.

Streck E(1), Jörres RA, Huber RM, Bergner A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Medizinische Klinik-Innenstadt,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Tobacco smoke is a key risk factor for chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, but it may also alter the pathophysiology of asthma. In the present
study, we analyzed whether tobacco smoke has acute or chronic effects on
bronchial tone and whether it alters bronchial reactivity in vitro.
METHODS: Airways in murine lung slices were digitally recorded and the change in 
cross-sectional area with time was quantified. T-bet KO mice served as a model
for bronchial hyperreactivity. T-bet KO mice show a shift towards type 2 helper T
lymphocytes and display histological as well as functional characteristics of
asthma. Cigarette smoke extract (CSE) was obtained using commercially available
cigarettes (Gauloise Blondes) by drawing cigarette smoke slowly through a water
pump into a tube containing 10 mL of DMEM culture medium.
RESULTS: Acute exposure to CSE led to relaxation of the airway. Acute exposure to
nicotine resulted in a minor relaxation of the airway in Balb/C mice and in
nonsignificant relaxation of the airway in T-bet KO mice. The nicotinic
acetylcholine-receptor hexamethonium partially inhibited CSE-induced airway
relaxation. Airway contraction in response to acetylcholine was stronger in T-bet
KO mice than in Balb/C mice. After exposure to CSE or nicotine for 48 hours,
acetylcholine-induced airway contraction was no longer different between the 2
types of mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that acute exposure to CSE leads to airway
relaxation, which is partially mediated by nicotine. Chronic exposure to CSE
reverses bronchial hyperreactivity in the airways of T-bet KO mice; this effect
can be mimicked by chronic exposure to nicotine.

PMID: 20815310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Virchows Arch. 2010 Oct;457(4):451-6. doi: 10.1007/s00428-010-0961-1. Epub 2010
Aug 31.

Differences in the T-bet and GATA-3 expression patterns between lymphocytic
colitis and coeliac disease.

Jöhrens K(1), Grünbaum M, Anagnostopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Medical University
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Lymphocytic colitis (LC) is a disease of unknown aetiology. Among other
pathogenetic possibilities, an abnormal reaction to a luminal antigen has been
discussed. To clarify this fact, we characterized the inflammatory infiltrate in 
LC and compared it with the Th1 response-related coeliac disease (CD). Biopsies
from 10 LC and 10 CD patients were analyzed by immunohistochemistry for detection
of T-bet, the master regulator of Th1 response and its antagonist GATA-3 in T
cells employing double labellings. In LC, 10-20% of intraepithelial lymphocytes
(IEL) expressed GATA-3 and the remaining T-bet, whereas in CD, all IEL were
T-bet-positive. The T cells in the lamina propria of LC (65-70% CD4+; 30-35%
CD8+) showed a mixed expression pattern of T-bet and GATA-3. The majority of the 
CD4+ T cells were GATA-3+, while T-bet and GATA-3 were expressed at a similar
frequency by the CD8+ T cells. Most of the T cells in the lamina propria of CD
specimens were CD4+, showing a predominant T-bet expression. Also, most of the
CD8+ lamina propria T cells in CD were T-bet+. We conclude that in contrast to
CD, which exhibits immunophenotypical features of a Th1-response, LC shows
features of a mixed Th1/Th2 immune response.

PMID: 20809338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Leukoc Biol. 2010 Nov;88(5):965-71. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0410238. Epub 2010 Aug 31.

T-bet-independent effects of IL-12 family cytokines on regulation of Th17
responses to experimental T. cruzi infection.

Cobb D(1), Hambright D, Smeltz RB.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Commonwealth University, Medical College of Virginia, Richmond, VA
23298, USA.

Tbx21 (i.e., T-bet) is an IFN-<U+03B3>-inducible transcription factor that promotes Th1 
differentiation. Previously, we reported that Tbx21(-/-) mice develop a robust
Th17 response to the parasite Trypanosoma cruzi, including CD4(+) T cell subsets 
producing IL-17 and IFN-<U+03B3>. Because of the known inhibitory effects of IFN-<U+03B3> on
Th17 cells, the purpose of this study was to determine the contribution of IFN-<U+03B3> 
to regulation of Th17 differentiation during the course of T. cruzi infection. We
observed that infection of IFN-<U+03B3>(-/-) or Stat-1(-/-) mice generated increased
numbers of IL-17-producing cells. In sharp contrast to infected Stat-1(-/-) or
Tbx21(-/-) mice, however, IFN-<U+03B3>(-/-) mice developed a lower overall Th17
response, suggesting that IFN-<U+03B3> was not required for T-bet-dependent activity,
including T-bet-dependent expression of CXCR3. To determine if IFN-<U+03B3> could
influence Th17 responses indirectly by acting on APCs, we neutralized IFN-<U+03B3> in
cultures containing APC and T. cruzi antigens. Although anti-IFN-<U+03B3> increased
IL-17 production modestly, anti-IFN-<U+03B3> and anti-IL-12 led to a significant
enhancement of T. cruzi-specific IL-17 (P<0.01). In contrast to the inhibitory
effects of IL-12, IL-23 was able to stimulate Tbx21(-/-) T cells and cause a
striking increase in T. cruzi-specific IL-17. These data show that the IL-12
family of cytokines can influence Th17 responses in a T-bet-independent manner
and that the effects of IFN-<U+03B3> are not necessarily related to its ability to
induce T-bet expression in T cells.

PMID: 20807701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Discov Med. 2010 Aug;10(51):134-43.

The genetics of systemic sclerosis.

Agarwal SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, Department of Internal
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, 6431 Fannin, 
MSB 5.270, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. Sandeep.K.Agarwal@uth.tmc.edu

Systemic sclerosis (SSc, scleroderma) is an autoimmune disease clinically
characterized by progressive fibrosis in the skin and internal organs. While the 
pathogenesis of SSc is not completely understood, familial studies and genetic
studies suggest that SSc is a complex polygenic disease. In the current review,
we will discuss recent studies investigating genetic susceptibility to SSc.
Candidate gene studies have identified critical immunoregulatory genes and gene
regions including BANK1, FAM167A-BLK, IL23R, IRF5, STAT4, TBX21, and TNFSF4 as
susceptibility genes for the development of SSc. More recently a genome-wide
association study has been performed and identified CD247 (CD3-zeta) as a novel
genetic risk factor for the susceptibility to SSc. Together these genetic
association studies have substantially advanced our understanding of SSc
pathogenesis and form the foundation for future studies seeking to understand the
complexities of SSc.

PMCID: PMC3803145
PMID: 20807474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Br J Haematol. 2010 Nov;151(3):207. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08359.x.

Hairy cell leukaemia, negative for conventional cell markers, diagnosed using
antibodies to annexin A1 and T-bet.

Sadik W(1), Coupland S, Thachil J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University Hospital Aintree, Royal Liverpool
University Hospital, UK.

PMID: 20738311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Toxicol Sci. 2010 Nov;118(1):318; author reply 319. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq248.
Epub 2010 Aug 18.

Cobalt-Induced lung injury and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha.

Inoue K, Kiyono M, Sone Y, Takano H.

Comment on
    Toxicol Sci. 2010 Aug;116(2):673-81.

PMID: 20719750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Immunol. 2010 Sep 15;185(6):3174-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000749. Epub 2010
Aug 16.

T-bet and eomesodermin are required for T cell-mediated antitumor immune
responses.

Zhu Y(1), Ju S, Chen E, Dai S, Li C, Morel P, Liu L, Zhang X, Lu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Cell-mediated adaptive immunity is very important in tumor immune surveillance
and tumor vaccination. However, the genetic program underlying an effective
adaptive antitumor immunity is elusive. T-bet and Eomesodermin (Eomes) have been 
suggested to be master regulators of Th1 cells and CD8(+) T cells. However,
whether they are important for T cell-mediated antitumor immunity is
controversial. In this paper, we show that the combined germline deletion of
T-bet and T cell-specific deletion of Eomes resulted in profound defects in
adaptive antitumor immune responses. T-bet and Eomes drive Tc1 differentiation by
preventing alternative CD8(+) T cell differentiation to Tc17 or Tc2 cells.
Surprisingly, T-bet and Eomes are not critical for the generation of systemic CTL
activities against cancer cells. Instead, T-bet and Eomes are crucial for tumor
infiltration by CD8(+) T cells. This study defines T-bet and Eomes as critical
regulators of T cell-mediated immune responses against tumor.

PMID: 20713880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Blood. 2010 Nov 4;116(18):3494-504. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-02-268169. Epub 2010 
Aug 9.

When Toll-like receptor and T-cell receptor signals collide: a mechanism for
enhanced CD8 T-cell effector function.

Geng D(1), Zheng L, Srivastava R, Asprodites N, Velasco-Gonzalez C, Davila E.

Author information: 
(1)University of Maryland Greenebaum Cancer Center, 655 W. Baltimore Street,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Emerging reports reveal that activating Toll-like receptor-2 (TLR2)-MyD88 signals
in CD8 T lymphocytes enhances cytokine production and cytotoxicity; however, the 
signaling pathway remains undefined. In the present study, we examined the
physiologic significance and molecular mechanisms involved in this process. We
found that TLR2 engagement on T-cell receptor transgenic CD8 OT-1 T cells
increased T-bet transcription factor levels consequently, augmenting effector
transcript and protein levels both in vivo and in vitro. In contrast, TLR2
agonist did not costimulate TLR2(-/-)OT-1 or MyD88(-/-)OT-1 T cells. Elevated
T-bet levels in TLR2-MyD88-activated T cells was a consequence of increased
biosynthesis resulting from the enhanced activation of the mammalian target of
the rapamycin (mTOR) pathway. Inhibiting mTOR, Akt, or protein kinase C in T
cells abolished the costimulatory effects of the TLR2 agonist. In vivo,
activating TLR2-MyD88 signals in T cells increased effector-molecule levels and
enhanced the clearance of Listeria monocytogenes-Ova. These results help define a
signaling pathway linking the TLR-MyD88 and mTOR pathway in an Akt- and protein
kinase C-dependent manner. These results highlight a critical role for MyD88
signaling in T-cell activation and cytotoxicity. Furthermore, these findings
offer the opportunity for improving the efficacy of vaccines and T cell-based
immunotherapies by targeting TLR-MyD88 signaling within T cells.

PMCID: PMC2981476
PMID: 20696947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Scand J Immunol. 2010 Sep;72(3):250-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2010.02425.x.

Differentiation imbalance of Th1/Th17 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells might
contribute to pathogenesis of Hashimoto's thyroiditis.

Shi Y(1), Wang H, Su Z, Chen J, Xue Y, Wang S, Xue Y, He Z, Yang H, Zhou C, Kong 
F, Liu Y, Yang P, Lu L, Shao Q, Huang X, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Laboratory Immunology, Institute of Laboratory
Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China.

T helper 17(Th17) cell is a new subset of CD4(+) T cells that produce a
proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-17 (IL-17). Th17 cells have recently been
shown to play a critical role in many autoimmune diseases that had previously
been thought to be Th1 dominant. Although Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) was
thought to be a Th1-type disease, the contributions of Th17 cells to the
pathogenesis remain unclear. In this study, we investigated the expression levels
of Th1/Th17 cell-associated factors in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) 
and plasma from patients with HT by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (RT-qPCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Our results
showed that the expression levels of Th1 cells-related T-bet and interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) mRNA in PBMC from HT significantly decreased. However, the mRNA of
Th17 coherent retinoic acid-related orphan nuclear receptor gamma t (RORgammat)
and IL-17 in patients with HT increased. In addition, a negative correlation
between T-bet and RORgammat mRNA expression was found in patients with HT, and
the similar phenomena also appeared on the levels of mRNA and plasma
concentration between IFN-gamma and IL-17. It suggested that Th17 cells rather
than Th1 cells predominated among patients suffering from HT, and Th17 cells
might be involved in the pathogenesis of HT.

PMID: 20696023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 17;107(33):14751-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1003852107. Epub 2010 Aug 2.

Th17 plasticity in human autoimmune arthritis is driven by the inflammatory
environment.

Nistala K(1), Adams S, Cambrook H, Ursu S, Olivito B, de Jager W, Evans JG, Cimaz
R, Bajaj-Elliott M, Wedderburn LR.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, University College London Institute of Child Health, London
WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom. K.Nistala@ich.ucl.ac.uk

In several murine models of autoimmune arthritis, Th17 cells are the dominant
initiators of inflammation. In human arthritis the majority of IL-17-secreting
cells within the joint express a cytokine phenotype intermediate between Th17 and
Th1. Here we show that Th17/1 cells from the joints of children with inflammatory
arthritis express high levels of both Th17 and Th1 lineage-specific transcription
factors, RORC2 and T-bet. Modeling the generation of Th17/1 in vitro, we show
that Th17 cells "convert" to Th17/1 under conditions that mimic the disease site,
namely low TGFbeta and high IL-12 levels, whereas Th1 cells cannot convert to
Th17. Th17/1 cells from the inflamed joint share T-cell receptor (TCR) clonality 
with Th17 cells, suggesting a shared clonal origin between Th17 and Th17/1 cells 
in arthritis. Using CD161, a lectin-like receptor that is a marker of human Th17,
we show synovial Th17 and Th17/1 cells, and unexpectedly, a large proportion of
Th1 cells express CD161. We provide evidence to support a Th17 origin for Th1
cells expressing CD161. In vitro, Th17 cells that convert to a Th1 phenotype
maintain CD161 expression. In the joint CD161+ Th1 cells share features with Th17
cells, with shared TCR clonality, expression of RORC2 and CCR6 and response to
IL-23, although they are IL-17 negative. We propose that the Th17 phenotype may
be unstable and that Th17 cells may convert to Th17/1 and Th1 cells in human
arthritis. Therefore therapies targeting the induction of Th17 cells could also
attenuate Th17/1 and Th1 effector populations within the inflamed joint.

PMCID: PMC2930428
PMID: 20679229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Immunol. 2010 Sep 1;185(5):2895-902. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001294. Epub 2010
Jul 30.

Intralesional delivery of dendritic cells engineered to express T-bet promotes
protective type 1 immunity and the normalization of the tumor microenvironment.

Qu Y(1), Chen L, Pardee AD, Taylor JL, Wesa AK, Storkus WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

T-bet (Tbx21), a T-box transcription factor, has been previously identified as a 
master regulator of type 1 T cell polarization. We have also recently shown that 
the genetic engineering of human dendritic cells (DCs) to express human T-bet
cDNA yields type 1-polarizing APCs in vitro (1). In the present study, murine
CD11c(+) DCs were transduced with a recombinant adenovirus encoding full-length
murine T-bets (DC.mTbets) and analyzed for their immunomodulatory functions in
vitro and in vivo. Within the range of markers analyzed, DC.mTbets exhibited a
control DC phenotype and were indistinguishable from control DCs in their ability
to promote allogenic T cell proliferation in MLR in vitro. However, DC.mTbets
were superior to control DCs in promoting Th1 and Tc1 responses in vitro via a
mechanism requiring DC-T cell interaction or the close proximity of these two
cell types and that can only partially be explained by the action of
DC-elaborated IL-12p70. When injected into day 7 s.c. CMS4 sarcoma lesions
growing in syngenic BALB/c mice, DC.mTbets dramatically slowed tumor progression 
(versus control DCs) and extended overall survival via a mechanism dependent on
both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells and, to a lesser extent, asialoGM1(+) NK cells.
DC.mTbet-based therapy also promoted superior tumor-specific Tc1 responses in the
spleens and tumor-draining lymph nodes of treated animals, and within the tumor
microenvironment it inhibited the accumulation of CD11b(+)Gr1(+) myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells and normalized CD31(+) vascular structures. These findings
support the potential translational utility of DC.Tbets as a therapeutic modality
in the cancer setting.

PMCID: PMC3151673
PMID: 20675595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Immunity. 2010 Jul 23;33(1):35-47. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.07.004.

Modular utilization of distal cis-regulatory elements controls Ifng gene
expression in T cells activated by distinct stimuli.

Balasubramani A(1), Shibata Y, Crawford GE, Baldwin AS, Hatton RD, Weaver CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Distal cis-regulatory elements play essential roles in the T lineage-specific
expression of cytokine genes. We have mapped interactions of three trans-acting
factors-NF-kappaB, STAT4, and T-bet-with cis elements in the Ifng locus. We find 
that RelA is critical for optimal Ifng expression and is differentially recruited
to multiple elements contingent upon T cell receptor (TCR) or interleukin-12
(IL-12) plus IL-18 signaling. RelA recruitment to at least four elements is
dependent on T-bet-dependent remodeling of the Ifng locus and corecruitment of
STAT4. STAT4 and NF-kappaB therefore cooperate at multiple cis elements to enable
NF-kappaB-dependent enhancement of Ifng expression. RelA recruitment to distal
elements was similar in T helper 1 (Th1) and effector CD8(+) T (Tc1) cells,
although T-bet was dispensable in CD8 effectors. These results support a model of
Ifng regulation in which distal cis-regulatory elements differentially recruit
key transcription factors in a modular fashion to initiate gene transcription
induced by distinct activation signals.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2994316
PMID: 20643337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2010 Nov;29(5):705-15. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2010.06.016.
Epub 2010 Jul 13.

Sequence and expression analysis of two T helper master transcription factors,
T-bet and GATA3, in rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss and analysis of their
expression during bacterial and parasitic infection.

Wang T(1), Holland JW, Martin SA, Secombes CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Fish Immunology Research Centre, Institute of Biological and
Environmental Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 2TZ, UK.

The polarization of naïve CD4+ T cells to T helper (Th)1 or Th2 cells is
specified by two master transcription factors, T-bet and GATA3, and is an
essential feature of mammalian adaptive immune responses to pathogens and the
development of long-lasting immunity. We report here the cloning of rainbow trout
Oncorhynchus mykiss T-bet and GATA3, to allow the future evaluation of the
existence of Th1 and Th2 cells in salmonid fish. The trout T-bet translation
shares high amino acid identities to other fish T-bet molecules (71-72%) but low 
identities to mammalian T-bet genes (41-42%), although the middle T-box DNA
binding domain is highly conserved among all the T-bet proteins from fish and
mammals. The trout GATA3 has high amino acid sequence identities (73-88%) to all 
known vertebrate molecules, with two highly conserved zinc finger motifs. The
identity of the trout T-bet and GATA3 molecules was confirmed by phylogenetic
tree analysis. A comparable expression level of T-bet and GATA3 was seen in the
spleen, head kidney and muscle in healthy trout, but a higher expression level of
GATA3 was seen in the gills, brain, skin and intestine relative to that of T-bet.
T-bet and GATA3 expression was modulated by different stimulants. The T cell
stimulant PHA up-regulated the expression of both T-bet and GATA3 in splenocytes,
suggesting that they may be mainly expressed by activated T cells. The expression
of T-bet and GATA3 in the spleen was increased by acute stress, but their
expression was inhibited by bacterial (Yersinia ruckeri) infection. In a
parasitic infection model, Tetracapsuloides bryosalmonae infection induced a
biased gene expression profile where a large increase in the expression of T-bet,
IFN-gamma and IL-2 was seen, suggesting that a Th1-like response is likely
induced by this disease. A better understanding of pathogen modulated expression 
of T-bet and GATA3, and the potential underlying host immune responses elicited
as a consequence of their expression, may allow novel future control measures
against disease in fish to be developed.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20633655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Apr;49(4):316-9.

[Expression of interleukin-18 and interleukin-18 receptor alpha chain of the
peripheral white blood cells in immune thrombocytopenia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Q(1), Zhan FX, Shan NN, Hou M, Yang XJ, Lu N, Wang HC, Zhang XL, Ji XB, Ji
CY.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Oncology Centre, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan 250012,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expression of interleukin (IL)-18 of the peripheral
blood cells and IL-18 receptor alpha chain (IL-18Ralpha) on the surface of
CD(3)(+) cells in patients newly diagnosed as immune thrombocytopenia (ITP)
before medication and to explore the roles of IL-18 and IL-18Ralpha in the
development of ITP.
METHODS: Eighteen out-patients or inpatients with acute ITP accepting treatment
in Qilu Hospital were enrolled in this study and 15 matching healthy subjects
were taken as control. Plasma IL-18 level was detected with enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), the expression of IL-18Ralpha on CD(3)(+)
lymphocytes and total lymphocytes were measured with flow cytometry;T-bet and
GATA-3 mRNA were measured with reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR).
RESULTS: The expression of IL-18 in acute ITP plasma was (468.57 + or - 141.62)
ng/L and IL-18Ralpha on the surface of CD(3)(+) cells and lymphocytes were (8.50 
+ or - 3.16)% and (9.16 + or - 2.98)% respectively. The levels of IL-18 and
IL-18Ralpha were increased in active ITP patients as compared with those in the
controls (P < 0.05). The levels of IL-18 mRNA (0.12 + or - 0.02) and T-bet mRNA
(0.07 + or - 0.02) were significantly increased in patients with active ITP as
compared with those in the controls (P < 0.05), while GATA-3 mRNA (0.0039 + or - 
0.0014) were significantly decreased in patients with active ITP (P < 0.05). The 
balance between T-bet and GATA-3 was significantly disturbed in ITP.
CONCLUSIONS: Through the variation of the levels of gene and protein, our study
showed that IL-18 and IL-18Ralpha might upregulate the expression of
Th1-cytokines in ITP patients. It is also suggested that IL-18 has potential
association with the development of ITP. Especially, it may provide a new
treatment method for ITP by regulating the ratio of T-bet and GATA-3 and resuming
the balance of Th1/Th2.

PMID: 20627039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Immunol. 2010 Aug 15;185(4):2089-98. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000818. Epub 2010
Jul 12.

Tc17 cells are capable of mediating immunity to vaccinia virus by acquisition of 
a cytotoxic phenotype.

Yeh N(1), Glosson NL, Wang N, Guindon L, McKinley C, Hamada H, Li Q, Dutton RW,
Shrikant P, Zhou B, Brutkiewicz RR, Blum JS, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Herman B. Wells Center for
Pediatric Research, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA.

CD8 T cells can acquire cytokine-secreting phenotypes paralleling cytokine
production from Th cells. IL-17-secreting CD8 T cells, termed Tc17 cells, were
shown to promote inflammation and mediate immunity to influenza. However, most
reports observed a lack of cytotoxic activity by Tc17 cells. In this study, we
explored the anti-viral activity of Tc17 cells using a vaccinia virus (VV)
infection model. Tc17 cells expanded during VV infection, and TCR transgenic Tc17
cells were capable of clearing recombinant VV infection. In vivo, adoptively
transferred Tc17 cells lost the IL-17-secreting phenotype, even in the absence of
stimulation, but they did not acquire IFN-gamma-secreting potential unless
stimulated with a virus-encoded Ag. However, examination of cells following
infection demonstrated that these cells acquired cytotoxic potential in vivo,
even in the absence of IFN-gamma. Cytotoxic potential correlated with Fasl
expression, and the cytotoxic activity of postinfection Tc17 cells was partially 
blocked by the addition of anti-FasL. Thus, Tc17 cells mediate VV clearance
through expression of specific molecules associated with cytotoxicity but
independent of an acquired Tc1 phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2916954
PMID: 20624947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Exp Med. 2010 Aug 2;207(8):1599-608. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091663. Epub 2010 Jul
12.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta limits the expansion of
pathogenic Th cells during central nervous system autoimmunity.

Dunn SE(1), Bhat R, Straus DS, Sobel RA, Axtell R, Johnson A, Nguyen K, Mukundan 
L, Moshkova M, Dugas JC, Chawla A, Steinman L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. sdunn@uhnresearch.ca

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs; PPAR-alpha, PPAR-delta, and
PPAR-gamma) comprise a family of nuclear receptors that sense fatty acid levels
and translate this information into altered gene transcription. Previously, it
was reported that treatment of mice with a synthetic ligand activator of
PPAR-delta, GW0742, ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), 
indicating a possible role for this nuclear receptor in the control of central
nervous system (CNS) autoimmune inflammation. We show that mice deficient in
PPAR-delta (PPAR-delta(-/-)) develop a severe inflammatory response during EAE
characterized by a striking accumulation of IFN-gamma(+)IL-17A(-) and
IFN-gamma(+)IL-17A(+) CD4(+) cells in the spinal cord. The preferential expansion
of these T helper subsets in the CNS of PPAR-delta(-/-) mice occurred as a result
of a constellation of immune system aberrations that included higher CD4(+) cell 
proliferation, cytokine production, and T-bet expression and enhanced expression 
of IL-12 family cytokines by myeloid cells. We also show that the effect of
PPAR-delta in inhibiting the production of IFN-gamma and IL-12 family cytokines
is ligand dependent and is observed in both mouse and human immune cells.
Collectively, these findings suggest that PPAR-delta serves as an important
molecular brake for the control of autoimmune inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2916127
PMID: 20624891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Feb;1812(2):246-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2010.05.012.
Epub 2010 Jun 18.

Th1 versus Th17: are T cell cytokines relevant in multiple sclerosis?

Lovett-Racke AE(1), Yang Y, Racke MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, Ohio State 
University Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Amy.Lovett-Racke@osumc.edu

Our understanding of the pathophysiology of multiple sclerosis (MS) has evolved
significantly over the past two decades as the fields of immunology and
neurobiology provide new avenues of exploration into the cause and mechanism of
the disease. It has been known for decades that T cells have different cytokine
phenotypes, yet the cytokine phenotype of pathogenic T cells in MS is still an
area of debate. In EAE, it appears that IFN<U+03B3> and IL-17, produced by Th1 and Th17 
cells respectively, are not the critical factor that determines T cell
encephalitogenicity. However, there are molecules such as IL-23, T-bet and STAT4,
that appear to be critical, yet it is unclear whether all these molecules
contribute to a common, yet undefined pathway, or act in a synergistic manner
which culminates in encephalitogenicity has still to be determined. Therefore,
the focus of research on effector T cells in MS should focus on pathways upstream
of the cytokines that define Th1 and Th17 cells, since downstream products, such 
as IFN<U+03B3> and IL-17, probably are not critical determinants of whether an effector 
T cells is capable of trafficking to the CNS and inducing inflammatory
demyelination.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3004998
PMID: 20600875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Infect Dis. 2010 Aug 15;202(3):406-15. doi: 10.1086/653829.

T-bet, GATA-3, and Foxp3 expression and Th1/Th2 cytokine production in the
clinical outcome of human infection with Leishmania (Viannia) species.

Díaz YR(1), Rojas R, Valderrama L, Saravia NG.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Internacional de Entrenamiento e Investigaciones Médicas (CIDEIM),
Cali, Colombia.

BACKGROUND: T cell differentiation determines susceptibility and resistance to
experimental cutaneous leishmaniasis, yet mixed T1/Th2 responses characterize the
clinical spectrum of human infection with Leishmania (Viannia) species.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To discern the interrelationship of T cell differentiation
and outcome of human infection, we examined factors that regulate T cell
differentiation and Th1/Th2 cytokine responses in asymptomatic infection, active 
and historical chronic and recurrent cutaneous leishmaniasis. T-bet, GATA-3,
Foxp3, and cytokine gene expression were quantified by real-time polymerase chain
reaction and correlated with interleukin 2, interferon gamma, tumor necrosis
factor alpha, interleukin 4, interleukin 13, and interleukin 10 secretion during 
in vitro response to live Leishmania panamensis.
RESULTS: Higher GATA-3 expression than T-bet expression occurred throughout the
15 days of coculture with promastigotes; however, neither transcription nor
secretion of interleukin 4 was detected. A sustained inverse correlation between 
GATA-3 expression and secretion of proinflammatory cytokines interferon gamma and
tumor necrosis factor alpha was observed in asymptomatic infection. In contrast, 
higher T-bet expression and a higher ratio of T-bet to GATA-3 characterized
active recurrent disease. Down-regulation of T-bet and GATA-3 expression and
increased interleukin 2 secretion, compared with control subjects, was directly
correlated with Foxp3 expression and interleukin 13 secretion in chronic disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Regulation of the inflammatory response rather than biased Th1/Th2
response distinguished asymptomatic and recalcitrant outcomes of infection with
Leishmnania viannia species.

PMID: 20583921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cytokine. 2010 Sep;51(3):259-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2010.05.011. Epub 2010 Jun
26.

The modulative effect of Cyperi Rhizoma on Th1/Th2 lineage development.

Bae H(1), Park N, Kim Y, Hong M, Shin M, Kim SH, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee University
#1 Hoeki-dong Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

To evaluate the direct effects of Cyperi Rhizoma (CR), a plant water extract, on 
Th1/Th2 lineage development in vitro, this study was conducted. Sorted CD4(+) T
cells obtained from the splenocytes of BALB/c mice were activated with
anti-CD3/anti-CD28 and then cultured in medium that contained CR medium under Th1
inducing or Th2 inducing conditions. Subsequently, IFN-gamma or IL-4 secreting
cells were quantitated using flow cytometry analysis. In addition, IFN-gamma and 
IL-4 protein secretions were detected by ELISA analysis, after which, IFN-gamma
and T-bet transcripts, key players in the Th1 immune function, and also, IL-4 and
GATA-3, which are primary components in the Th2 immune mechanism, were
quantitated by real-time RT-PCR. CR had no mitogenic effects on un-stimulated
CD4(+) T cells, however, it increased the CD4(+) T cell population. Th1/Th2
polarization experiments revealed that CR enhanced IFN-gamma secretion in Th1
cells, but reduced the IL-4 in Th2 cells, and this occurred in a dose-dependent
manner and showed significances. In addition, under Th1/Th2 skewed conditions,
the transcription levels of IFN-gamma and T-bet were considerably increased,
while the expressions of IL-4 and GATA-3 were relatively decreased with CR
treatment. These findings suggest that CR enhances Th1 lineage development by
increasing Th1 specific cytokine expression and secretion and reduces Th2 lineage
development by repressing Th2 specific cytokine productions. Therefore, CR
extract may be useful for preventing the onset of allergies or improving allergic
symptoms.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20580249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Sci Transl Med. 2010 Jun 23;2(37):37ra44. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3000813.

Nuclear role of WASp in the pathogenesis of dysregulated TH1 immunity in human
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.

Taylor MD(1), Sadhukhan S, Kottangada P, Ramgopal A, Sarkar K, D'Silva S,
Selvakumar A, Candotti F, Vyas YM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

The clinical symptomatology in the X-linked Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS), a
combined immunodeficiency and autoimmune disease resulting from WAS protein
(WASp) deficiency, reflects the underlying coexistence of an impaired T helper 1 
(TH1) immunity alongside intact TH2 immunity. This suggests a role for WASp in
patterning T(H) subtype immunity, yet the molecular basis for the TH1-TH2
imbalance in human WAS is unknown. We have discovered a nuclear role for WASp in 
the transcriptional regulation of the TH1 regulator gene TBX21 at the chromatin
level. In primary TH1-differentiating cells, a fraction of WASp is found in the
nucleus, where it is recruited to the proximal promoter locus of the TBX21 gene, 
but not to the core promoter of GATA3 (a TH2 regulator gene) or RORc (a TH17
regulator gene). Genome-wide mapping demonstrates association of WASp in vivo
with the gene-regulatory network that orchestrates TH1 cell fate choice in the
human TH cell genome. Functionally, nuclear WASp associates with H3K4
trimethyltransferase [RBBP5 (retinoblastoma-binding protein 5)] and H3K9/H3K36
tridemethylase [JMJD2A (Jumonji domain-containing protein 2A)] proteins, and
their enzymatic activity in vitro and in vivo is required for achieving
transcription-permissive chromatin dynamics at the TBX21 proximal promoter in
primary differentiating TH1 cells. During TH1 differentiation, the loss of WASp
accompanies decreased enrichment of RBBP5 and, in a subset of WAS patients, also 
of filamentous actin at the TBX21 proximal promoter locus. Accordingly, human
WASp-deficient TH cells, from natural mutation or RNA interference-mediated
depletion, demonstrate repressed TBX21 promoter dynamics when driven under
TH1-differentiating conditions. These chromatin derangements accompany deficient 
T-BET messenger RNA and protein expression and impaired TH1 function, defects
that are ameliorated by reintroducing WASp. Our findings reveal a previously
unappreciated role of WASp in the epigenetic control of T-BET transcription and
provide a new mechanism for the pathogenesis of WAS by linking aberrant histone
methylation at the TBX21 promoter to dysregulated adaptive immunity.

PMCID: PMC2943146
PMID: 20574068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Sci Transl Med. 2010 Jun 23;2(37):37ps31. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001336.

Alternative control: what's WASp doing in the nucleus?

Teitell MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, and Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen
School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
mteitell@ucla.edu

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is a rare X-linked recessive immunodeficiency
disorder of childhood that is caused by mutations in the WAS gene. WAS encodes
WASp, a protein that is known to function in the cytoplasm of hematopoietic cells
and is required for the induced differentiation of CD4+ T helper type 1 (TH1)
lymphocytes. Now, a paper in Science Translational Medicine describes another
mechanism for impaired immunity in WAS by showing that WASp localizes in the
nucleus and regulates histone modifications and chromatin structure, thereby
modulating expression of the TH1 master gene TBX21 (TBET).

PMID: 20574067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Aug;69(8):1562-7. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.111757. Epub 2010 Jun
11.

Role of IL-17 in the Th1 systemic defects in rheumatoid arthritis through
selective IL-12Rbeta2 inhibition.

Toh ML(1), Kawashima M, Hot A, Miossec P, Miossec P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, Immunogenomics and Inflammation
Research Unit EA 4130, University of Lyon, Edouard Herriot Hospital, Lyon,
France.

BACKGROUND: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have a systemic Th1 defect
associated with inflammation.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the hypothesis that interleukin 17 (IL-17) contributes to
this defect.
METHODS: IL-17 effects on Th1 markers were examined on T-bet and interferon gamma
(IFNgamma) expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients
with RA or healthy controls (HC). Receptor specificities were determined by
analysis of the Th1-specific IL-12 receptor beta2 (IL-12Rbeta2), Th17-specific
IL-23R and the common IL-12Rbeta1 chain expression. Effects of IL-17 or IFNgamma 
on IL-6, IL-1, IL-8, matrix metalloproteinase-8 (MMP-8) were measured by
real-time RT-PCR in RA synovial cells.
RESULTS: RA PBMCs were less responsive to IL-12-induced IFNgamma than HC PBMCs.
IL-12 hyporesponsiveness was increased by IL-17 treatment associated with a
selective reduction in IL-12Rbeta2, but not IL-23R, IL-12Rbeta1 or T-bet, which
was reversed with IL-17R inhibition. IL-17 inhibited IL-12Rbeta2 expression in
developing Th1 cells. In RA synovial cells, IL-17 induced IL-6, IL-1, IL-8 and
MMP-8, whereas IFNgamma had minimal or inhibitory effects.
CONCLUSION: In RA, IL-12 hyporesponsiveness is associated with IL-17R-mediated
downregulation of IL-12Rbeta2 expression. IL-17 may reinforce Th17 lineage
commitment and proinflammatory and destructive effects through Th1 inhibition and
positive feedback effects in RA synovial cells. Anti-inflammatory effects of
IL-17/IL-17R antagonism may include the restoration of protective Th1 responses.

PMID: 20542964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. PLoS One. 2010 May 21;5(5):e10757. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010757.

Immunological basis for the gender differences in murine Paracoccidioides
brasiliensis infection.

Pinzan CF(1), Ruas LP, Casabona-Fortunato AS, Carvalho FC, Roque-Barreira MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Celular e Molecular e Bioagentes Patogênicos,
Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brasil.

This study aimed to investigate the immunological mechanisms involved in the
gender distinct incidence of paracoccidioidomycosis (pcm), an endemic systemic
mycosis in Latin America, which is at least 10 times more frequent in men than in
women. Then, we compared the immune response of male and female mice to
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis infection, as well as the influence in the gender
differences exerted by paracoccin, a P. brasiliensis component with carbohydrate 
recognition property. High production of Th1 cytokines and T-bet expression have 
been detected in the paracoccin stimulated cultures of spleen cells from infected
female mice. In contrast, in similar experimental conditions, cells from infected
males produced higher levels of the Th2 cytokines and expressed GATA-3.
Macrophages from male and female mice when stimulated with paracoccin displayed
similar phagocytic capability, while fungicidal activity was two times more
efficiently performed by macrophages from female mice, a fact that was associated
with 50% higher levels of nitric oxide production. In order to evaluate the role 
of sexual hormones in the observed gender distinction, we have utilized mice that
have been submitted to gonadectomy followed by inverse hormonal reconstitution.
Spleen cells derived from castrated males reconstituted with estradiol have
produced higher levels of IFN-gamma (1291+/-15 pg/mL) and lower levels of IL-10
(494+/-38 pg/mL), than normal male in response to paracoccin stimulus. In
contrast, spleen cells from castrated female mice that had been treated with
testosterone produced more IL-10 (1284+/-36 pg/mL) and less IFN-gamma (587+/-14
pg/mL) than cells from normal female. In conclusion, our results reveal that the 
sexual hormones had a profound effect on the biology of immune cells, and
estradiol favours protective responses to P. brasiliensis infection. In addition,
fungal components, such as paracoccin, may provide additional support to the
gender dimorphic immunity that marks P. brasiliensis infection.

PMCID: PMC2873977
PMID: 20505765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Acta Paediatr. 2010 Oct;99(10):1584-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2010.01881.x.

Potential Th1/Th2 predominance in children with newly diagnosed IgA nephropathy.

Tsuruga K(1), Oki E, Aizawa-Yashiro T, Yoshida H, Imaizumi T, Tanaka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University Hospital, Japan.

PMID: 20491699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Immunity. 2010 May 28;32(5):616-27. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.04.016. Epub 2010 
May 13.

Epigenetic instability of cytokine and transcription factor gene loci underlies
plasticity of the T helper 17 cell lineage.

Mukasa R(1), Balasubramani A, Lee YK, Whitley SK, Weaver BT, Shibata Y, Crawford 
GE, Hatton RD, Weaver CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2010 May 28;32(5):581-3.

Phenotypic plasticity of T helper 17 (Th17) cells suggests instability of
chromatin structure of key genes of this lineage. We identified epigenetic
modifications across the clustered Il17a and Il17f and the Ifng loci before and
after differential IL-12 or TGF-beta cytokine signaling, which induce divergent
fates of Th17 cell precursors. We found that Th17 cell precursors had substantial
remodeling of the Ifng locus, but underwent critical additional modifications to 
enable high expression when stimulated by IL-12. Permissive modifications across 
the Il17a-Il17f locus were amplified by TGF-beta signaling in Th17 cells, but
were rapidly reversed downstream of IL-12-induced silencing of the Rorc gene by
the transcription factors STAT4 and T-bet. These findings reveal substantial
chromatin instability of key transcription factor and cytokine genes of Th17
cells and support a model of Th17 cell lineage plasticity in which cell-extrinsic
factors modulate Th17 cell fates through differential effects on the epigenetic
status of Th17 cell lineage factors.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3129685
PMID: 20471290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Immunother. 2010 Jun;33(5):538-46. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e3181cc2615.

Immunosuppression affects CD4+ mRNA expression and induces Th2 dominance in the
microenvironment of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma in organ transplant
recipients.

Kosmidis M(1), Dziunycz P, Suárez-Fariñas M, Mühleisen B, Schärer L, Läuchli S,
Hafner J, French LE, Schmidt-Weber C, Carucci JA, Hofbauer GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, Gloriastrasse, Zurich, 
Switzerland.

Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most frequent cancer in organ transplant
recipients (OTRs). The immune system plays a major role in the fight against SCC,
however, little is known about the local inflammatory response in SCC at all. We 
analyzed quantity and quality of the perineoplastic inflammatory SCC
microenvironment in immunocompetent patients and immmunosuppressed OTRs. RNA
expression profile of SCC patients was analyzed for 8 different sets of genes
relating to Th1 versus Th2 response using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis. SCC from 
immunocompetent patients and OTRs were analyzed by real-time polymerase chain
reactions for CD4, CD8, TBET, GATA-3, FOXP3, RORC, IFN-gamma, IL-4, TGF-beta,
IL-10, and IL-17A mRNA expression. Immunohistochemistry was carried out in SCC
for CD3, CD4, CD8, and FOXP3 expression. Considerable inflammation was seen in
both patient groups. SCC in immunocompetent patients and OTRs was associated with
a mixed Th1 and Th2 gene expression signature. CD4(+) mRNA was diminished in
immunosuppression. Skin adjacent to SCC in OTRs showed Th2 expression pattern as 
compared with immunocompetent patients. T-BET and IFN-gamma mRNA expression were 
decreased in the OTR group. Although Th17-weighted inflammation was unchanged,
IL-17A mRNA level was markedly decreased with immunosuppression. Regulatory T
cells, characterized by FOX-P3 and TGF-beta mRNA level, were decreased in OTRs.
Our findings support the hypothesis that nontumor-bearing skin adjacent to SCC in
OTRs is not necessarily normal and that the local microenvironment may contribute
to a field effect contributing to higher recurrence rates and more aggressive
behavior observed in these patients.

PMID: 20463594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Vaccine. 2010 Jun 17;28(27):4402-10. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2010.04.046. Epub
2010 Apr 29.

Paclitaxel acts as an adjuvant to promote both Th1 and Th2 immune responses
induced by ovalbumin in mice.

Yuan L(1), Wu L, Chen J, Wu Q, Hu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Animal Sciences, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310029, China.

Paclitaxel, a diterpenoid isolated from the bark of the Taxus cuspidate cv. Nana,
was evaluated for its adjuvant effect on the immune responses in a mouse model.
Fifty-six mice were randomly distributed into seven groups with 8 mice in each.
Animals were subcutaneously immunized on days 1 and 21 with 100microg of
paclitaxel, 10microg of ovalbumin (OVA), OVA with paclitaxel (50, 100 or
200microg) or with aluminum hydroxide (alum). Two weeks after the primary and
boost immunizations, blood samples were collected for measurement of serum
antibodies. Splenocytes were separated for detection of lymphocyte proliferation 
in responses to concanavalin A (Con A), lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and OVA, and
mRNA expression of Th1 cytokines (IFN-gamma and IL-12), Th2 cytokines (IL-10 and 
IL-5) and transcription factors T-bet/GATA-3 (Th1/Th2 switcher). Results showed
that coadministration of OVA with paclitaxel induced significantly higher IgG,
IgG1, IgG2a, IgG2b, IgG3 and IgM responses than when OVA was used alone. In
addition, up-regulated T-bet/GATA-3 together with significantly increased mRNA
expression of IL-4, IL-10, IFN-gamma and IL-12 by splenocytes, as well as the
proliferative responses of splenocytes to Con A, LPS and OVA were observed in
paclitaxel-adjuvanted groups. Incubation of a murine macrophage-like cell line
with paclitaxel significantly increased TNF-alpha and -10 released from the cells
and expression of microRNAs such as miR-155, miR-147, miR-146a and miR-132.
Therefore, paclitaxel activated both Th1 and Th2 responses. Considering its
unique adjuvant effect demonstrated in this study and a safe record clinically
used as an antineoplastic agent, paclitaxel could be an ideal adjuvant candidate 
when mixed Th1/Th2 immune responses are needed.

PMID: 20434553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Scand J Rheumatol. 2010 May;39(3):254-8. doi: 10.3109/03009740903347983.

Association of TBX21 gene haplotypes in a Chinese population with systemic lupus 
erythematosus.

You Y(1), Zhao W, Chen S, Tan W, Dan Y, Hao F, Deng G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: T-cell-specific T-box transcription factor (T-bet) is a member of the 
T-box family of transcription factors regulating type 1 T-helper (Th1) cell
development and is thought to be linked with several autoimmune diseases
including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The aim of this study was to
evaluate whether T-bet gene (TBX21) polymorphisms or its haplotypes are
associated with SLE in a Chinese population.
METHODS: The study included 248 cases with SLE and 261 gender- and age-matched
healthy controls. The polymorphisms T-1993C (rs4794067) and T-1514C (rs17250932) 
in the TBX21 promoter were identified by a polymerase chain reaction-restriction 
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) assay.
RESULTS: The frequency of both the -1993T and the -1514T allele were
significantly higher in SLE patients than in controls. By haplotype analysis,
there was significantly decreased frequency of the haplotype at positions
-1993C/-1514C in the case group compared with the control group (p = 0.0002).
Multifactorial logistic regression analysis showed that individuals with CC/CC
haplotype homozygotes had a decreased susceptibility to SLE [p = 0.0004, odds
ratio (OR) 0.316, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.167-0.599].
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the -1993C/-1514C haplotype may be a
protective factor for genetic susceptibility to SLE in the Chinese population.

PMID: 20429676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cytokine. 2010 Jul;51(1):12-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2010.03.018. Epub 2010 Apr 27.

Differential effects of lactacystin on cytokine production in activated Jurkat
cells and murine splenocytes.

Rockwell CE(1), Qureshi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Science, School of Medicine, and Shock/Trauma
Research Center, University of Missouri Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA. 
crockwell@kumc.edu

Previous studies have demonstrated that the proteasome inhibitor, lactacystin,
suppresses cytokine production and induction of other inflammatory mediators by
LPS-stimulated macrophages. The purpose of the present studies was to determine
the effect of lactacystin upon the function of activated human Jurkat T cells and
murine splenocytes. Lactacystin treatment suppressed interleukin (IL)-2,
interferon (IFN)gamma, and IL-13 production similarly in both activated Jurkat
cells and primary splenocytes. Interestingly, lactacystin produced differential
effects on IL-4 transcription in the two models. While lactacystin inhibited IL-4
mRNA transcription in primary splenocytes, it induced IL-4 mRNA in a
concentration-dependent manner in Jurkat cells. The increase in IL-4 mRNA levels 
by lactacystin did not correlate with increases in T(H2)-specific transcription
factors, avian musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma AS42 oncogene homolog (c-maf) or
GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3). In addition, the binding of both GATA-3 and
t-bet to their respective response elements was essentially unchanged by
lactacystin treatment in both splenocytes and Jurkat T cells, suggesting the
induction of IL-4 is due to other mechanisms. Collectively, the current studies
suggest proteasomal activity has differential effects on IL-4 transcription in
activated Jurkat cells and primary splenocytes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2911229
PMID: 20427199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Scand J Immunol. 2010 Mar;71(3):176-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2009.02363.x.

New production of eosinophils and the corresponding TH1/TH2 balance in the lungs 
after allergen exposure in BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice.

Lu Y(1), Sjöstrand M, Malmhäll C, Rådinger M, Jeurink P, Lötvall J, Bossios A.

Author information: 
(1)Krefting Research Centre, Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of
Medicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Allergic asthma is associated with eosinophilic inflammation in the airways.
Animal models commonly used to elucidate allergic inflammation mechanisms include
BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice. Our aim was to evaluate lung eosinophilia and the
corresponding Th1/Th2 balance in the two strains after allergen exposure. BALB/c 
and C57BL/6 mice were subjected to ovalbumin-induced allergic airway inflammation
using BrdU to label newly produced cells. The numbers of new eosinophils were
evaluated by differential cell count and immunocytochemistry (MBP+BrdU+).
Proliferation rate of lung eosinophils was measured by analysis of
CD45+CCR3+BrdU+ cells by FACS. Distribution of newly produced eosinophils in the 
lung and the Th1/Th2 (CD4+T-bet+/CD4+GATA-3+) balance was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry. Allergen challenge with ovalbumin induced comparable
eosinophilia in bone marrow (BM), blood and lung tissue in both strains of mice
compared to phosphate-buffered saline controls, which was confirmed by
immunocytochemistry. There was a small increase in the number of lung MBP+BrdU(-)
eosinophils in C57BL/6 mice compared to BALB/c mice, which suggests a basal
increase in this strain following sensitization. While there was no difference in
eosinophilic proliferation in the lung, the distribution of the newly produced
eosinophils differs between the two strains. BALB/c mice showed staining
primarily around vessels and airways, whereas C57BL/6 mice showed a more even
distribution in the lung tissue. No difference in the Th1/Th2 balance was
observed between two strains. This study shows that there is a difference in the 
distribution of eosinophils in the lung between the C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice, but 
no difference in eosinophil production or Th1/Th2 balance.

PMID: 20415783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Feb;45(2):133-8.

[Effects of garlicin on the expression of transcription factor T-bet and GATA-3
in blood lymph cells in rats with allergic rhinitis].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen D(1), Li YX, Li TY, Wen WP, Shi JB, He XG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, First Affiliated Hospital of SUN Yet-san
University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of garlicin on the expression of
transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in blood lymph cells of experimental rats 
with allergic rhinitis.
METHODS: Thirty healthy SD rats were randomly divided into 3 groups, with 10 rats
for each. Ten rats (pharmacological group) were sensitized and intranasally
challenged by ovalbumin (OVA), aluminium hydroxide hydrate gel and Bordetella
pertussis (B. pertussis) inactive microorganism suspension adjuvants, as the
allergic rhinitis models, and then injection of garlicin (0.4 ml)
intraperitoneally per day for 10 days. Ten rats in the control group were
immunized as the pharmacological group, and then injection of physiological
saline as equal volume as garlicin. Ten rats in the negative control group were
investigated using physiological saline only. Plasma and lymph cells were
separated from 2 ml blood which was extracted from rat heart. Enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was utilized to detect the levels of plasma IL-4 and 
IFN-<U+03B3>, and RT-PCR was utilized to detect the expression of T-bet and GATA-3.
RESULTS: The levels of IL-4 (x(-) ± s) were (6.292 ± 1.734), (14.252 ± 1.971),
(4.916 ± 0.600) pg/ml, respectively, and the levels of IFN-<U+03B3> were (24.338 ±
2.375), (12.364 ± 1.749), (16.136 ± 2.012) pg/ml, respectively, among the
pharmacological, control and negative control groups. The plasma level of IL-4 in
the pharmacological group rats was lower than that of control group rats (t =
4.23, P < 0.05), while there was no significant difference between the
pharmacological and negative control group rats (t = 1.01, P > 0.05). The plasma 
level of IFN-<U+03B3> was increased significantly in the pharmacological group rats when
compared with the value of control group rats (t = 4.61, P < 0.05) and with the
negative control group (t = 5.79, P < 0.05), respectively. There was no
significant difference (t = 1.17, P > 0.05) in plasma level of IFN-<U+03B3> in the
control group rats when compared with the negative control group. Relative
quantization of expression of GATA-3 (median) was 0.826, 1.029 and 0.474, and
those of T-bet (median) were 1.245, 0.280 and 0.544, respectively, among the
pharmacological, control and negative control groups. There were significant
difference among 3 groups (chi² = 6.599, P = 0.019; chi² = 9.884, P = 0.007,
respectively). Relative quantization of expression of GATA-3 in the control group
rats was significantly higher than that in the negative control group and
pharmacological group rats (chi² value were 10.113 and 2.384, respectively, all P
< 0.05), and that of GATA-3 in the pharmacological group rats was increased as
compared to the negative control group rats (chi² = 3.784, P < 0.05). The level
of expression of T-bet in pharmacological group rats was elevated markedly with a
significant difference as compared to both control (chi² = 16.021, P < 0.05) and 
negative control groups (chi² = 14.103, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Garlicin may upregulate the expression of T-bet dramatically and
downregulate the expression of transcription factor GATA-3 in the experimental
models of allergic rhinitis.

PMID: 20398510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):575-87. doi: 10.1089/ars.2009.2989.

Glutathione peroxidase 1 deficiency attenuates allergen-induced airway
inflammation by suppressing Th2 and Th17 cell development.

Won HY(1), Sohn JH, Min HJ, Lee K, Woo HA, Ho YS, Park JW, Rhee SG, Hwang ES.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Division of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences, and Center 
for Cell Signaling & Drug Discovery Research, Ewha Womans University, Seoul,
Korea.

Comment in
    Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011 Jan 1;14(1):169-70; author reply 170-1.

Engagement of T cell receptor (TCR) triggers signaling pathways that mediate
activation, proliferation, and differentiation of T lymphocytes. Such signaling
events are mediated by reactive oxygen species (ROS), including hydrogen peroxide
and lipid peroxides, both of which are reduced by glutathione peroxidase 1
(GPx1). We have now examined the role of GPx1 in the activation, differentiation,
and functions of CD4(+) T helper (Th) cells. TCR stimulation increased the
intracellular ROS concentration in Th cells in a time-dependent manner, and such 
TCR-induced ROS generation was found to promote cell proliferation.
GPx1-deficient Th cells produced higher levels of intracellular ROS and
interleukin-2 than wild-type Th cells and proliferated at a faster rate than did 
wild-type cells. Moreover, differentiation of GPx1-deficient Th cells was biased 
toward Th1, and Th17 cell development was also impeded by GPx1 depletion.
Consistent with these findings, GPx1-null mice were protected from the
development of ovalbumin-induced allergic asthma. Eosinophil infiltration, goblet
cell hyperplasia, collagen deposition, and airway hyperresponsiveness were thus
all attenuated in the lungs of GPx1-null mice. These data indicate that
GPx1-dependent control of intracellular ROS accumulation is important not only
for regulation of Th cell proliferation but for modulation of differentiation
into Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells.

PMID: 20367278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 Jul 15;80(2):218-25. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2010.03.028. Epub
2010 Mar 31.

Obaculactone suppresses Th1 effector cell function through down-regulation of
T-bet and prolongs skin graft survival in mice.

Gong F(1), Shen Y, Zhang Q, Sun Y, Tang J, Tao F, Xu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Nanjing University, China.

Allograft rejection is a predominantly Th1 immune response. In this study, we
showed that obaculactone, a natural compound derived from citrus fruit, prolonged
skin graft survival in mice when treated after but not before transplantation.
Furthermore, obaculactone inhibited alloantigen-specific production of Th1
cytokine IFN-gamma as well as proinflammatory cytokine IL-2, TNFalpha and IL-6.
In parallel, IL-10 production was markedly up-regulated. Obaculactone
significantly enhanced the percentage of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) Treg cells in the 
CD4(+) splenocytes without any effect on their inhibitory function. In vitro and 
in vivo tests showed obaculactone down-regulated T-bet expression in Th1 effector
cells. Taken together, the unique immunomodulatory properties might qualify
obaculactone as a putative, therapeutic compound for the treatment of Th1-driven 
diseases, including transplant rejection.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20361943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Arch Dermatol Res. 2010 Sep;302(7):517-23. doi: 10.1007/s00403-010-1048-1. Epub
2010 Mar 24.

Expression of Th1 and Th2 cytokine-associated transcription factors, T-bet and
GATA-3, in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and skin lesions of patients with
psoriasis vulgaris.

Zhu K(1), Ye J, Wu M, Cheng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Psoriasis is considered as a T cell-mediated autoimmune disease, and the Th1
response has been established as the major immune agent in its pathomechanisms.
The relative expression of Th1 and Th2 transcription factors, T-bet and GATA-3,
resulting in a swing in the Th1/Th2 pendulum, has been implicated in a number of 
immunological diseases. However, their expression and correlation with psoriasis 
has not yet been studied. Our aim was to evaluate the expression of T-bet and
GATA-3 in psoriatic patients and determine their correlation with serum levels of
IFN-gamma and IL-4. Sera, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and skin
lesions were taken from 23 patients with psoriasis vulgaris. Serum levels of
IFN-gamma and IL-4 were measured by ELISA. T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA expression in
PBMCs was analyzed by RT-PCR. Lesional expression and distribution of CD4, CD8,
T-bet and GATA-3 were assessed by immunohistochemistry. Blood and skin samples of
healthy individuals served as controls. A markedly higher IFN-gamma and lower
IL-4 concentration in the serum of psoriatic patients was found. A significantly 
higher expression of T-bet mRNA and a lower expression of GATA-3 mRNA in PBMCs,
and consequently, a much higher T-bet/GATA-3 ratio in patients than in controls
were shown. T-bet mRNA expression was strongly correlated with serum IFN-gamma
secretion in patients; furthermore, the correlation between T-bet/GATA-3 ratio
and IFN-gamma/IL-4 ratio was revealed. We also observed a significant increase in
CD4+ cells and T-bet positive cells in psoriatic lesions. These results suggested
that T-bet and GATA-3 might be regulator genes for psoriasis via the Th1/Th2
balance, and the Th1-specific transcription factor, T-bet, may play an important 
role in the development and maintenance of psoriasis.

PMID: 20333526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Immunol. 2010 Apr 15;184(8):4178-84. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901282. Epub 2010
Mar 17.

Lck mediates Th2 differentiation through effects on T-bet and GATA-3.

Kemp KL(1), Levin SD, Bryce PJ, Stein PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The Src family kinase Lck has been shown to be crucial in T cell signaling and
development. However, its role in Th effector functions is not well understood.
Lck has previously been shown to play a role in the cytokine expression of Th2
cells, but the mechanism by which Lck influences Th2 effector functions is
unknown. Using a mouse model, we report that Lck is important in regulating the
expression of IL-4 in Th2 skewed cells but is not as necessary for the expression
of Th2 cytokines IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13. Furthermore, in the absence of Lck,
T-bet and GATA-3 expression is aberrant. Moreover, this atypical expression
pattern of T-bet and GATA-3 correlates with increased histone 3 acetylation at
the Ifng locus and production of the Th1 cytokine IFN-gamma. We find
overexpression of GATA-3 restores IL-4 expression in lck(-/-) Th2 cells; this
indicates that the decreased IL-4 expression is due in part to reduced amounts of
GATA-3. Taken together, these data imply that Lck mediates Th2 differentiation
through effects on T-bet and GATA-3.

PMID: 20237292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Mar 5;6(3):e1000798. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000798.

Perforin and IL-2 upregulation define qualitative differences among highly
functional virus-specific human CD8 T cells.

Makedonas G(1), Hutnick N, Haney D, Amick AC, Gardner J, Cosma G, Hersperger AR, 
Dolfi D, Wherry EJ, Ferrari G, Betts MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The prevailing paradigm of T lymphocyte control of viral replication is that the 
protective capacity of virus-specific CD8(+) T cells is directly proportional to 
the number of functions they can perform, with IL-2 production capacity
considered critical. Having recently defined rapid perforin upregulation as a
novel effector function of antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells, here we sought to
determine whether new perforin production is a component of polyfunctional CD8(+)
T cell responses that contributes to the control of several human viral
infections: cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), influenza (flu), and
adenovirus (Ad). We stimulated normal human donor PBMC with synthetic peptides
whose amino acid sequences correspond to defined CTL epitopes in the
aforementioned viruses, and then used polychromatic flow cytometry to measure the
functional capacity and the phenotype of the responding CD8(+) T cells. While EBV
and flu-specific CD8(+) T cells rarely upregulate perforin, CMV-specific cells
often do and Ad stimulates an exceptionally strong perforin response. The
differential propensity of CD8(+) T cells to produce either IL-2 or perforin is
in part related to levels of CD28 and the transcription factor T-bet, as CD8(+) T
cells that rapidly upregulate perforin harbor high levels of T-bet and those
producing IL-2 express high amounts of CD28. Thus, "polyfunctional" profiling of 
antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells must not be limited to simply the number of
functions the cell can perform, or one particular memory phenotype, but should
actually define which combinations of memory markers and functions are relevant
in each pathogenic context.

PMCID: PMC2832688
PMID: 20221423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Shock. 2010 Oct;34(4):358-63. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e3181dc0977.

Early assessment of leukocyte alterations at diagnosis of septic shock.

Venet F(1), Davin F, Guignant C, Larue A, Cazalis MA, Darbon R, Allombert C,
Mougin B, Malcus C, Poitevin-Later F, Lepape A, Monneret G.

Author information: 
(1)Hospices Civils de Lyon, CRB Sepsis, France.

A dramatic decrease in circulating lymphocyte number is regularly described after
septic shock. However, it is unknown how early this alteration develops after
diagnosis of shock and if it remains stable over time. Twenty-one septic shock
patients with no comorbidities were included within 2 h after the beginning of
vasopressive treatment. Flow cytometry phenotyping of circulating leukocyte
subpopulations and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction of T-bet,
GATA-3, FOXP3, and ROR<U+03B3> mRNA were performed in patients from the diagnosis of
shock and every 6 h during the subsequent 48 h. From their admission in the
intensive care unit, patients present with major alterations of circulating
leukocyte count (leukocytosis, neutrophilia, and major lymphopenia). The numbers 
of every lymphocyte subpopulations (T, B, and natural killer cells) were
diminished. Gene expression analysis of transcription factors specific for TH1,
TH2, CD4CD25 regulatory, and TH17 lymphocytes showed a severe decrease in
comparison with healthy individuals' values. These alterations remain stable
during the first 48 h after inclusion in the protocol despite early and
aggressive resuscitation and antibiotherapy administered in patients. At the time
of diagnosis of shock and admission in the intensive care unit, septic patients
already present with severe lymphopenia involving every lymphocyte subsets
including CD4 T-cell subpopulations. No significant variation could be detected
within the first 48 h. This should be taken into account in the forthcoming
clinical trials testing immunomodulating therapies in septic shock patients.

PMID: 20220566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Int J Immunogenet. 2010 Apr;37(2):111-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1744-313X.2010.00899.x.
Epub 2010 Feb 19.

The mutations of Th1 cell-specific T-box transcription factor may be associated
with a predominant Th2 phenotype in gastric cancers.

Yang P(1), Qiu G, Wang S, Su Z, Chen J, Wang S, Kong F, Lu L, Ezaki T, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang, China.

Gastric cancer is a serious public health cancer and causes nearly 1 million
deaths a year worldwide. Th1 cells play critical roles in orchestrating the
adaptive immune responses against gastric cancer. T-bet, a member of the T-box
family of transcription factors, is the Th1 master regulator and up-regulated
during Th1 differentiation. Polymorphisms have also been shown to exist in T-bet.
Some reports indicated that some tumours were associated with the drift of Th1
and Th2. In the present work, we investigated the drift of Th1/Th2 by detecting
the expression levels of T-bet, IFN-gamma, IL-4, and GATA-3 in peripheral blood
mononuclear cell of gastric cancer patients by real-time PCR, explored the
relationship between the polymorphism of T-bet gene and drift of Th1/Th2 by gene 
sequence, western blot, and gene transfection. Our results indicated that a
predominant Th2 phenotype was existence. T-bet gene mutations may be associated
with Th2-dominated condition in gastric cancers.

PMID: 20193034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2010 Jun;30(6):399-406. doi: 10.1089/jir.2009.0028.

All-trans retinoic acid ameliorates trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid-induced colitis
by shifting Th1 to Th2 profile.

Bai A(1), Lu N, Zeng H, Li Z, Zhou X, Chen J, Liu P, Peng Z, Guo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanchang
University, Nanchang City, People's Republic of China. baiap@163.com

Inflammatory bowel disease is characterized with uncontrolled immune response in 
inflamed mucosa, with dominance of Th1 cells. Recently, all-trans retinoic acid
has been shown that can lead T-cell response by suppressing Th17 development via 
retinoic acid receptor (RAR), but it is still unknown whether all-trans retinoic 
acid can modulate Th1 response of inflammatory bowel disease. In the experiment, 
we investigated the effect of all-trans retinoic acid on trinitrobenzene sulfonic
acid (TNBS)-induced murine colitis, and the possible mechanism. Mice were
intraperitoneally treated daily with all-trans retinoic acid (the agonist of
RAR-alpha) or LE135 (the antagonist of RAR-alpha) or medium, and sacrificed 6
days later. Colon was collected for histological analysis and myeloperoxidase
(MPO) activity measurement. Lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMCs) were
isolated, cultured, and assayed for the expressions of T-bet and GATA-3 by the
use of Western blot and for cytokine levels by the use of ELISA. All-trans
retinoic acid treatment inhibited inflammatory responses as shown by lower
histological inflammatory scores and MPO activity, compared with LE135 and medium
groups. Furthermore, in LPMCs culture supernatants, the levels of Th1 cytokines
(INF-gamma, IL-12, and TNF-alpha) were decreased while those of Th2 cytokines
(IL-4 and IL-10) were increased significantly in all-trans retinoic acid-treated 
mice. In addition, T-bet expression in LPMCs was inhibited and GATA-3 expression 
was up-regulated in all-trans retinoic acidtreated mice. On the contrary, LE135
showed the reverse effects in colon inflammation and cytokine profile. By
shifting Th1 to Th2 profile in inflamed mucosa, all-trans retinoic acid
down-regulates inflammatory response and ameliorates acute TNBS-induced colitis, 
which suggests the ligand of RAR-alpha-based pharmaceutical strategies for
managing inflammatory bowel disease.

PMID: 20187766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2009 Dec;34(6):693-701. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2710.2009.01054.x.

Pharmacogenetic study of the effects of NK2R G231E G>A and TBX21 H33Q C>G
polymorphisms on asthma control with inhaled corticosteroid treatment.

Ye YM(1), Lee HY, Kim SH, Jee YK, Lee SK, Lee SH, Park HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Ajou University School of Medicine,
Suwon, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are widely used as
maintenance regimens for asthma patients. However, response to ICS shows marked
inter-individual variability. Genetic factors have been shown to be potential
predictors of responsiveness to ICS. We aimed to evaluate those pharmacogenetic
effects on asthma control in further detail.
METHODS: Fifty-three mild-to-moderate asthmatics were genotyped for four genetic 
polymorphisms of four genes: beta2-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2), adenylate cyclase
9 (ADCY9), neurokinin receptor 2 (NK2R) and T-box 21 (TBX21). The principal
clinical outcome was the achievement of asthma control, as assessed using the
Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) guidelines. During treatment with ICS, the
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)), maximal mid-expiratory flow (MMEF)
and peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) were monitored every 4 weeks and twice
daily.
RESULTS: Forty-eight of the 53 patients with asthma were in a controlled or
partly controlled state after 12 weeks of treatment with ICS, whereas five
asthmatics were in an uncontrolled state even after active treatment. Of the four
genetic polymorphisms examined, NK2R G231E G>A and TBX21 H33Q C>G were
significantly associated with asthma control status (P = 0.041 and P = 0.006).
The subjects with wild-type alleles at each polymorphism showed a significant
association with the well-controlled or partly controlled state, as compared to
those with mutant alleles. At 5-12 weeks after ICS treatment, the NK2R G231E G>A 
was associated with therapeutic response to ICS, as reflected by improvement in
predicted FEV(1)%.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that NK2R G231E G>A and TBX21 H33Q C>G are
genetic predictors of response to ICS, at least with respect to asthma control
status and changes in FEV(1)%, in Korean patients with asthma. Further
prospective validation of those associations is necessary.

PMID: 20175803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Immunol. 2010 Mar 15;184(6):3008-15. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903615. Epub 2010
Feb 17.

Transfusion of nonobese diabetic mice with allogeneic newborn blood ameliorates
autoimmune diabetes and modifies the expression of selected immune response
genes.

Jayaraman S(1), Patel T, Patel V, Ajani S, Garza R, Jayaraman A, Kwon S, Singh R,
Rondelli D, Prabhakar BS, Holterman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA. anue2468@uic.edu

Although allogeneic bone marrow transplantation has been shown to prevent
autoimmune diabetes in heavily irradiated nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice, a similar
procedure is not suitable for the treatment of patients with type 1 diabetes
because of associated severe side effects. Therefore, we evaluated whether mouse 
newborn blood (NBB), equivalent to human umbilical cord blood, could be used for 
diabetes prevention without recipient preconditioning. To test this hypothesis,
unconditioned, prediabetic female NOD mice were given a single injection of whole
NBB derived from the allogeneic diabetes-resistant mouse strain C57BL/6.
Transfusion of allogeneic NBB but not adult blood prevented diabetes incidence in
a majority of treated mice for a prolonged period of time. This was accompanied
by the release of insulin in response to a challenge with glucose. Invasive
cellular infiltration of islets was also substantially reduced in these mice.
Although NBB transfusion induced a low level of hematopoietic microchimerism, it 
did not strictly correlate with amelioration of diabetes. Induction of genes
implicated in diabetes, such as Il18, Tnfa, and Inos but not Il4, Il17 or Ifng,
was repressed in splenocytes derived from protected mice. Notably, expression of 
the transcription factor Tbet/Tbx21 but not Gata3 or Rorgt was upregulated in
protected mice. These data indicate that allogeneic NBB transfusion can prevent
diabetes in NOD mice associated with modulation of selected cytokine genes
implicated in diabetes manifestation. The data presented in this study provide
the proof of principle for the utility of allogeneic umbilical cord blood
transfusion to treat patients with autoimmune diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3779363
PMID: 20164427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Apr;62(4):1043-50. doi: 10.1002/art.27336.

Interleukin-23 promotes Th17 differentiation by inhibiting T-bet and FoxP3 and is
required for elevation of interleukin-22, but not interleukin-21, in autoimmune
experimental arthritis.

Mus AM(1), Cornelissen F, Asmawidjaja PS, van Hamburg JP, Boon L, Hendriks RW,
Lubberts E.

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, 3015 CE Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the role of interleukin-23 (IL-23) in subgroup polarization
of IL-17A-positive and/or interferon-gamma (IFNgamma)-positive T cells in
autoimmune disease-prone DBA/1 mice with and without collagen-induced arthritis.
METHODS: A magnetic-activated cell sorting system was used to isolate CD4+ T
cells from the spleen of naive and type II collagen (CII)-immunized DBA/1 mice.
These CD4+ T cells were stimulated in vitro under Th0, Th1, or different Th17
culture conditions. Intracellular staining for IL-17A and IFNgamma was evaluated 
by flow cytometry. In addition, Th17 cytokines and T helper-specific
transcription factors were analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and/or
quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: In CD4+ T cells from naive DBA/1 mice, IL-23 alone hardly induced
retinoic acid-related orphan receptor gammat (RORgammat), Th17 polarization, and 
Th17 cytokines, but it inhibited T-bet expression. In contrast, transforming
growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1)/IL-6 was a potent inducer of RORgammat, RORalpha, 
IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-21, and FoxP3 in these cells. In contrast to TGFbeta1/IL-6,
IL-23 was critical for the induction of IL-22 in CD4+ T cells from both naive and
CII-immunized DBA/1 mice. Consistent with these findings, IL-23 showed a more
pronounced induction of the IL-17A+IFNgamma- subset in CD4+ T cells from
CII-immunized mice. However, in CD4+ T cells from naive mice, IL-23 significantly
increased the TGFbeta1/IL-6-induced Th17 polarization, including elevated levels 
of IL-17A and IL-17F and decreased expression of T-bet and FoxP3. Of note, the
IL-23-induced increase in IL-17A and IL-17F levels was prevented in
T-bet-deficient mice.
CONCLUSION: IL-23 promotes Th17 differentiation by inhibiting T-bet and FoxP3 and
is required for elevation of IL-22, but not IL-21, levels in autoimmune
arthritis. These data indicate different mechanisms for IL-23 and TGFbeta1/IL-6
at the transcription factor level during Th17 differentiation in autoimmune
experimental arthritis.

PMID: 20131264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Jan;12(1):29-31.

[Expression of T-bet and GATA3 in children with acute idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura].

[Article in Chinese]

Ren SM(1), Zhang CX, Li WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Peditrics, Affiliated Hospital of Innner Mongolia Medical
College, Hohhot 010050, China. rensm22@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of transcriptional factors T-bet and GATA3
mRNA and the levels of IFN-gamma and IL-4 in blood in children with acute
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and investigate the tendency of
polarization of Th1/Th2 in children with ITP.
METHODS: Blood T-bet and GATA3 mRNA expression were examined using RT-PCR and
plasma IFN-gamma and IL-4 levels were measured using EIASA in children with acute
ITP in acute (n=30) and remission stages (n=28). Twenty healthy children served
as the controls.
RESULTS: Blood T-bet mRNA expression and IFN-gamma levels in children with ITP in
the acute stage were markedly higher than those in the remission stage and
controls (p<0.01). In contrast, blood GATA3 mRNA expression and IL-4 levels in
children with ITP in the acute stage were significantly lower than those in the
remmission stage and controls (p<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The high expression of T-bet and IFN-gamma and the low expression of
GATA3 and IL-4 indicate the existence of Th1 polarization in children with acute 
ITP. This might be related to the regulation of T-bet and GATA3.

PMID: 20113630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2010 Mar;22(2):133-8. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e3283367c17.

The genetics of scleroderma (systemic sclerosis).

Agarwal SK(1), Reveille JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, Department of Internal
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. Sandeep.K.Agarwal@uth.tmc.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To determine the advances made in the genetics of scleroderma 
in candidate gene association studies.
RECENT FINDINGS: Over the past 18 months, a number of candidate gene studies
using large case-control series in scleroderma have been reported. The studies
have identified multiple genes involved in immune regulation including BANK1,
C8orf13-BLK, IL-23R, IRF5, STAT4, TBX21, and TNFSF4 as susceptibility genes for
the development of SSc. Furthermore, gene-gene interaction studies suggest that
IRF5, STAT4, and BANK1 as well as TBX21 and STAT4 interact with regard to
scleroderma susceptibility. Many of the genetic variants associated with SSc
susceptibility are shared among other autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid
arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus.
SUMMARY: Candidate gene association studies have substantially advanced our
understanding of the pathogenesis of SSc and demonstrate that SSc is a polygenic,
autoimmune disease.

PMID: 20090527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Immunity. 2010 Jan 29;32(1):116-28. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.12.004. Epub 2010 
Jan 14.

Interferons direct Th2 cell reprogramming to generate a stable GATA-3(+)T-bet(+) 
cell subset with combined Th2 and Th1 cell functions.

Hegazy AN(1), Peine M, Helmstetter C, Panse I, Fröhlich A, Bergthaler A, Flatz L,
Pinschewer DD, Radbruch A, Löhning M.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Charité - University Medicine Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany.

Current T cell differentiation models invoke separate T helper 2 (Th2) and Th1
cell lineages governed by the lineage-specifying transcription factors GATA-3 and
T-bet. However, knowledge on the plasticity of Th2 cell lineage commitment is
limited. Here we show that infection with Th1 cell-promoting lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) reprogrammed otherwise stably committed GATA-3(+)
Th2 cells to adopt a GATA-3(+)T-bet(+) and interleukin-4(+)interferon-gamma(+)
"Th2+1" phenotype that was maintained in vivo for months. Th2 cell reprogramming 
required T cell receptor stimulation, concerted type I and type II interferon and
interleukin-12 signals, and T-bet. LCMV-triggered T-bet induction in adoptively
transferred virus-specific Th2 cells was crucial to prevent viral persistence and
fatal immunopathology. Thus, functional reprogramming of unfavorably
differentiated Th2 cells may facilitate the establishment of protective immune
responses. Stable coexpression of GATA-3 and T-bet provides a molecular concept
for the long-term coexistence of Th2 and Th1 cell lineage characteristics in
single memory T cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20079668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Hum Immunol. 2010 Apr;71(4):366-71. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2010.01.005. Epub 2010 
Jan 25.

Interferon-gamma and T-bet expression in a patient with toxoplasmic
lymphadenopathy.

Jöhrens K(1), Moos V, Schneider T, Stein H, Anagnostopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Charité-University Medicine Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Hindenburgdamm, 
Berlin, Germany. korinna.joehrens@charite.de

Infection with Toxoplasma gondii (TG) presents in some individuals as a
self-limited disease with a predominant lymphadenopathy characterized by
prominent B-cell activation. As this is in contrast to the in vitro based concept
of a T(h)1-immune response against TG, we investigated native lymphoid tissue and
peripheral blood of a patient with serologic evidence of toxoplasmosis to verify 
which cells show T(h)1-response features. High-level expression of T-bet in
monocytoid B-cells, in germinal center B-cells, and in a lesser amount in T cells
could be demonstrated by immunohistochemistry. In vitro stimulation of lymph node
cells with either TG, staphylococcus enterotoxin B, or phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate/ionomycin revealed an interferon-gamma expression in T-bet(+) B cells 
only in the patient and not in controls. Similar results were found for T-bet(+) 
T cells which were also present in controls. CD4(+) peripheral blood cells
stimulated with TG antigens showed a TG-specific but attenuated T(h)1-reactivity 
in the patient associated with a reduced expression of IL-2 when compared with
controls. We conclude that the pathogenesis and course of toxoplasmic
lymphadenopathy is based on a T(h)1-cell defect, which becomes compensated by the
B cells mounting a T(h)1-like immune response.

PMID: 20074601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 13;5(1):e8644. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008644.

Vaccination of mice with salmonella expressing VapA: mucosal and systemic Th1
responses provide protection against Rhodococcus equi infection.

Oliveira AF(1), Ruas LP, Cardoso SA, Soares SG, Roque-Barreira MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Celular e Molecular e Bioagentes Patogênicos,
Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão
Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.

Conventional vaccines to prevent the pneumonia caused by Rhodococcus equi have
not been successful. We have recently demonstrated that immunization with
Salmonella enterica Typhimurium expressing the VapA antigen protects mice against
R. equi infection. We now report that oral vaccination of mice with this
recombinant strain results in high and persistent fecal levels of
antigen-specific IgA, and specific proliferation of the spleen cells of immunized
mice in response to the in vitro stimulation with R. equi antigen. After in vitro
stimulation, spleen cells of immunized mice produce high levels of Th1 cytokines 
and show a prominent mRNA expression of the Th1 transcription factor T-bet, in
detriment of the Th2 transcription factor GATA-3. Following R. equi challenge, a 
high H2O2, NO, IL-12, and IFN-gamma content is detected in the organs of
immunized mice. On the other hand, TNF-alpha and IL-4 levels are markedly lower
in the organs of vaccinated mice, compared with the non-vaccinated ones. The
IL-10 content and the mRNA transcription level of TGF-beta are also higher in the
organs of immunized mice. A greater incidence of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and B
lymphocytes is verified in vaccinated mice. However, there is no difference
between vaccinated and non-vaccinated mice in terms of the frequency of
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ T cells. Finally, we show that the vaccination confers a
long-term protection against R. equi infection. Altogether, these data indicate
that the oral vaccination of mice with S. enterica Typhimurium expressing VapA
induces specific and long-lasting humoral and cellular responses against the
pathogen, which are appropriately regulated and allow tissue integrity after
challenge.

PMCID: PMC2800180
PMID: 20072623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 15;70(2):685-96. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1530. Epub
2010 Jan 12.

Prognosis of hormone-dependent breast cancers: implications of the presence of
dysfunctional transcriptional networks activated by insulin via the immune
transcription factor T-bet.

McCune K(1), Bhat-Nakshatri P, Thorat MA, Nephew KP, Badve S, Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana 46202, USA.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha)-positive breast cancers that co-express
transcription factors GATA-3 and FOXA1 have a favorable prognosis. These
transcription factors form an autoregulatory hormonal network that influences
estrogen responsiveness and sensitivity to hormonal therapy. Disruption of this
network may be a mechanism whereby ERalpha-positive breast cancers become
resistant to therapy. The transcription factor T-bet is a negative regulator of
GATA-3 in the immune system. In this study, we report that insulin increases the 
expression of T-bet in breast cancer cells, which correlates with reduced
expression of GATA-3, FOXA1, and the ERalpha:FOXA1:GATA-3 target gene GREB-1. The
effects of insulin on GATA-3 and FOXA1 could be recapitulated through
overexpression of T-bet in MCF-7 cells (MCF-7-T-bet). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed reduced ERalpha binding to GREB-1 enhancer
regions in MCF-7-T-bet cells and in insulin-treated MCF-7 cells. MCF-7-T-bet
cells were resistant to tamoxifen in the presence of insulin and displayed
prolonged extracellular signal-regulated kinase and AKT activation in response to
epidermal growth factor treatment. ERalpha-positive cells with intrinsic
tamoxifen resistance as well as MCF-7 cells with acquired tamoxifen and
fulvestrant resistance expressed elevated levels of T-bet and/or reduced levels
of FOXA1 and GATA-3. Analysis of publicly available databases revealed
ERalpha-positive/T-bet-positive breast cancers expressing lower levels of FOXA1
(P = 0.0137) and GATA-3 (P = 0.0063) compared with
ERalpha-positive/T-bet-negative breast cancers. Thus, T-bet expression in primary
tumors and circulating insulin levels may serve as surrogate biomarkers to
identify ERalpha-positive breast cancers with a dysfunctional hormonal network,
enhanced growth factor signaling, and resistance to hormonal therapy.

PMCID: PMC2807987
PMID: 20068169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Immunity. 2010 Jan 29;32(1):67-78. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.10.010. Epub 2010
Jan 7.

The mTOR kinase determines effector versus memory CD8+ T cell fate by regulating 
the expression of transcription factors T-bet and Eomesodermin.

Rao RR(1), Li Q, Odunsi K, Shrikant PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263,
USA.

The mechanisms underpinning integration of instructions that program naive CD8+ T
cells for effector and/or memory differentiation are not well understood. Herein,
we demonstrate that interleukin-12 (IL-12) enhanced and sustained antigen and
costimulatory molecule (B7.1)-induced mTOR kinase activity in naive CD8+ (OT-I) T
cells via phosphoinositide 3-kinase and STAT4 transcription factor pathways.
Blocking mTOR activity by rapamycin reversed IL-12-induced effector functions
because of loss of persistent expression of the transcription factor T-bet.
Rapamycin treatment of IL-12-conditioned OT-I cells promoted persistent
Eomesodermin expression and produced memory cell precursors that demonstrated
enhanced sustenance and antigen-recall responses upon adoptive transfer. The
memory cell precursors showed greater tumor efficacy than IL-12-conditioned
effector OT-I cells. These results identify mTOR as the central regulator of
transcriptional programs that determine effector and/or memory cell fates in CD8+
T cells. Targeting mTOR activity offers new opportunities to regulate CD8+ T
cell-mediated immunity.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20060330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Jan;26(1):31-4.

[Role of transcription factor T-bet and Eomes in IFN-gamma secretion of different
human T cell subsets].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang HT(1), Ge XS, Xue ZP, Li BQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu 233030, China.
bb_wanghongtao@126.com

AIM: To investigate the effect of siRNAs specific for T-bet and Eomesodermin
(Eomes) in interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) production of different human T cell
subsets.
METHODS: Double-stranded small interfering RNA (siRNA) sequences specific for
genes of T-bet and Eomes were chemically synthesized and transfected into
anti-CD3 mAb activated alphabeta T cells and Mtb-Ag activated gammadelta T cells.
CD4(+), CD8(+) T and gammadelta T cells were sorted by flow cytometry and the
expressions of T-bet and Eomes gene mRNA were detected by RT-PCR technique. The
changes of IFN-gamma production were determined by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: After two series of transfection, the siRNA-FAM(+) cells were about 50% 
in the transfected cells. The IFN-gamma(+) cells in CD4(+) T cells (50.20%)
decreased in the cells transfected with T-bet siRNA (18.46%) but no obvious
decrease was observed in the cells transfected with Eomes siRNA, whereas the
IFN-gamma(+) cells in CD8(+) T cells (76.51%) decreased in the cells transfected 
with Eomes siRNA (25.37%) and no obvious decrease was observed in the cells
transfected with T-bet siRNA. However, the IFN-gamma producing cells in
gammadelta T cells (76.52%) decreased in the cells transfected with T-bet siRNA
(56.57%) or with Eomes siRNA (42.53%).
CONCLUSION: At the level of transcription factors, T-bet and Eomes are important 
transcription factors for the regulation of IFN-gamma production in CD4(+) and
CD8(+) T cells, respectively. Both T-bet and Eomes may simultaneously be involved
in the regulation of the IFN-gamma production of gammadeltaT cells.

PMID: 20056084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Mar;40(3):859-66. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939842.

T-bet, a Th1 transcription factor regulates the expression of Tim-3.

Anderson AC(1), Lord GM, Dardalhon V, Lee DH, Sabatos-Peyton CA, Glimcher LH,
Kuchroo VK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

T-cell immunoglobulin, mucin domain-3 (Tim-3) is a membrane protein expressed at 
late stages of IFN-gamma secreting CD4(+) Th1 cell differentiation and
constitutively on DC. Ligation of Tim-3 on Th1 cells terminates Th1 immune
responses. In addition, Tim-3 plays a role in tolerance induction, although the
mechanism by which this is accomplished has yet to be elucidated. While it is
clear that Tim-3 plays an important role in the immune system, little is known
regarding the molecular pathways that regulate Tim-3 expression. In the current
study, we examine the role of Th1-associated transcription factors in regulating 
Tim-3 expression. Our experiments reveal that Tim-3 expression is regulated by
the Th1-specific transcription factor T-bet. This introduces a novel paradigm
into the generation of a Th1 response, whereby a transcription factor responsible
for effector Th1 cell differentiation also increases the expression of a specific
counter-regulatory molecule to ensure appropriate termination of pro-inflammatory
Th1 immune responses.

PMCID: PMC2837127
PMID: 20049876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Yonsei Med J. 2009 Dec 31;50(6):744-50. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2009.50.6.744. Epub 2009
Dec 18.

Update on recent advances in the management of aspirin exacerbated respiratory
disease.

Palikhe NS(1), Kim JH, Park HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Ajou University School of Medicine,
Yeongtong-gu, Suwon, Korea.

Aspirin intolerant asthma (AIA) is frequently characterized as an aspirin
(ASA)-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD). It is a clinical syndrome
associated with chronic severe inflammation in the upper and lower airways
resulting in chronic rhinitis, sinusitis, recurrent polyposis, and asthma. AERD
generally develops secondary to abnormalities in inflammatory mediators and
arachidonic acid biosynthesis expression. Upper and lower airway eosinophil
infiltration is a key feature of AERD; however, the exact mechanisms of such
chronic eosinophilic inflammation are not fully understood. Cysteinyl leukotriene
over-production may be a key factor in the induction of eosinophilic activation. 
Genetic studies have suggested a role for variability of genes in disease
susceptibility and response to medication. Potential genetic biomarkers
contributing to the AERD phenotype include HLA-DPB1*301, LTC4S, ALOX5, CYSLT,
PGE2, TBXA2R, TBX21, MS4A2, IL10 -1082A > G, ACE -262A > T, and CRTH2 -466T > C; 
the four-locus SNP set was composed of B2ADR 46A > G, CCR3 -520T > G, CysLTR1
-634C > T, and FCER1B -109T > C. Management of AERD is an important issue.
Aspirin ingestion may result in significant morbidity and mortality, and patients
must be advised regarding aspirin risk. Leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRA)
that inhibit leukotriene pathways have an established role in long-term AERD
management and rhinosinusitis. Aspirin desensitization may be required for the
relief of upper and lower airway symptoms in AERD patients. Future research
should focus on identification of biomarkers for a comprehensive diagnostic
approach.

PMCID: PMC2796398
PMID: 20046412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Transplant Proc. 2009 Dec;41(10):4316-20. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2009.08.057.

Increased T-bet to GATA-3 ratio during acute allograft rejection in the rat lung.

Jungraithmayr W(1), Ji L, Yang L, Weder W, Korom S, Hersberger M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Acute allograft rejection (AR) remains a major problem in solid organ
transplantation. The pivotal mechanism hinges on alloantigen recognition by
recipient T helper (T(h)) cells that differentiate into T(h)1 and T(h)2. This
study investigated the association of mRNA levels of the transcription factors
T-box expressed in T cells and GATA-binding protein 3 with the development of
T(h)1/T(h)2-directed immune responses. We investigated the expression of T-bet
and GATA-3 mRNA levels and the protein levels of their marker cytokines
interleukin (IL)-2 and IL-4 in orthotopically transplanted rat lungs during AR.
We observed a nonsignificant increase in T-bet expression following allografting 
at days 3 and 5 but there was a significant reduction in GATA-3 expression on day
5 compared with controls. The ratio of T-bet to GATA-3 expression showed a trend 
to increase at day 3 following allografting reaching significance at 5 days.
These changes were associated with a significant increase in the expression of
IL-2 over IL-4 on days 3 and 5. This study suggests that T(h)1 responses play a
major role during AR in the rat lung, and that this differentiation can be
monitored by measuring mRNA levels of T-bet and GATA-3.

PMID: 20005391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Endocrinology. 2010 Jan;151(1):56-62. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0565. Epub 2009 Dec 4.

Leptin: a critical regulator of CD4+ T-cell polarization in vitro and in vivo.

Batra A(1), Okur B, Glauben R, Erben U, Ihbe J, Stroh T, Fedke I, Chang HD, Zeitz
M, Siegmund B.

Author information: 
(1)Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin,
Gastroenterology, 12200 Berlin, Germany.

Besides being mandatory in the metabolic system, adipokines like leptin directly 
affect immunity. Leptin was found to be necessary in T helper 1 (Th1)-dependent
inflammatory processes, whereas effects on Th2 cells are rarely understood. Here,
we focused on leptin in T-helper cell polarization and in Th2-mediated intestinal
inflammation in vivo. The induction of cytokine-producing Th1 or Th2 cells from
naive CD4(+) T cells under polarizing conditions in vitro was generally decreased
in cells from leptin-deficient ob/ob mice compared with wild-type mice. To
explore the in vivo relevance of leptin in Th2-mediated inflammation, the model
of oxazolone-induced colitis was employed in wild-type, ob/ob, and
leptin-reconstituted ob/ob mice. Ob/ob mice were protected, whereas wild-type and
leptin-reconstituted ob/ob mice developed colitis. The disease severity went in
parallel with local production of the Th2 cytokine IL-13. A possible explanation 
for the protection of ob/ob mice in Th1- as well as in Th2-dependent inflammation
is provided by a decreased expression of the key transcription factors for Th1
and Th2 polarization, T-bet and GATA-3, in naive ob/ob T cells. In conclusion,
these results support the regulatory function of the adipokine leptin within
T-cell polarization and thus in the acquired immune system and support the
concept that there is a close interaction with the endocrine system.

PMID: 19966187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. FEBS J. 2010 Jan;277(1):128-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07460.x. Epub 2009 
Dec 3.

Identification and characterization of the transcription factors involved in
T-cell development, t-bet, stat6 and foxp3, within the zebrafish, Danio rerio.

Mitra S(1), Alnabulsi A, Secombes CJ, Bird S.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Fish Immunology Research Centre, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.

The discovery of cytokines expressed by T-helper 1 (Th1), Th2, Th17 and
T-regulatory (T(reg)) cells has prompted speculation that these types of
responses may exist in fish, arising early in vertebrate evolution. In this
investigation, we cloned three zebrafish transcription factors, T-box expressed
in T cells (t-bet), signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (stat6)
and fork-head box p3 (foxp3), in which two transcripts are present, that are
important in the development of a number of these cell types. They were found
within the zebrafish genome, using a synteny approach in the case of t-bet and
foxp3. Multiple alignments of zebrafish t-bet, stat6 and foxp3 amino acids with
known vertebrate homologues revealed regions of high conservation, subsequently
identified to be protein domains important in the functioning of these
transcription factors. The gene organizations of zebrafish t-bet and foxp3 were
identical to those of the human genes, with the second foxp3 transcript lacking
exons 5, 6, 7 and 8. Zebrafish stat6 (21 exons and 20 introns) was slightly
different from the human gene, which contained 22 exons and 21 introns.
Immunostimulation of zebrafish head kidney and spleen cells with
phytohaemagglutinin, lipopolysaccharide or Poly I:C, showed a correlation between
the expression of t-bet, stat6 and foxp3 with other genes involved in Th and
T(reg) responses using quantitative PCR. These transcription factors, together
with many of the cytokines that are expressed by different T-cell subtypes, will 
aid future investigations into the Th and T(reg) cell types that exist in
teleosts.

PMID: 19961539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Oct;30(10):658-61.

[The role of interleukin-18 and interleukin-18 receptor in predominant Th1 immune
response of patients with immune thrombocytopenia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Q(1), Yang XJ, Shan NN, Hou M, Ji XB, Wang CY, Zhu XJ, Yang L, Zhang XL,
Peng J, Ma DX, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Haematology Oncology Centre, Qilu Hospital,
Shandong University, Jinan 250012, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of interleukin (IL)-18 and IL-18 receptor
(IL-18R) in the predominant Th1 type cytokine response in patients with immune
thrombocytopenia (ITP).
METHODS: Fifteen patients with active phase ITP, eighteen in remission and
thirteen healthy controls were enrolled in this study. T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA
levels in peripheral blood mononucleated cells (PBMNC) were measured by reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR); the plasma IL-18 level by
enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), the expression of IL-18R on CD3(+)
lymphocytes and total lymphocytes by flow cytometry(FCM).
RESULTS: The T-bet mRNA levels in patients with active phase ITP was 3.572 fold
as much as that in the controls (P < 0.05), while the GATA-3 mRNA levels were
0.378 fold of that in controls (P < 0.05). The levels of plasma IL-18 and IL-18R 
on CD3(+) lymphocytes were significantly increased in active phase ITP than in
remission phase and controls. There was no difference in ratio of T-bet/GATA-3
between remitted ITP and controls and so was for T-bet mRNA, GATA-3 mRNA, plasma 
IL-18 and IL-18R on CD3(+) lymphocytes.
CONCLUSION: ITP as a disease of Th1-dominant response there is an unbalance
between T-bet and GATA-3 in its active phase; IL-18 and IL-18R being upregulated.

PMID: 19954659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Dec;60(12):3794-806. doi: 10.1002/art.24958.

Polymorphisms in TBX21 and STAT4 increase the risk of systemic sclerosis:
evidence of possible gene-gene interaction and alterations in Th1/Th2 cytokines.

Gourh P(1), Agarwal SK, Divecha D, Assassi S, Paz G, Arora-Singh RK, Reveille JD,
Shete S, Mayes MD, Arnett FC, Tan FK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 
pravitt.gourh@uth.tmc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is an autoimmune disease characterized by
fibrosis of the skin and internal organs. Dysregulation of the immune system,
including the Th1/Th2 cytokine balance, is central to the pathogenesis of SSc.
This study was undertaken to investigate the hypothesis that single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in TBX21 and STAT4, both of which are critical transcription
factors that regulate the Th1/Th2 balance, are associated with SSc
susceptibility.
METHODS: We tested SNPs in TBX21 and STAT4 for association with SSc in 2
independent cohorts, the SSc Registry cohort (880 SSc cases and 507 controls) and
the University of Texas SSc cohort (522 cases and 531 controls). Additional white
control genotypes were obtained from public repositories. We also investigated
for gene-gene interactions. Plasma cytokines and whole blood gene expression
profiles were examined to determine functional effects of these SNPs.
RESULTS: Multiple SNPs in TBX21 and STAT4 were found to be associated with SSc.
In a combined analysis of 902 SSc patients and 4,745 controls, TT genotyping of
the TBX21 rs11650354 variant revealed a recessive pattern for disease
susceptibility (Pcorr=1.4x10(-15), odds ratio 3.37, 95% confidence interval
2.4-4.6). In an analysis of 1,039 SSc patients and 3,322 controls, the A allele
of the STAT4 variant rs11889341 was associated with increased SSc susceptibility 
in a dominant pattern (Pcorr=2.4x10(-5), odds ratio 1.29, 95% confidence interval
1.2-1.5). Furthermore, we identified gene-gene interaction among the TBX21 and
STAT4 variants, such that the STAT4 genotype increased the risk of SSc only in
the TBX21 CC genotype group. SSc patients carrying the TBX21 CC genotype had
higher interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor alpha levels, and those
with the TT genotype had elevated IL-2, IL-5, IL-4, and IL-13 (Th2) levels,
compared with controls. Whole blood expression profiles revealed dysregulation of
type I interferon pathways in the CC group and T cell pathways in the TT group of
the TBX21 SNP.
CONCLUSION: The present results, from studies of 2 independent cohorts, indicate 
that SNPs in TBX21 and STAT4 contribute uniquely and interactively to SSc
susceptibility, leading to altered cytokine balance and immune dysregulation.

PMCID: PMC2998060
PMID: 19950257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Immunol. 2009 Dec 15;183(12):7743-51. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803812.

Integration of distinct intracellular signaling pathways at distal regulatory
elements directs T-bet expression in human CD4+ T cells.

Placek K(1), Gasparian S, Coffre M, Maiella S, Sechet E, Bianchi E, Rogge L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Immunoregulation Unit and Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique Unité de Recherche Associée 1961, Department of Immunology, Paris,
France.

T-bet is a key regulator controlling Th1 cell development. This factor is not
expressed in naive CD4(+) T cells, and the mechanisms controlling expression of
T-bet are incompletely understood. In this study, we defined regulatory elements 
at the human T-bet locus and determined how signals originating at the TCR and at
cytokine receptors are integrated to induce chromatin modifications and
expression of this gene during human Th1 cell differentiation. We found that T
cell activation induced two strong DNase I-hypersensitive sites (HS) and rapid
histone acetylation at these elements in CD4(+) T cells. Histone acetylation and 
T-bet expression were strongly inhibited by cyclosporine A, and we detected
binding of NF-AT to a HS in vivo. IL-12 and IFN-gamma signaling alone were not
sufficient to induce T-bet expression in naive CD4(+) T cells, but enhanced T-bet
expression in TCR/CD28-stimulated cells. We detected a third HS 12 kb upstream of
the mRNA start site only in developing Th1 cells, which was bound by
IL-12-induced STAT4. Our data suggest that T-bet locus remodeling and gene
expression are initiated by TCR-induced NF-AT recruitment and amplified by
IL-12-mediated STAT4 binding to distinct distal regulatory elements during human 
Th1 cell differentiation.

PMID: 19923468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 22;285(4):2545-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038794. Epub 2009 
Nov 18.

Ikaros silences T-bet expression and interferon-gamma production during T helper 
2 differentiation.

Thomas RM(1), Chen C, Chunder N, Ma L, Taylor J, Pearce EJ, Wells AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine and The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

CD4+ T cells can be instructed by nonantigen-specific signals to differentiate
into functionally distinct lineages with mutually exclusive patterns of cytokine 
production. The molecular events that drive interferon-gamma (IFN gamma)
production during Th1 development are well understood, but mechanisms that
silence this cytokine during Th2 polarization are not clear. In this study, we
find that the tbx21 gene encoding the Th1 master regulator T-bet is a direct
target of the transcriptional repressor Ikaros. In Th2 cells, which do not
express T-bet, strong Ikaros binding could be detected at the endogenous tbx21
promoter, whereas this gene was not occupied by Ikaros in T-bet-expressing Th1
cells. Inhibition of Ikaros DNA binding activity during Th2 polarization resulted
in loss of Ikaros promoter occupancy, increased T-bet expression, and
inappropriate T-bet-dependent production of IFN gamma. Ikaros was also required
for epigenetic imprinting of the ifn gamma locus during Th2 polarization, and
loss of Ikaros function in vivo led to an inappropriate Th1 response to the
parasite Shistosoma mansoni. These studies demonstrate that Ikaros, a factor with
an established role in lymphocyte development, also regulates the development of 
peripheral T helper responses.

PMCID: PMC2807311
PMID: 19923223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Transpl Immunol. 2010 Feb;22(3-4):165-71. doi: 10.1016/j.trim.2009.11.003. Epub
2009 Nov 14.

The dynamic changes of T-bet(+)/GATA-3(+) and RORgammat(+)/FOXP3(+) cells in
recipient spleens and grafts after rat orthotopic liver transplantation.

Xu M(1), Tan C, Zhou J, Huang X, Dai Z, Zhu H, Zhao Y, Gu F, Zhou S, Fan J.

Author information: 
(1)Xiaoshan People' Hospital, Hangzhou 311201, China.

BACKGROUND: Rejection of transplanted liver occurs when the host generates
alloantigen-reactive T cells, and CD4(+) T-cell subsets, including Th1, Th2, T17 
and iTreg, could be involved in changing the dynamics of graft rejection onset.
In the current immunosuppressive strategies, rejection is treated as an
undifferentiated process that is uniform, which results in the failure of
tolerance induction. Here, we established a rejection model to observe the
reciprocal interaction of CD4(+) T-cell subsets in the complex networks of the
immune system.
METHODS: Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) from male inbred Lewis rats
(n=15) to male inbred Brown Norway (BN) rats was performed by Kamada's two-cuff
technique without reconstruction of the hepatic artery. OLT from BN to BN rats
(n=5) was performed as a control. Recipients were sacrificed on postoperative
days 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13 and 15. Recipient spleens and grafts were harvested,
fixed in 10% neutral formalin, and embedded in paraffin. Meanwhile, hematoxylin
and eosin and immunohistochemical staining was done, acute rejection was graded
by the Banff scheme, and the number of T-bet(+), GATA-3(+), RORgammat(+) and
FOXP3(+) cells in the spleen and grafts were counted.
RESULTS: In recipient spleens, the T-bet(+) and RORgammat(+) cells were increased
more significantly in the mild acute rejection (AR) group than in the control
group (P=0.016, P=0.009, respectively), while both cell types were decreased in
the moderate AR group. Compared with the control group, the RORgammat(+) cells
did not differ significantly in the severe AR group, while the T-bet(+) cells
were significantly decreased (P=0.465, P=0.009, respectively). The GATA-3(+)
cells were significantly decreased in the mild AR group compared with the control
group (P=0.009). With regard to the FOXP3(+) cells, there was no significant
difference between the control and mild AR groups (P=0.754), while they were
significantly decreased in the moderate and severe AR groups (P=0.028, P=0.009,
respectively). The ratio of T-bet(+)/GATA-3(+) cells was more associated with AR 
than was the RORgammat(+)/FOXP3(+) cell ratio in the early stage. In the graft,
the T-bet(+) and RORgammat(+) cells were significantly increased in mild,
moderate and severe AR groups compared with the control group (P<0.009). The
expression of GATA-3(+) cell was not significantly increased in the mild AR group
compared with the control group, while it was significantly increased in the
moderate and severe AR groups (P=0.028, P=0.009, respectively). Concerning the
FOXP3(+) cells, no significant difference was found between the control and mild 
AR groups (P=0.347), while they were significantly increased in the moderate and 
severe AR groups (P<0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed the dynamic changes of T-bet(+), GATA-3(+),
RORgammat(+) and FOXP3(+) cells in the spleen and grafts of recipient rats. It
seems that the ratio of T-bet(+)/GATA-3(+) cells was more associated with AR than
was RORgammat(+)/FOXP3(+) cells in the early stage of rejection, while the ratio 
of RORgammat(+)/FOXP3(+) cells was associated more with the later but more
persistent stage of rejection. This study could make a contribution to the
optimal selection of immunosuppressive regimens according to the dynamic changes 
in CD4(+) T-cell subsets at different stages of rejection.

Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 19922796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Immunology. 2010 Feb;129(2):147-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03189.x. Epub
2009 Nov 17.

Plasticity of T-cell phenotype and function: the T helper type 17 example.

Peck A(1), Mellins ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Program in Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Mature T helper type 1 (Th1) and Th2 cells antagonize the development of the
opposing subset to sustain lineage-specific responses. However, the recent
identification of a third distinct subset of helper T cells - the Th17 lineage - 
collapses the established Th1/Th2 dichotomy and raises intriguing questions about
T-cell fate. In this review, we discuss the Th17 subset in the context of the
effector and regulatory T-cell lineages. Initial studies suggested reciprocal
developmental pathways between Th17/Th1 subsets and between Th17/regulatory
T-cell subsets, and identified multiple mechanisms by which Th1 and Th2 cells
antagonize the generation of Th17 cells. However, recent observations reveal the 
susceptibility of differentiated Th17 cells to Th1 polarization and the
enhancement of Th17 memory cells by the Th1 factors interferon-gamma and T-bet.
In addition, new data indicate late-stage plasticity of a subpopulation of
regulatory T cells, which can be selectively induced to adopt a Th17 phenotype.
Elucidating the mechanisms that undermine cross-lineage suppression and
facilitate these phenotype shifts will not only clarify the flexibility of T-cell
differentiation, but may also shed insight into the pathogenesis of autoimmunity 
and cancer. Furthermore, understanding these phenomena will be critical for the
design of immunotherapy that seeks to disrupt lineage-specific T-cell responses
and may suggest ways to manipulate the balance between pathogenic and regulatory 
lymphocytes for the restoration of homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2814457
PMID: 19922424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Immunol. 2009 Dec 1;183(11):7250-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901477. Epub 2009
Nov 13.

Ectopic T-bet expression licenses dendritic cells for IL-12-independent priming
of type 1 T cells in vitro.

Lipscomb MW(1), Chen L, Taylor JL, Goldbach C, Watkins SC, Kalinski P,
Butterfield LH, Wesa AK, Storkus WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

T-bet (TBX21) is a transcription factor required for the optimal development of
type 1 immune responses. Although initially characterized for its intrinsic role 
in T cell functional polarization, endogenous T-bet may also be critical to the
licensing of type 1-biasing APCs. Here, we investigated whether human dendritic
cells (DC) genetically engineered to express high levels of T-bet (i.e., DC.Tbet)
promote superior type 1 T cell responses in vitro. We observed that DC.Tbet were 
selective activators of type 1 effector T cells developed from the naive pool of 
responder cells, whereas DC.Tbet and control DC promoted type 1 responses
equitably from the memory pool of responder cells. Naive T cells primed by
(staphylococcal enterotoxin B or tumor-associated protein-loaded) DC.Tbet
exhibited an enhancement in type 1- and a concomitant reduction in Th2- and
regulatory T cell-associated phenotype/function. Surprisingly, DC.Tbets were
impaired in their production of IL-12 family member cytokines (IL-12p70, IL-23,
and IL-27) when compared with control DC, and the capacity of DC.Tbet to
preferentially prime type 1 T cell responses was only minimally inhibited by
cytokine (IL-12p70, IL-23, IFN-gamma) neutralization or receptor (IL-12Rbeta2,
IL-27R) blockade during T cell priming. The results of transwell assays suggested
the DC.Tbet-mediated effects are predominantly the result of direct DC-T cell
contact or their close proximity, thereby implicating a novel, IL-12-independent 
mechanism by which DC.Tbets promote improved type 1 functional polarization from 
naive T cell responders. Given their superior type 1 polarizing capacity, DC.Tbet
may be suitable for use in vaccines designed to prevent/treat cancer or
infectious disease.

PMCID: PMC2921905
PMID: 19915058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Exp Neurol. 2010 Jan;221(1):225-30. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.11.003. Epub
2009 Nov 11.

Functional recovery and facial motoneuron survival are influenced by
immunodeficiency in crush-axotomized mice.

Beahrs T(1), Tanzer L, Sanders VM, Jones KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Loyola University
Medical Center, Maywood, IL 60153, USA. tbeahrs@yahoo.com

Facial nerve axotomy is a well-described injury paradigm for peripheral nerve
regeneration and facial motoneuron (FMN) survival. We have previously shown that 
CD4(+) T helper (Th) 1 and 2 effector subsets develop in the draining cervical
lymph node, and that the IL-4/STAT-6 pathway of Th2 development is critical for
FMN survival after transection axotomy. In addition, delayed behavioral recovery 
time in immunodeficient mice may be due to the absence of T and B cells. This
study utilized a crush axotomy paradigm to evaluate FMN survival and functional
recovery in WT, STAT-6 KO (impaired Th2 response), T-Bet KO (impaired Th1
response), and RAG-2 KO (lacking mature T and B cells) mice to elucidate the
contributions of specific CD4(+) T cell subsets in motoneuron survival and
recovery mechanisms. STAT-6 KO and RAG-2 KO mice exhibited decreased FMN survival
after crush axotomy compared to WT, supporting a critical role for the Th2
effector cell in motoneuron survival before target reconnection. Long term FMN
survival was sustained through 10 wpo after crush axotomy in both WT and RAG-2 KO
mice, indicating that target derived neurotrophic support maintains FMN survival 
after target reconnection. In addition, RAG-2 KO mice exhibited delayed
functional recovery compared to WT mice. Both STAT-6 and T-Bet KO mice exhibited 
partially delayed functional recovery compared to WT, though not to the extent of
RAG-2 KO mice. Collectively, our findings indicate that both pro- and
anti-inflammatory CD4(+) T cell responses contribute to optimal functional
recovery from axotomy-induced facial paralysis, while FMN survival is supported
by the anti-inflammatory Th2 response alone.

PMCID: PMC2812661
PMID: 19913014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Blood. 2010 Jan 21;115(3):541-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-211383. Epub 2009 Nov
10.

The role of the Th1 transcription factor T-bet in a mouse model of
immune-mediated bone-marrow failure.

Tang Y(1), Desierto MJ, Chen J, Young NS.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

The transcription factor T-bet is a key regulator of type 1 immune responses. We 
examined the role of T-bet in an animal model of immune-mediated bone marrow (BM)
failure using mice carrying a germline T-bet gene deletion (T-bet(-/-)). In
comparison with normal C57BL6 (B6) control mice, T-bet(-/-) mice had normal
cellular composition in lymphohematopoietic tissues, but T-bet(-/-) lymphocytes
were functionally defective. Infusion of 5 x 10(6) T-bet(-/-) lymph node (LN)
cells into sublethally irradiated, major histocompatibility complex-mismatched
CByB6F1 (F1) recipients failed to induce the severe marrow hypoplasia and fatal
pancytopenia that is produced by injection of similar numbers of B6 LN cells.
Increasing T-bet(-/-) LN-cell dose to 10 to 23 x 10(6) per recipient led to only 
mild hematopoietic deficiency. Recipients of T-bet(-/-) LN cells had no expansion
in T cells or interferon-gamma-producing T cells but showed a significant
increase in Lin(-)Sca1(+)CD117(+)CD34(-) BM cells. Plasma transforming growth
factor-beta and interleukin-17 concentrations were increased in T-bet(-/-)
LN-cell recipients, possibly a compensatory up-regulation of the Th17 immune
response. Continuous infusion of interferon-gamma resulted in hematopoietic
suppression but did not cause T-bet(-/-) LN-cell expansion or BM destruction. Our
data provided fresh evidence demonstrating a critical role of T-bet in
immune-mediated BM failure.

PMCID: PMC2810980
PMID: 19903901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cytokine. 2010 Feb;49(2):177-84. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2009.09.015. Epub 2009 Oct
30.

TNFalpha and TGF-beta1 influence IL-18-induced IFNgamma production through
regulation of IL-18 receptor and T-bet expression.

Koutoulaki A(1), Langley M, Sloan AJ, Aeschlimann D, Wei XQ.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Engineering and Reparative Dentistry, School of Dentistry, Cardiff
University, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XY, UK.

Bacterial infections can lead to a state of uncontrolled inflammation and also
trigger autoimmune disease. At the centre of this are CD4(+) T cell responses in 
inflammatory tissues or local lymph nodes which are orchestrated by dendritic
cells. IL-18 is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that drives dendritic cell maturation
and mediates IFNgamma production. In this study, we demonstrate that in the
dendritic precursor-like cell line KG-1, IFNgamma production induced by IL-18 is 
potentiated (>5-fold) by TNFalpha and completely suppressed by TGF-beta1. IL-18
stimulation rapidly activates different MAPK signalling pathways but only
blocking of p38 activation alleviates IFNgamma production. The mechanism through 
which TNFalpha enhances IL-18 induced IFNgamma production is by promoting IL-18
receptor alpha-chain expression which results in higher levels of p38 activation 
and induces expression of T-bet, a transcriptional regulator of the IFNG gene. In
contrast, TGF-beta1 rapidly suppresses IFNgamma production by limiting IL-18
receptor numbers at the cell surface and preventing induction of T-bet
expression. TGF-beta1 experience by cells leads to sustained long-term
inactivation of TNFalpha/IL-18-mediated cell activation but not IL-18 induced p38
activation suggesting transcriptional silencing of the T-BET and/or IFNG promoter
independent of MAPK signalling. These results demonstrate how IL-18 activity is
regulated by pro and anti-inflammatory cytokines and thereby provide insight into
the mechanism that controls dendritic cell activity and ultimately leads to
resolution of an inflammatory response.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19879772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2009 Oct;29(10):2138-9.

[Expression of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus].

[Article in Chinese]

Peng XB(1), Deng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510515, China. pengxb@fimmu.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in
the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
METHODS: The expression of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA in the peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 60 patients with SLE and 20 normal control subjects 
were detected by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Compared with the normal controls, T-bet mRNA expression decreased
whereas GATA-3 mRNA expression increased significantly in patients with SLE,
active SLE and inactive SLE.
CONCLUSIONS: The high expression of GATA-3 promotes the immature T cells to
differentiate into Th2 cells, induces Th2 cells to secrete the cytokines IL-6 and
IL-10, which, along with the low expression of Th1 as a result of T-bet
expression inhibition, causes B cell activation to produce a large quantity of
autoantibodies, leading finally to multiple organ injuries. Effective regulation 
of GATA-3 expression may provide a new clue for the treatment of SLE.

PMID: 19861286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Immunol. 2009 Nov 15;183(10):6681-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902212. Epub 2009
Oct 21.

Activation of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory system by nicotine attenuates
neuroinflammation via suppression of Th1 and Th17 responses.

Nizri E(1), Irony-Tur-Sinai M, Lory O, Orr-Urtreger A, Lavi E, Brenner T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem,
Israel.

The alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) was recently described as an 
anti-inflammatory target in both macrophages and T cells. Its expression by
immune cells may explain the epidemiological data claiming a negative link
between cigarette smoking and several inflammatory diseases. In this study, we
determined the immunological effects of alpha7 nAChR activation by nicotine. Our 
results indicate that the alpha7 nAChR is expressed on the surface of CD4(+) T
cells and that this expression is up-regulated upon immune activation. Nicotine
reduced T cell proliferation in response to an encephalitogenic Ag, as well as
the production of Th1 (TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma) and Th17 cytokines (IL-17,
IL-17F, IL-21, and IL-22). IL-4 production was increased in the same setting.
Attenuation of the Th1 and Th17 lineages was accompanied by reduced T-bet (50%)
and increased GATA-3 (350%) expression. Overall, nicotine induced a shift to the 
Th2 lineage. However, alpha7(-/-)-derived T cells were unaffected by nicotine.
Furthermore, nicotine reduced NF-kappaB-mediated transcription as measured by
IL-2 and IkappaB transcription. In vivo, administration of nicotine (2 mg/kg
s.c.) suppressed the severity of CD4(+) T cell-mediated disease experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis. alpha7(-/-) mice were refractory to nicotine
treatment, although disease severity in those animals was reduced, due to
impairment in Ag presentation. Accordingly, CD4(+) and CD11b(+) cells
infiltration into the CNS, demyelination, and axonal loss were reduced. Our data 
implicate a role for the alpha7 nAChR in immune modulation and suggest that
alpha7 nAChR agonists may be effective in the treatment of inflammatory
disorders.

PMID: 19846875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Immunology. 2009 Dec;128(4):589-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03169.x. Epub
2009 Aug 4.

T-bet-dependent regulation of CD8+ T-cell expansion during experimental
Trypanosoma cruzi infection.

Cobb D(1), Guo S, Lara AM, Manque P, Buck G, Smeltz RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

The transcription factor T-bet (T-box, expressed in T cells), promotes type I
immunity to pathogens through effects involving T cells and dendritic cells. In
CD8(+) T cells, many of the functions of T-bet are redundant with those of
eomesodermin (Eomes), a paralogue of T-bet. We therefore investigated the role of
T-bet in immunity to Trypanosoma cruzi, an intracellular pathogen that causes
Chagas disease, and which requires CD8(+) T cells for resistance. T-bet-deficient
mice (tbx21(-/-)) were highly susceptible to T. cruzi infection, marked by severe
liver pathology. CD8(+) T cells from infected tbx21(-/-) mice expressed typical
markers of activation, including CD44 and CD25. In striking contrast, there was a
10-fold reduction in the number of antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells in tbx21(-/-) 
mice. This reduction was not a consequence of increased apoptosis or altered
tissue-specific migration. Further, antigen-presenting cell (APC) functions in
tbx21(-/-) mice were normal as we observed comparable levels of B7-1, B7-2 and
CD40 expression as well as normal antigen-driven proliferation of wild-type
CD8(+) T cells in infected tbx21(-/-) mice. However, adoptive transfer of naïve T
cells from tbx21(-/-) donors into infected Rag-2-deficient mice (tbx21(+/+))
demonstrated a similar quantitative defect in CD8(+) T-cell expansion. These data
demonstrate that T-bet facilitates immunity to T. cruzi by promoting the
expansion of T. cruzi-specific CD8(+) T cells in a T cell-intrinsic manner. They 
also serve to further illustrate the multifaceted functions of T-box proteins in 
regulating quantitative aspects of T-cell immunity, in addition to qualitative
components such as cytokine production.

PMCID: PMC2792143
PMID: 19824916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Exp Med. 2009 Oct 26;206(11):2511-26. doi: 10.1084/jem.20090134. Epub 2009 Oct 
12.

Therapy of experimental type 1 diabetes by isolated Sertoli cell xenografts
alone.

Fallarino F(1), Luca G, Calvitti M, Mancuso F, Nastruzzi C, Fioretti MC, Grohmann
U, Becchetti E, Burgevin A, Kratzer R, van Endert P, Boon L, Puccetti P,
Calafiore R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia 06126,
Italy.

Type I diabetes mellitus is caused by autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta
cells, and effective treatment of the disease might require rescuing beta cell
function in a context of reinstalled immune tolerance. Sertoli cells (SCs) are
found in the testes, where their main task is to provide local immunological
protection and nourishment to developing germ cells. SCs engraft, self-protect,
and coprotect allogeneic and xenogeneic grafts from immune destruction in
different experimental settings. SCs have also been successfully implanted into
the central nervous system to create a regulatory environment to the surrounding 
tissue which is trophic and counter-inflammatory. We report that isolated
neonatal porcine SC, administered alone in highly biocompatible microcapsules,
led to diabetes prevention and reversion in the respective 88 and 81% of overtly 
diabetic (nonobese diabetic [NOD]) mice, with no need for additional beta cell or
insulin therapy. The effect was associated with restoration of systemic immune
tolerance and detection of functional pancreatic islets that consisted of
glucose-responsive and insulin-secreting cells. Curative effects by SC were
strictly dependent on efficient tryptophan metabolism in the xenografts, leading 
to TGF-beta-dependent emergence of autoantigen-specific regulatory T cells and
recovery of beta cell function in the diabetic recipients.

PMCID: PMC2768846
PMID: 19822646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Immunity. 2009 Oct 16;31(4):551-64. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.08.021. Epub 2009 
Oct 8.

CCCTC-binding factor and the transcription factor T-bet orchestrate T helper 1
cell-specific structure and function at the interferon-gamma locus.

Sekimata M(1), Pérez-Melgosa M, Miller SA, Weinmann AS, Sabo PJ, Sandstrom R,
Dorschner MO, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Wilson CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

How cell type-specific differences in chromatin conformation are achieved and
their contribution to gene expression are incompletely understood. Here we
identify a cryptic upstream orchestrator of interferon-gamma (IFNG)
transcription, which is embedded within the human IL26 gene, compromised of a
single CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding site and retained in all mammals, even
surviving near-complete evolutionary deletion of the equivalent gene encoding
IL-26 in rodents. CTCF and cohesins occupy this element in vivo in a cell
type-nonspecific manner. This element is juxtaposed to two other sites located
within the first intron and downstream of Ifng, where CTCF, cohesins, and the
transcription factor T-bet bind in a T helper 1 (Th1) cell-specific manner. These
interactions, close proximity of other elements within the locus to each other
and to the gene encoding interferon-gamma, and robust murine Ifng expression are 
dependent on CTCF and T-bet. The results demonstrate that cooperation between
architectural (CTCF) and transcriptional enhancing (T-bet) factors and the
elements to which they bind is required for proper Th1 cell-specific expression
of Ifng.

PMCID: PMC2810421
PMID: 19818655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Exp Neurol. 2009 Dec;220(2):366-73. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.09.022. Epub
2009 Oct 7.

T-bet deficiency decreases susceptibility to experimental myasthenia gravis.

Liu R(1), Hao J, Dayao CS, Shi FD, Campagnolo DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Barrow Neurological Institute, St. Joseph's Hospital 
and Medical Center, 350 W Thomas Road, Phoenix, AZ 85013-4496, USA.
Ruolan.Liu@chw.edu

T-bet, a tissue-specific transcription factor, controls T helper 1 (Th1) cell
differentiation and IFN-production. Given the reciprocal relationship between Th1
and other types of helper T cells, we hypothesized that T-bet impacts multiple
helper and regulatory T (Treg) cells, thereby influencing the magnitude of
autoimmune disease. We tested this hypothesis in an experimental model of
autoimmune myasthenia gravis (EAMG) of mice. Myasthenia gravis (MG) and EAMG are 
T cell-driven, IgG autoantibody-mediated disorders that destroy muscles by
attacking the target antigen acetylcholine receptor (AChR) or other antigens of
skeletal muscle at neuromuscular junctions. We show that, compared to wild-type
mice, AChR-primed T-bet(-/-) mice are less susceptible to EAMG. This phenotype is
associated with a reduction of autoreactive Th1 cells and augmentation of Th2 and
Th17 cells as well as an upregulation of Foxp3 expression by
T-bet(-/-)CD4(+)CD25(+) Treg cells. Thus, in our model, T-bet not only specifies 
the Th1 lineage but also has a broad influence on autoreactive Th2, Th17 and Treg
cells. These coordinated effects reduce the genesis of pathogenic antibodies and 
protect against B cell-mediated EAMG.

PMID: 19818352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Exp Med. 2009 Oct 26;206(11):2469-81. doi: 10.1084/jem.20090525. Epub 2009 Oct 
6.

T-bet-dependent S1P5 expression in NK cells promotes egress from lymph nodes and 
bone marrow.

Jenne CN(1), Enders A, Rivera R, Watson SR, Bankovich AJ, Pereira JP, Xu Y, Roots
CM, Beilke JN, Banerjee A, Reiner SL, Miller SA, Weinmann AS, Goodnow CC, Lanier 
LL, Cyster JG, Chun J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

During a screen for ethylnitrosourea-induced mutations in mice affecting blood
natural killer (NK) cells, we identified a strain, designated Duane, in which NK 
cells were reduced in blood and spleen but increased in lymph nodes (LNs) and
bone marrow (BM). The accumulation of NK cells in LNs reflected a decreased
ability to exit into lymph. This strain carries a point mutation within Tbx21
(T-bet), which generates a defective protein. Duane NK cells have a 30-fold
deficiency in sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 5 (S1P5) transcript levels, and
S1P5-deficient mice exhibit an egress defect similar to Duane. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation confirms binding of T-bet to the S1pr5 locus. S1P-deficient
mice exhibit a more severe NK cell egress block, and the FTY720-sensitive S1P1
also plays a role in NK cell egress from LNs. S1P5 is not inhibited by CD69, a
property that may facilitate trafficking of activated NK cells to effector sites.
Finally, the accumulation of NK cells within BM of S1P-deficient mice was
associated with reduced numbers in BM sinusoids, suggesting a role for S1P in BM 
egress. In summary, these findings identify S1P5 as a T-bet-induced gene that is 
required for NK cell egress from LNs and BM.

PMCID: PMC2768857
PMID: 19808259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Exp Med. 2009 Oct 26;206(11):2407-16. doi: 10.1084/jem.20082286. Epub 2009 Sep 
28.

Transforming growth factor beta is dispensable for the molecular orchestration of
Th17 cell differentiation.

Das J(1), Ren G, Zhang L, Roberts AI, Zhao X, Bothwell AL, Van Kaer L, Shi Y, Das
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Microbiology, and Immunology, Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School-University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Erratum in
    J Exp Med. 2009 Dec 21;206(13):3157.

Interleukin (IL)-17-producing T helper (Th17) cells play a critical role in the
pathophysiology of several autoimmune disorders. The differentiation of Th17
cells requires the simultaneous presence of an unusual combination of cytokines: 
IL-6, a proinflammatory cytokine, and transforming growth factor (TGF) beta, an
antiinflammatory cytokine. However, the molecular mechanisms by which TGF-beta
exerts its effects on Th17 cell differentiation remain elusive. We report that
TGF-beta does not directly promote Th17 cell differentiation but instead acts
indirectly by blocking expression of the transcription factors signal transducer 
and activator of transcription (STAT) 4 and GATA-3, thus preventing Th1 and Th2
cell differentiation. In contrast, TGF-beta had no effect on the expression of
retinoic acid receptor-related orphan nuclear receptor gammat, a Th17-specific
transcription factor. Interestingly, in Stat-6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) mice, which are
unable to generate Th1 and Th2 cells, IL-6 alone was sufficient to induce robust 
differentiation of Th17 cells, whereas TGF-beta had no effect, suggesting that
TGF-beta is dispensable for Th17 cell development. Consequently, BALB/c
Stat-6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) mice, but not wild-type BALB/c mice, were highly
susceptible to the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis,
which could be blocked by anti-IL-17 antibodies but not by anti-TGF-beta
antibodies. Collectively, these data provide evidence that TGF-beta is not
directly required for the molecular orchestration of Th17 cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2768861
PMID: 19808254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 20;106(42):17876-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0909357106. Epub 2009 Oct 5.

The transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 control alternative pathways of T-cell
differentiation through a shared set of target genes.

Jenner RG(1), Townsend MJ, Jackson I, Sun K, Bouwman RD, Young RA, Glimcher LH,
Lord GM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC/UCL Centre for Medical Molecular Virology, Division of Infection and
Immunity, University College London, London W1T 4JF, United Kingdom.
r.jenner@ucl.ac.uk

Upon detection of antigen, CD4(+) T helper (Th) cells can differentiate into a
number of effector types that tailor the immune response to different pathogens. 
Alternative Th1 and Th2 cell fates are specified by the transcription factors
T-bet and GATA-3, respectively. Only a handful of target genes are known for
these two factors and because of this, the mechanism through which T-bet and
GATA-3 induce differentiation toward alternative cell fates is not fully
understood. Here, we provide a genomic map of T-bet and GATA-3 binding in primary
human T cells and identify their target genes, most of which are previously
unknown. In Th1 cells, T-bet associates with genes of diverse function, including
those with roles in transcriptional regulation, chemotaxis and adhesion. GATA-3
occupies genes in both Th1 and Th2 cells and, unexpectedly, shares a large
proportion of targets with T-bet. Re-complementation of T-bet alters the
expression of these genes in a manner that mirrors their differential expression 
between Th1 and Th2 lineages. These data show that the choice between Th1 and Th2
lineage commitment is the result of the opposing action of T-bet and GATA-3 at a 
shared set of target genes and may provide a general paradigm for the interaction
of lineage-specifying transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2764903
PMID: 19805038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Oncol Rep. 2009 Nov;22(5):1181-7.

FOXP3 expression of micrometastasis-positive sentinel nodes in breast cancer
patients.

Matsuura K(1), Yamaguchi Y, Osaki A, Ohara M, Okita R, Emi A, Murakami S, Arihiro
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and 
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. m79kazuo@saitama-med.ac.jp

A number of methods have been established for identifying sentinel nodes (SNs).
In the present study, we attempted to clarify the immunological status of SNs
with or without micrometastasis in breast cancer patients. SNs were identified by
the dye- and gamma probe-guided method. Total RNA was extracted from the SNs, and
the expression of T-BET, GATA-3, and FOXP3 were evaluated using quantitative
real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
Micrometastasis was identified as microscopically negative but positive by RT-PCR
specific for mammaglobin. Of 88 patients, 17 (19.3%) showed positive metastasis
in SNs (pN1, 14; pN2, 3). Of the 71 metastasis-negative SNs, 11 showed positive
bands on RT-PCR specific for mamma-globin [pN0(mol+)]. There was no significant
correlation among clinicopathological features with or without micrometastasis.
Immunological parameters were compared among the 60 pN0, 11 pN0(mol+), and 17
pN1-2. Although T-BET expression was higher in pN0(mol+) than pN0, FOXP3
expression was also higher in pN0(mol+) than pN0. In pN1-2, T-BET expression
decreased compared with pN0(mol+), but FOXP3 expression did not. On the other
hand, GATA-3 expression inversely increased in pN1-2 compared with pN0(mol+). In 
patients with breast cancer, micrometastasis can stimulate Th1 response in SNs.
However, the Treg cell response is also induced at the micrometastasis level and 
persists during the progression of metastasis in SNs. Then, the shift in the
Th1/Th2 balance may preferentially lean toward Th2 responses in pN1-2 SNs and
suppress antitumor immune responses. Micrometastasis [pN0(mol+)] is a status
immunologically distinguishable from pN0 and pN1-2.

PMID: 19787238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Immunol. 2009 Oct 15;183(8):4957-67. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900735. Epub 2009
Sep 28.

Differential effect of IL-27 on developing versus committed Th17 cells.

El-behi M(1), Ciric B, Yu S, Zhang GX, Fitzgerald DC, Rostami A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, 
USA.

IL-27 counters the effect of TGF-beta+IL-6 on naive CD4(+) T cells, resulting in 
near complete inhibition of de novo Th17 development. In contrast, little is
known about the effect of IL-27 on already differentiated Th17 cells. A better
understanding of how IL-27 regulates these cells is needed to evaluate the
therapeutic potential of IL-27 in Th17 cells-associated diseases. In this study, 
we show that IL-27 had surprisingly little effect on committed Th17 cells,
despite its expression of a functional IL-27R. Contrary to de novo
differentiation of Th17 cells, IL-27 did not suppress expression of
retinoid-related orphan receptor (ROR)gammat or RORalpha in committed Th17 cells.
Consistent with this finding, the frequency of committed Th17 cells and their
cytokine secretion remained unaffected by IL-27. Both memory Th17 cells
(CD4(+)CD25(-)CD62L(low)) that developed in vivo and encephalitogenic Th17 cells 
infiltrating the CNS of mice developing experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
produced similar amounts of IL-17A when reactivated with IL-23 in the absence and
presence of exogenous IL-27. Finally, IL-27 failed to suppress
encephalitogenicity of Th17 cells in an adoptive transfer of experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Analysis ex vivo of transferred Th17 cells in the
spleen and CNS of recipient mice showed that cells retained similar phenotype
irrespective of whether cells were treated or not with IL-27. Our data
demonstrate that in contrast to inhibition of de novo differentiation of Th17
cells, IL-27 has little or no effect on committed Th17 cells. These findings
indicate that therapeutic applications of IL-27 might have a limited efficacy in 
inflammatory conditions where aggressive Th17 responses have already developed.

PMCID: PMC2901918
PMID: 19786534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Immunol. 2009 Oct 15;183(8):5293-300. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803109. Epub 2009 
Sep 25.

Development of allergen-induced airway inflammation in the absence of T-bet
regulation is dependent on IL-17.

Durrant DM(1), Gaffen SL, Riesenfeld EP, Irvin CG, Metzger DW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology and Microbial Disease, Albany Medical College, Albany,
NY 12208, USA.

Dysfunctional expression of T-bet, a transcription factor that is critical for
IFN-gamma production, has been implicated in the development of asthma. To
investigate in detail the mechanisms responsible for exacerbated disease in the
absence of T-bet expression, BALB/c wild-type (WT) and T-bet(-/-) mice were used 
in a murine model of OVA-induced allergic lung inflammation. Following OVA
challenge, T-bet(-/-) mice displayed increased histological inflammation in the
lungs as well as greater thickening of the bronchiole linings, increased numbers 
of eosinophils and neutrophils in the lung, and enhanced airway
hyperresponsiveness, compared with WT mice. However, the production of Th2
cytokines in T-bet(-/-) mice did not appear to be significantly greater than in
WT mice. Interestingly, a marked increase in the levels of the proinflammatory
cytokine IL-17 was observed in T-bet(-/-) mice. Neutralization of pulmonary IL-17
in T-bet(-/-) mice by anti-IL-17 mAb treatment during OVA challenge resulted in
decreased levels of neutrophilic infiltration into the airways and decreased
airway inflammation, essentially reversing the development of allergic asthma
development. These findings indicate that IL-17 is a key mediator of airway
inflammation in the absence of T-bet. The results of this study suggest a
possible target for therapeutic intervention of human asthma.

PMCID: PMC2811523
PMID: 19783683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 Oct;50(10):1687-92. doi: 10.1080/10428190903161042.

T-box-expressed-in-T-cells (T-bet) expression by the tumor cells of hairy-cell
leukemia correlates with interferon-gamma production.

Jöhrens K(1), Moos V, Schneider T, Anagnostopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Consultation and Reference Center for Hematopathology, Institute of Pathology,
Charité - University Medicine Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, 12203 Berlin,
Germany.

Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) is an uncommon B-cell malignancy with unknown
pathogenesis. In an earlier study, we demonstrated that HCL cells highly express 
the transcription factor T-box-expressed-in-T-cells (T-bet). T-bet is the master 
regulator of the T-helper (Th)1 cell response regulating interferon gamma
(IFN-gamma) production and also plays a central role in the T-cell independent
Th1-like B-cell response. Here, we demonstrate by fluorescence activated cell
sorting (FACS) analysis that neoplastic cells from the peripheral blood of five
patients with HCL showed an enhanced expression of IFN-gamma after stimulation.
Additionally, a comparison with 55 healthy individuals revealed a significant
elevation of IFN-gamma in the sera of patients with HCL. Based on our recent
findings that a non-neoplastic B-cell subset, the monocytoid B-cells, are T-bet
positive and produce IFN-gamma, we propose that monocytoid and hairy B-cells have
a similar function and that the T-bet-IFN-gamma axis is involved in the
pathogenesis of HCL.

PMID: 19757302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Immunol. 2009 Oct;46(16):3218-23. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.08.014. Epub
2009 Sep 9.

Role of Cybr, a cytohesin binder and regulator, in CD4(+) T-cell function and
host immunity.

Chang SL(1), Chang CL, Huang PI, Tao MH, Yang WC.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

Cytohesin binder and regulator (Cybr) is known to regulate leukocyte adhesion and
migration. However, its function in T-cells is poorly understood. Here, we
investigated the role of Cybr in CD4(+) T-cell function and host immunity. Cybr
inhibited p38 phosphorylation following CD4(+) T-cell stimulation. Since p38
regulates the expression of T-box expressed in T-cells (T-bet) but not GATA
binding protein 3 (GATA-3) in T-cells, Cybr decreased the expression of T-bet and
IFN-gamma in CD4(+) T-cells. Moreover, we found that host immunity against
Listeria infection and IFN-gamma production in blood were significantly
compromised in Cybr-overexpressing transgenic mice. In summary, our data suggest 
that Cybr represses the expression of T-bet and IFN-gamma via an inhibition of
p38 in T-cells and consequently reduces host resistance to bacterial infection in
mice.

PMID: 19744714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Clin Exp Immunol. 2009 Oct;158(1):106-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2009.03999.x.

T-bet and pSTAT-1 expression in PBMC from coeliac disease patients: new markers
of disease activity.

Frisullo G(1), Nociti V, Iorio R, Patanella AK, Plantone D, Bianco A, Marti A,
Cammarota G, Tonali PA, Batocchi AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Catholic University, Largo Agostino Gemelli 8,
Rome, Italy.

Coeliac disease (CD) is considered a T cell-mediated autoimmune disease, and
up-regulation of T-bet and phosphorylated signal transducers and activators of
transcription (pSTAT)1, key transcription factors for the development of T helper
type 1 (Th1) cells, has been described in the mucosa of patients with untreated
CD. Using transcription factor analysis, we investigated whether T-bet and pSTAT1
expressions are up-regulated in the peripheral blood of CD patients and correlate
with disease activity. Using flow cytometry, we analysed T-bet, pSTAT1 and pSTAT3
expression in CD4(+), CD8(+) T cells, CD19(+) B cells and monocytes from
peripheral blood of 15 untreated and 15 treated CD patients and 30 controls, and 
longitudinally in five coeliac patients before and after dietary treatment. We
evaluated using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), interferon (FN)-gamma,
interleukin (IL)-17 and IL-10 production by peripheral blood mononuclear cell
(PBMC) cultures. T-bet expression in CD4(+), CD8(+) T cells, CD19(+) B cells and 
monocytes and IFN-gamma production by PBMC was higher in untreated than in
treated CD patients and controls. pSTAT1 expression was higher in CD4(+)T cells, 
B cells and monocytes from untreated than from treated CD patients and controls. 
pSTAT3 was increased only in monocytes from untreated patients compared with
CD-treated patients and controls. The data obtained from the longitudinal
evaluation of transcription factors confirmed these results. Flow cytometric
analysis of pSTAT1 and T-bet protein expression in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells could be useful and sensible markers in the follow-up of CD patients to
evaluate disease activity and response to dietary treatment.

PMCID: PMC2759065
PMID: 19737237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cancer Cell. 2009 Sep 8;16(3):208-19. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.07.015.

Colitis-associated colorectal cancer driven by T-bet deficiency in dendritic
cells.

Garrett WS(1), Punit S, Gallini CA, Michaud M, Zhang D, Sigrist KS, Lord GM,
Glickman JN, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. wendy_garrett@dfci.harvard.edu

We previously described a mouse model of ulcerative colitis linked to T-bet
deficiency in the innate immune system. Here, we report that the majority of
T-bet(-/-)RAG2(-/-) ulcerative colitis (TRUC) mice spontaneously progress to
colonic dysplasia and rectal adenocarcinoma solely as a consequence of
MyD88-independent intestinal inflammation. Dendritic cells (DCs) are necessary
cellular effectors for a proinflammatory program that is carcinogenic. Whereas
these malignancies arise in the setting of a complex inflammatory environment,
restoration of T-bet selectively in DCs was sufficient to reduce colonic
inflammation and prevent the development of neoplasia. TRUC colitis-associated
colorectal cancer resembles the human disease and provides ample opportunity to
probe how inflammation drives colorectal cancer development and to test
preventative and therapeutic strategies preclinically.

PMCID: PMC2740755
PMID: 19732721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Sep;39(9):2470-81. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939325.

T-bet protects against exacerbation of schistosome egg-induced immunopathology by
regulating Th17-mediated inflammation.

Rutitzky LI(1), Smith PM, Stadecker MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02111, USA.

C57BL/6 mice infected with Schistosoma mansoni naturally develop mild CD4(+)
T-cell-mediated immunopathology characterized by small hepatic granulomas around 
parasite eggs. However, immunization with soluble egg Ag in CFA markedly
exacerbates the lesions by inducing a potent proinflammatory environment with
high levels of IFN-gamma and IL-17, which are signature cytokines of distinct
Th1- versus Th17-cell lineages. To determine the relative role of these subsets
in disease exacerbation, we examined mice deficient in T-bet (T-bet(-/-)), which 
is required for Th1 differentiation and IFN-gamma production. We now report that 
immunization with soluble egg Ag in CFA caused a significantly greater
enhancement of egg-induced hepatic immunopathology in T-bet(-/-) mice compared
with WT controls, and analysis of their granulomas disclosed a higher proportion 
of activated DC and CD4(+) T cells, as well as a marked influx of neutrophils.
The absence of IFN-gamma in the T-bet(-/-) mice correlated with a marked increase
in IL-23p19, IL-17 and TNF-alpha in granulomas and MLN. In contrast, T-bet(-/-)
mice had lower levels of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-10 and a reduction in FIZZ1 and FoxP3 
expression, suggesting diminished regulatory activity, respectively, by
alternatively activated macrophages and Treg. These findings demonstrate that
T-bet-dependent signaling negatively regulates Th17-mediated immunopathology in
severe schistosomiasis.

PMCID: PMC3024243
PMID: 19714576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Ethnopharmacol. 2009 Oct 29;126(1):57-63. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2009.08.011. Epub 
2009 Aug 19.

Immunosuppressive effects of an ethyl acetate extract from Urtica dentata Hand on
skin allograft rejection.

Xiang M(1), Hou WR, Xie SN, Zhang WD, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Natural Medicinal Chemistry and Resources Evaluation, 
School of Pharmacy, Tongji Medical College, HuaZhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China.

AIM OF THE STUDY: To investigate the immunosuppressive effects of HPLC qualitied 
ethyl acetate extract (EAE) from Urtica dentate Hand on skin allograft rejection 
in a murine model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Allo-skin transplantation model was established by placing
skin allograft of C57BL/6 mice in the wound bed which was on the back of Balb/c
mice. We used FACS to study the effects of EAE on dendritic cells (DCs)
maturation and CD4(+)CD25(+)T regulatory cells (Tregs) differentiation. We also
studied spleen lymphocyte proliferation and T-bet gene expression in DCs.
Concentration of Th1/Th2 cytokines was monitored as markers of Th1/Th2 responses 
by ELISA.
RESULTS: A significant prolongation of skin allografts survival was observed as a
dose-dependent manner in the animals treated with EAE. By FACS, we found that
treatment with EAE (200 mg kg(-1)) resulted in an immature statement of DCs and
stimulated the differentiation of CD4(+)CD25(+)Tregs. Additionally, the
expression of T-bet gene and the proliferation of spleen lymphocytes were
efficiently abated in EAE treated mice. Comparing to the model control,
EAE-treated recipients showed a significant down-regulation (P<0.01) of Th1
cytokines (IL-2, IFN-gamma) and an obviously increase (P<0.01) of Th2 cytokine
(IL-10) in the serum, which presented in a dose-related way.
CONCLUSIONS: The anti-allograft rejection effect of EAE by enhancing
CD4(+)CD25(+)Tregs differentiation and sustaining DCs immaturation makes EAE to
be a possible choice for treating autoimmune diseases in a way of inducing a
stable immunological tolerance state.

PMID: 19698774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 Aug 22;7:84. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-84.

Modulation of cytokines and transcription factors (T-Bet and GATA3) in CD4
enriched cervical cells of Chlamydia trachomatis infected fertile and infertile
women upon stimulation with chlamydial inclusion membrane proteins B and C.

Gupta R(1), Vardhan H, Srivastava P, Salhan S, Mittal A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology-ICMR, Safdarjang Hospital Campus, Post Box no, 4909,
New Delhi-110 029, India. rishein9@rediffmail.com

BACKGROUND: Chlamydial Inclusion membrane proteins (Incs), are involved in
biochemical interactions with host cells and infecting Chlamydiae. We have
previously reported the role of two Chlamydia trachomatis (CT) Incs, namely IncB 
and IncC in generating host immunity in CT infected women. Emerging data shows
involvement of Inc stimulated CD4 positive T cells in aiding host immunity in
infected fertile and infertile women through the secretion of interferon gamma.
However the lack of data on the intra-cytokine interplay to these Incs in
infected cell milieu prompted us to investigate further.
METHODS: A total of 14 CT-positive fertile, 18 CT-positive infertile women and 25
uninfected controls were enrolled in this study. CD8 depleted, CD4 enriched
cervical cells were isolated and upon stimulation with IncB and IncC, modulation 
of cytokines (Interleukin (IL)-1 Beta, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, Interferon-gamma,
IL-12, IL-23, Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha and Granulocyte macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and T cell lineage regulating transcription
factors T-Bet and GATA3 was determined by real-time reverse-transcriptase
(RT)-PCR and ELISA.
RESULTS: Significant higher expression (P < 0.05) of Interferon-gamma, IL-12,
IL-23 and GM-CSF were found in Inc-stimulated CD4 enriched cervical cells of
CT-positive fertile women and contrastingly high IL-1 Beta, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6 and 
IL-10 levels were found in CT-positive infertile women. Positive correlation (P <
0.05) was found between Interferon-gamma and T-Bet levels in CT-positive fertile 
women and IL-4 mRNA and GATA3 levels in CT-positive infertile patients upon IncB 
and IncC stimulation.
CONCLUSION: Overall our data shows that CT IncB and IncC are able to upregulate
expression of cytokines, namely interferon-gamma, IL-12, IL-23 and GM-CSF in
CT-positive fertile women while expression of IL-1 Beta, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6 and
IL-10 were upregulated in CT-positive infertile women. Our study also suggests
that Incs are able to modulate expression of T cell lineage determinants
indicating their involvement in regulation of immune cells.

PMCID: PMC2736965
PMID: 19698128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Neuroimmunol. 2009 Oct 30;215(1-2):90-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2009.07.010.
Epub 2009 Aug 19.

Expression of Th1 and Th17 cytokines and transcription factors in multiple
sclerosis patients: does baseline T-bet mRNA predict the response to
interferon-beta treatment?

Drulovic J(1), Savic E, Pekmezovic T, Mesaros S, Stojsavljevic N,
Dujmovic-Basuroski I, Kostic J, Vasic V, Mostarica Stojkovic M, Popadic D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology, Clinical Centre of Serbia, University of Belgrade, Dr 
Subotica 6, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia. jelena60@eunet.rs

We studied the effect of one-year interferon (IFN)-beta treatment on the in vivo 
mRNA expression of IFN-gamma, interleukin (IL)-17, T-bet and RoR-gammat, on
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from 36 multiple sclerosis (MS)
patients. In the total MS group, IFN-beta induced decrease in mRNA levels of
IFN-gamma and T-bet (p<0.0001), while the levels of IL-17 and RoR-gammat remained
similar. In both responders and non-responders, IFN-beta induced significant
decrease of IFN-gamma (p<0.0001 and p=0.011, respectively), while decrease in
T-bet was detected only in responders (p<0.0001). Higher pre-treatment T-bet
allowed prediction of the clinical response in the first year (beta=0.601,
p=0.036). Our preliminary findings suggest that T-bet expression might be a
potential prognostic marker of treatment response to IFN-beta in MS.

PMID: 19695714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Neuroimmunol. 2009 Oct 30;215(1-2):10-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2009.07.007. 
Epub 2009 Aug 18.

Encephalitogenic T cells that stably express both T-bet and ROR gamma t
consistently produce IFNgamma but have a spectrum of IL-17 profiles.

Abromson-Leeman S(1), Bronson RT, Dorf ME.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
sara.abromson.leeman@gmail.com

Th1/Th17 cells, secreting both IFNgamma and IL-17, are often associated with
inflammatory pathology. We cloned and studied the cytokine phenotypes of
MBP-specific, TCR-identical encephalitogenic CD4+ cells in relationship to Th1-
and Th17-associated transcription factors T-bet and RORgammat. IFNgamma-producing
cells could be sub-divided into those that are T-bet(+)/RORgammat(-) and those
that are T-bet(+)/RORgammat(+). The latter comprises a spectrum of phenotypes, as
defined by IL-17 production, and can be induced to up-regulate IL-23R with IL-12 
or IL-23. The former, bona fide Th1 cells, lack IL-23R expression under all
conditions. In vivo, T-bet(+)/RORgammat(-) and T-bet(+)/RORgammat(+) clones
induce EAE equally well.

PMCID: PMC2761534
PMID: 19692128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2009 Jun;14(2):107-17. doi:
10.1111/j.1529-8027.2009.00220.x.

pSTAT1, pSTAT3, and T-bet as markers of disease activity in chronic inflammatory 
demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy.

Madia F(1), Frisullo G, Nociti V, Conte A, Luigetti M, Del Grande A, Patanella
AK, Iorio R, Tonali PA, Batocchi AP, Sabatelli M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology, Department of Neuroscience, Catholic University, Rome,
Italy.

Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (CIDP) is considered an
auto-immune disorder. We evaluated expression of pSTAT1, T-bet, and pSTAT3 in
circulating T-cells, B-cells, and monocytes and spontaneous production of
interleukin-17 (IL17), interferon-gamma (IFN gamma), and interleukin-10 (IL10) by
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 14 active CIDP patients compared 
with 6 patients with long-lasting remission and 20 controls. Active disease
patients showed higher pSTAT1, T-bet, and pSTAT3 in CD4(+) T-cells than controls 
(p < 0.001, p = 0.0002, p = 0.0097, respectively) and remission patients (p <
0.001, p = 0.0036, p = 0.0008, respectively). pSTAT1, T-bet, and pSTAT3 were also
higher in monocytes from active CIDP patients than controls (p = 0.0011, p =
0.0041, p = 0.0413, respectively) and remission patients (p = 0.0073, p = 0.0274,
p = 0.0251, respectively). Moreover in CD8(+) T-cells, pSTAT3 expression was
higher in active CIDP patients than in remission patients (p = 0.0345) and in
controls (p = 0.0023). IL17 and IFN gamma production were significantly higher in
active CIDP patients than in controls (p < 0.0395, p = 0.0010, respectively); IFN
gamma levels were higher also in remission CIDP patients (p = 0.0073). IL10
levels were higher in active phase patients than in controls (p = 0.0334). Our
data suggest that pSTAT1, T-bet, and pSTAT3 can be considered putative markers of
disease activity and potential targets for specific therapies.

PMID: 19691533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Immunology. 2009 Sep;128(1):34-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03049.x.

A continuous T-bet expression is required to silence the interleukin-4-producing 
potential in T helper type 1 cells.

Zhuang Y(1), Huang Z, Nishida J, Brown M, Zhang L, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Medicine, National Jewish
Health, Denver, CO, USA.

To develop into committed T helper type 1 (Th1) cells, naive CD4(+) T cells not
only need to acquire the capacity to produce interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), but
they also need to gain the ability to silence their interleukin-4 (IL-4)
-producing potential. How Th1 cells silence their Th2 cytokine-producing
potential is an important yet unresolved issue in Th1 immunity. We found that a
lack of IL-4 stimulation was not sufficient to silence the IL-4-producing
potential in activated CD4(+) T cells and that Th1-promoting factor was required.
Although it has been shown that T-bet is a crucial factor in suppressing Il4 gene
expression, it is unclear whether a continuous presence of T-bet is required to
silence the Il4 gene in Th1 cells. To address this problem, we used an inducible 
form of T-bet - a T-bet-oestrogen receptor fusion molecule (T-bet-ER). We found
that the activation of T-bet during primary or secondary culture was sufficient
to silence IL-4-producing potential. On the other hand, the inactivation of T-bet
after naïve CD4(+) T cells had differentiated into Th1 cells resulted in
derepression of Il4 gene transcription. Additionally, we found that T-bet is
required to maintain Ifng expression. Our data demonstrate that the continuous
expression of T-bet is required for Th1 cells to silence their IL-4-producing
potential.

PMCID: PMC2747137
PMID: 19689734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2009 May;29(5):394-7.

[Effect of Aidi injection on peripheral blood expression of Th1/Th2 transcription
factors and cytokines in patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma during 
radiotherapy].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Q(1), Chen DY.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Medical College of Jiangsu University, Jiangsu.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of Th1/Th2 transcription factors and
cytokines in peripheral blood of patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) during radiotherapy to provide an evidence for using traditional Chinese
medicine in anti-tumor immunotherapy.
METHODS: Sixty patients with ESCC undergoing radiotherapy were randomly and
equally assigned to the tested group (treated with combined treatment of Aidi
Injection) and the control group (treated with radiotherapy alone). A group
consisted of 20 healthy persons was set up meanwhile as the normal control.
Patients' expressions of Th1 and Th2 type transcription factors and cytokines
were detected before and after radiotherapy, the expression of T-bet and GATA-3
in peripheral blood monoclear cells (PBMCs) were detected by Real-time
quantitative PCR (RT-PCR), and plasma expressions of interferon gamma
(IFN-gamma), interleukin 2, 4 and 10 (IL-2, IL-4, IL-10) were detected by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: Compared with the healthy control group, the expressions of Th1 type
transcription factor T-bet and cytokines IFN-gamma, IL-2 in ESCC patients were
significantly lower (P < 0.01), while expressions of Th2 type transcription
factor GATA-3 and cytokines IL-4, IL-10 were significantly higher (P < 0.01).
These changes were exacerbated significantly after radiotherapy in the control
group (P < 0.01), but only showed a slight change in the tested group with
statistical insignificance (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Radiotherapy can not reverse the Th1/Th2 shift presented in ESCC
patients, while the combined intravenous dripping of Aidi Injection during
radiotherapy can inhibit it effectively. The combined therapy could elevate the
immune function in organism, enhance the radiosensitivity, and attenuate the
toxic-adverse effect of radiotherapy.

PMID: 19673326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cytokine. 2009 Oct-Nov;48(1-2):144-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2009.07.007. Epub 2009 
Aug 8.

T-bet-/- RAG2-/- ulcerative colitis: the role of T-bet as a peacekeeper of
host-commensal relationships.

Garrett WS(1), Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. wendy_garrett@dfci.harvard.edu

Inflammatory bowel disease is a disease that reflects a disequilibrium in
host-commensal homeostasis. T-bet-/-xRAG2-/- deficient mice develop a spontaneous
juvenile ulcerative colitis resulting from a pro-inflammatory response to the
commensal microbiota that is dendritic cell and TNF-alpha driven [schematized in 
Fig. 1]. The TRUC (T-bet-/- RAG2-/- ulcerative colitis) model is discussed in the
broader context of the adaptive and innate immune mechanisms that regulate
host-commensal relationships within the intestine.

PMCID: PMC2836906
PMID: 19666230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Immunol. 2009 Sep 1;183(5):3454-62. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802887. Epub 2009
Jul 31.

Targeting gut T cell Ca2+ release-activated Ca2+ channels inhibits T cell
cytokine production and T-box transcription factor T-bet in inflammatory bowel
disease.

Di Sabatino A(1), Rovedatti L, Kaur R, Spencer JP, Brown JT, Morisset VD,
Biancheri P, Leakey NA, Wilde JI, Scott L, Corazza GR, Lee K, Sengupta N, Knowles
CH, Gunthorpe MJ, McLean PG, MacDonald TT, Kruidenier L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infectious Disease, Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts 
and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.

Prolonged Ca(2+) entry through Ca(2+) release-activated Ca(2+) (CRAC) channels is
crucial in activating the Ca(2+)-sensitive transcription factor NFAT, which is
responsible for directing T cell proliferation and cytokine gene expression. To
establish whether targeting CRAC might counteract intestinal inflammation, we
evaluated the in vitro effect of a selective CRAC inhibitor on T cell cytokine
production and T-bet expression by lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMC) and
biopsy specimens from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients. The inhibitory
activity of the CRAC blocker was investigated through patch-clamp experiments on 
rat basophilic leukemia cells and fluorometric imaging plate reader intracellular
Ca(2+) assays using thapsigargin-stimulated Jurkat T cells and its detailed
selectivity profile defined using a range of in vitro radioligand binding and
functional assays. Anti-CD3/CD28-stimulated LPMC and biopsy specimens from 51
patients with IBD were cultured with a range of CRAC inhibitor concentrations
(0.01-10 microM). IFN-gamma, IL-2, IL-8, and IL-17 were analyzed by ELISA. T-bet 
was determined by immunoblotting. We found that the CRAC blocker
concentration-dependently inhibited CRAC current in rat basophilic leukemia cells
and thapsigargin-induced Ca(2+) influx in Jurkat T cells. A
concentration-dependent reduction in T-bet expression and production of
IFN-gamma, IL-2, IL-17, but not IL-8, was observed in IBD LPMC and biopsy
specimens treated with the CRAC inhibitor. In conclusion, we provide evidence
that the suppression of CRAC channel function may dampen the increased T cell
response in the inflamed gut, thus suggesting a promising role for CRAC inhibitor
drugs in the therapeutic management of patients with IBD.

PMID: 19648266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol. 2009;19(4):276-82.

Characterizing T-cell phenotypes in nasal polyposis in Chinese patients.

Shi J(1), Fan Y, Xu R, Zuo K, Cheng L, Xu G, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Cancer Center, Otorhinolarygology Hospital of The First Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, and Otorhinolaryngology Institute of Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Nasal polyposis has different etiologies in Western and Eastern
countries. Furthermore, its pathogenesis is still poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the T-cell phenotypes involved in nasal polyposis in
Chinese patients.
METHODS: Twenty-four Chinese patients with nasal polyps were studied. CD4, CD8,
Foxp3, and interleukin (IL) 17 were analyzed by immunohistochemical staining.
Expression of T-bet, GATA-3, Foxp3, and RORgammat mRNA was detected by real-time 
polymerase chain reaction. The levels of T-cell cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, interferon
[IFN] gamma, IL-10, IL-17, and transforming growth factor [TGF] beta) were
determined using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and serum immunoglobulin (Ig)
E levels were measured using the UNICAP system.
RESULTS: Increased expression of CD4+ and CD8+ and decreased expression of Foxp3 
and IL-17 were detected in nasal polyps compared with control tissue.
Furthermore, expression of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA was upregulated, whereas Foxp3
mRNA expression was markedly downregulated. Furthermore, increased levels of
IFN-gamma, IL-4 and IL-5 and decreased levels of IL-10 and TGF-beta were found in
nasal polyps. There was no association between Staphylococcus aureus exotoxin
(SAE)-specific IgE and T regulatory cell (Treg) insufficiency in nasal polyps.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that excessive infiltration of CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells in nasal polyps may be associated with expression of Foxp3+ by Tregs
but not with SAEs in Chinese patients.

PMID: 19639723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Jun;26(3):606-9, 619.

[Adeno-associated virus mediated T-bet gene transfer into SGC-7901 cell to
regulate IFN-gamma production].

[Article in Chinese]

Qiu G(1), Wang S, Wang S, Shao Q, Ma J, Yang M, Xu X, Mao C, Su Z, Huang X, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medical Technology, Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang 212013, China.

In order to investigate the effect of T-bet on malignant cells, we selected
SGC-7901, a kind of human gastric carcinoma cell line, and used gene clone
technique and adeno-associated virus (AAV) packing technology, thus obtaining a
recombinant rAAV-eGFP-T-bet and T-bet gene-transfected SGC-7901 cells. Then the
function of T-bet gene-infected SGC-7901 cells was researched by detecting the
levels of IFN-gamma and T-bet production. The results showed: (1) It was verified
that rAAV-T-bet's packing was completed; (2) After SGC-7901 cells was transfected
by rAAV-eGFP-T-bet, a green fluorescence was found in about 30%-40% SGC-7901s,
and the gene of 1670 bp (T-bet) and 388 bp (IFN-gamma) were generated from
SGC-7901s cells; (3) The proteins of IFN-gamma and T-bet secreted by SGC-7901
cells were also detected. These reveal that SGC-7901 cell is efficiently infected
by rAAV encoding T-bet, which can induce transfected cells to secret IFN-gamma.
It may be useful in the researches on cancer immune therapy of transfecting T-bet
gene.

PMID: 19634682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Oct;39(10):2703-15. doi: 10.1002/eji.200839097.

Allogeneic induced human FOXP3(+)IFN-gamma(+) T cells exhibit selective
suppressive capacity.

Stroopinsky D(1), Avivi I, Rowe JM, Avigan D, Katz T.

Author information: 
(1)Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa, Israel.

Human induced CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells have been shown to express FOXP3, similar to 
naturally occurring Treg cells (nTreg). However, the suppressive capacity of
these cells is still under debate. The current study was designed to investigate 
functional characteristics of CD25(+)FOXP3(+) derived from CD25(-) T cells.
Stimulation of CD25(-) PBMC with allogeneic PBMC resulted in production of
CD4(+)CD25(high) T cells. This process was more rapid and prominent when highly
mature DC were used for stimulation. The resultant CD4(+)CD25(high) population
concurrently exhibited regulatory markers FOXP3, CTLA-4, GITR, and inflammatory
cytokines IL-2 and IFN-gamma. These human-induced FOXP3(+)IFN-gamma(+) T cells
were shown, for the first time, to markedly inhibit alloreactive T-cell
expansion, similar to nTreg. However, in contrast to nTreg, the induced
CD4(+)CD25(+)FOXP3(+) cells did not suppress proliferation against a third party 
donor stimulus or CMV. This suggested that the cell population possessed a more
selective suppressive capacity targeted against the original stimulus only. The
induced human CD4(+)CD25(+)FOXP3(+) subset derived from CD25(-) T cells, while
expressing inflammatory cytokines, exhibits a suppressive cell contact-dependent 
effect, restricted against T cells responding to the original stimulus. Such
unique properties suggest that these cells are potentially ideal for the use as
post-transplant GVH disease prophylaxis.

PMID: 19634189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Immunobiology. 2009;214(9-10):877-86. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2009.06.013. Epub 2009
Jul 21.

Cutaneous distribution of plasmacytoid dendritic cells in lupus erythematosus.
Selective tropism at the site of epithelial apoptotic damage.

Vermi W(1), Lonardi S, Morassi M, Rossini C, Tardanico R, Venturini M, Sala R,
Tincani A, Poliani PL, Calzavara-Pinton PG, Cerroni L, Santoro A, Facchetti F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Brescia, Italy. william.vermi@gmail.com

Recent evidences suggest a significant role of Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDC)
role in the pathogenesis of lupus erythematosus (LE) via production of type I
IFN. Taking advantage on the availability of multiple reagents (CD123, BDCA2, and
CD2ap) specifically recognizing PDC on fixed tissues, we investigated the
occurrence of PDC in a cohort of 74 LE patients. The large majority of LE
biopsies (67/74; 90.5%) showed cutaneous infiltration of PDC. PDC were more
frequently observed (96.4 vs 72.2) and numerous in cutaneous LE compared to
systemic LE (SLE) and correlated with the density of the inflammatory infiltrate 
(r=0.40; p<0.001). PDC reduction in SLE might be related to a broader tissue
distribution of this cellular population, as indicated by their occurrence in
kidneys in 11 out of 24 (45.8%) cases studied. The distribution of cutaneous PDC 
showed two distinct patterns. More commonly, PDC were observed within
perivascular inflammatory nodules in the dermis, associated with CD208+ mature DC
and T-bet+ cells [D-PDC]. A second component was observed along the
dermal-epithelial junction [J-PDC], in association with cytotoxic T-cells in
areas of severe epithelial damage. Notably, chemerin reactivity was observed in
64% of LE biopsies on endothelial cells and in the granular layer keratinocytes. 
Cutaneous PDC in LE strongly produced type I IFN, as indicated by the diffuse MxA
expression, and the cytotoxic molecule granzyme B. This study confirms cutaneous 
PDC infiltration as hallmark of LE. The topographical segregation in D-PDC and
J-PDC suggests a novel view of the role of these cells in skin autoimmunity.

PMID: 19625100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Aug 1;15(15):4823-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-3224.
Epub 2009 Jul 21.

Differential genetic and functional markers of second neoplasias in Hodgkin's
disease patients.

Lorenzo Y(1), Provencio M, Lombardía L, Díaz R, Silva J, Herrera M, García JM,
Peña C, García V, Romero J, Domínguez G, Bonilla F.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Oncology and Radiation Oncology, Hospital Universitario
Puerta de Hierro, Majadahonda; and Molecular Diagnostic Unit, Molecular Pathology
Program, Spanish Cancer Research Center, Madrid, Spain.

PURPOSE: The mechanisms involved in the appearance of a second neoplasia in
patients with Hodgkin's disease (HD) are probably related to the genomic damage
induced by the treatments administered and its repair. Here, we searched for some
constitutive molecular mechanisms that in a basal manner may influence the
behavior of HD patients.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We aimed to evaluate with the Comet Assay whether baseline, 
induced, and unrepaired DNA damage differ between HD patients who did not develop
a second neoplasia (HD-NST), HD patients who developed a second tumor (HD-ST),
and healthy individuals; and to identify, through cDNA microarray hybridization, 
an expression signature of genes that could discriminate between the three
groups.
RESULTS: Baseline, induced, and unrepaired DNA damage was higher in HD-ST than in
HD-NST and higher in the second group than in healthy donors. The genomic
approach revealed two sets of genes that discriminated between healthy subjects
and patients and between the three sets of individuals. Hsp40, RAD50, TPMT,
Rap2a, E2F2, EPHX2, TBX21, and BATF were validated by reverse transcription-PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: Functional and genomic techniques revealed that alterations in cell 
cycle, repair, detoxification, and stress response pathways could be involved in 
the development of HD and in the occurrence of a primary second neoplasia in
these patients. Both approaches may be useful as biological markers in the
clinical setting.

PMID: 19622580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2009 Mar;31(3):189-91.

[Expression of transcription factor T-bet and GATA-3 in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells and its correlation with immune status in esophageal cancer
patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen DY(1), Shi YW, Hua Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of transcription factors (TF) T-bet and 
GATA-3 mRNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and its correlation with immune
status in esophageal cancer patients.
METHODS: Sixty patients were divided into two groups according to the clinical
data: group A consisting of stage I and II, group B including stage III and IV.
The gene expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in 60 esophageal cancer patients and 30
healthy controls was detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR). The expression of IFN-gamma and IL-4 was measured by enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: Expression of T-bet mRNA in esophageal cancer patients (stage I and II: 
0.27 +/- 0.05 ng/L, stage III and IV: 0.12 +/- 0.02 ng/L) was significantly lower
than that in the healthy controls (1.35 +/- 0.14 ng/L), but the expression of
GATA-3 mRNA in esophageal cancer patients (stage I and II: 0.45 +/- 0.06, stage
III and IV: 0.55 +/- 0.03) was significantly higher than that in the healthy
controls (0.09 +/- 0.10). The plasma level of Th1 cytokine IFN-gamma in the
patients [stage I and II: (12.12 +/- 1.48) ng/L, stage III and IV: (8.44 +/-
0.90) ng/L] was significantly lower than that in the healthy controls, while the 
level of Th2 cytokine IL-4 in the patients [stage I and II: (18.64 +/- 0.77)
ng/L, stage III and IV: (25.28 +/- 2.02) ng/L] was significantly higher than that
in the healthy controls. However, neither in the expression of T-bet and GATA-3, 
nor in the plasma level of IFN-gamma and IL-4, showed a significant difference
between group A and B.
CONCLUSION: In the peripheral blood of esophageal cancer patients, the expression
of T-bet decreased, while GATA-3 increased, Th1/Th2 balance is broken, and the
Th2 is dominant. T-bet and GATA-3 play a part role in the regulation of Th1/Th2
balance.

PMID: 19615257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Immunol. 2009 Aug 1;183(3):1695-704. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900592. Epub 2009
Jul 10.

Gene regulation and chromatin remodeling by IL-12 and type I IFN in programming
for CD8 T cell effector function and memory.

Agarwal P(1), Raghavan A, Nandiwada SL, Curtsinger JM, Bohjanen PR, Mueller DL,
Mescher MF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology and Department of Laboratory, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

A third signal that can be provided by IL-12 or type I IFN is required for
differentiation of naive CD8 T cells responding to Ag and costimulation. The
cytokines program development of function and memory within 3 days of initial
stimulation, and we show here that programming involves regulation of a common
set of approximately 355 genes including T-bet and eomesodermin. Much of the gene
regulation program is initiated in response to Ag and costimulation within 24 h
but is then extinguished unless a cytokine signal is available. Histone
deacetylase inhibitors mimic the effects of IL-12 or type I IFN signaling,
indicating that the cytokines relieve repression and allow continued gene
expression by promoting increased histone acetylation. In support of this,
increased association of acetylated histones with the promoter loci of granzyme B
and eomesodermin is shown to occur in response to IL-12, IFN-alpha, or histone
deacetylase inhibitors. Thus, IL-12 and IFN-alpha/beta enforce in common a
complex gene regulation program that involves, at least in part, chromatin
remodeling to allow sustained expression of a large number of genes critical for 
CD8 T cell function and memory.

PMCID: PMC2893405
PMID: 19592655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Nat Immunol. 2009 Aug;10(8):857-63. doi: 10.1038/ni.1767. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

Production of interleukin 22 but not interleukin 17 by a subset of human
skin-homing memory T cells.

Duhen T(1), Geiger R, Jarrossay D, Lanzavecchia A, Sallusto F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Interleukin 22 (IL-22) is a cytokine produced by the T(H)-17 lineage of helper T 
cells and NK-22 subset of natural killer cells that acts on epithelial cells and 
keratinocytes and has been linked to skin homeostasis and inflammation. Here we
characterize a population of human skin-homing memory CD4(+) T cells that
expressed the chemokine receptors CCR10, CCR6 and CCR4 and produced IL-22 but
neither IL-17 nor interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). Clones isolated from this
population produced IL-22 only and had low or undetectable expression of the
T(H)-17 and T helper type 1 (T(H)1) transcription factors RORgammat and T-bet.
The differentiation of T cells producing only IL-22 was efficiently induced in
naive T cells by plasmacytoid dendritic cells in an IL-6- and tumor necrosis
factor-dependent way. Our findings delineate a previously unknown subset of human
CD4(+) effector T cells dedicated to skin pathophysiology.

PMID: 19578369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Virol. 2009 Sep;83(17):8463-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00751-09. Epub 2009 Jun 24.

Inhibition of intrahepatic gamma interferon production by hepatitis C virus
nonstructural protein 5A in transgenic mice.

Kanda T(1), Steele R, Ray R, Ray RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University, 1100 S. Grand Blvd., St.
Louis, MO 63104, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) utilizes strategies to suppress or evade the host immune 
response for establishment of persistent infection. We have shown previously that
HCV nonstructural protein 5A (NS5A) impairs tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-alpha)-mediated apoptosis. In this study, we have examined the
immunomodulatory role of HCV NS5A protein in transgenic mouse (NS5A-Tg) liver
when mice were challenged with an unrelated hepatotropic adenovirus as a
nonspecific stimulus. Hepatotropic adenovirus was introduced intravenously into
NS5A-Tg mice and control mice, and virus clearance from liver was compared over a
time course of 3 weeks. The differential mRNA expression levels of 84
cytokine-related genes, signal pathway molecules, transcription factors, and cell
surface molecules were determined using real-time reverse transcription-PCR
array. NS5A-Tg mice failed to clear adenovirus from liver up to 3 weeks
postinfection while control mice cleared virus within 1 to 2 weeks. Subsequent
study revealed that gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) expression is inhibited at both 
the mRNA and protein levels in NS5A-Tg mice, and an inverse expression of
transcription factors Gata-3 and Tbx21 is observed. However, TNF-alpha mRNA and
protein expression were elevated in both NS5A-Tg and control mice. Together, our 
results suggested that HCV NS5A acts as an immunomodulator by inhibiting
IFN-gamma production and may play an important role toward establishment of
chronic HCV infection.

PMCID: PMC2738187
PMID: 19553305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Chem Biodivers. 2009 Jun;6(6):916-23. doi: 10.1002/cbdv.200800159.

Stemucronatoside L, a pregnane glycoside from the roots of Stephanotis mucronata,
inhibits Th1/Th2 immune responses in vitro.

Chen FY(1), Ye YP, Sun HX, Li XY, Shi H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Materia Medica, Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Tianmushan 
Road 182, Hangzhou 310013, P. R. China.

Stemucronatoside L (SML), isolated from Stephanotis mucronata, could suppress the
activation of T cells in vitro. However, the mechanisms responsible for its
immunosuppressive activity remain poorly understood. The purpose of this study
was to investigate whether SML could suppress Th1/Th2 immune responses and to
characterize the cellular mechanisms involved. Effects of SML on T-lymphocyte
subsets and the production of Th1 cytokines IL-2 and IFN-gamma, and Th2 cytokines
IL-4 and IL-10 from ConA-stimulated mice splenocytes were detected by
flow-cytometric analysis and ELISA method, respectively. Furthermore, effects of 
SML on mRNA expression level of Th1/Th2 cytokines and transcription factors T-bet
and GATA-3 were evaluated by RT-PCR analysis. SML not only significantly
decreased the percentage of CD4(+) T cells and the CD4(+)/CD8(+) ratio, but
reduced the production of Th1/Th2 cytokines in a concentration-dependent manner. 
The mRNA expression levels of Th1/Th2 cytokines and transcription factors (T-bet 
and GATA-3) were also suppressed by SML. These results suggested that SML could
simultaneously inhibit Th1/Th2 immune responses by suppressing gene expression of
Th1/Th2 cytokines and transcription factors.

PMID: 19551733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Exp Med. 2009 Jul 6;206(7):1549-64. doi: 10.1084/jem.20082584. Epub 2009 Jun
22.

T-bet is essential for encephalitogenicity of both Th1 and Th17 cells.

Yang Y(1), Weiner J, Liu Y, Smith AJ, Huss DJ, Winger R, Peng H, Cravens PD,
Racke MK, Lovett-Racke AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus, OH
43210, USA.

The extent to which myelin-specific Th1 and Th17 cells contribute to the
pathogenesis of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is controversial.
Combinations of interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-6, and IL-23 with transforming growth 
factor beta were used to differentiate myelin-specific T cell receptor transgenic
T cells into Th17 cells, none of which could induce EAE, whereas Th1 cells
consistently transferred disease. However, IL-6 was found to promote the
differentiation of encephalitogenic Th17 cells. Further analysis of
myelin-specific T cells that were encephalitogenic in spontaneous EAE and
actively induced EAE demonstrated that T-bet expression was critical for
pathogenicity, regardless of cytokine expression by the encephalitogenic T cells.
These data suggest that encephalitogenicity of myelin-specific T cells appears to
be mediated by a pathway dependent on T-bet and not necessarily pathway-specific 
end products, such as interferon gamma and IL-17.

PMCID: PMC2715092
PMID: 19546248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Immunol. 2009 Jul 1;183(1):381-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900939.

IL-23 promotes the production of IL-17 by antigen-specific CD8 T cells in the
absence of IL-12 and type-I interferons.

Curtis MM(1), Way SS, Wilson CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, 98195, USA.

In contrast to CD4 T cells, CD8 T cells inherently differentiate into
IFN-gamma-producing effectors. Accordingly, while generation of
IFN-gamma-producing Th1 CD4 T cells was profoundly impaired in mice deficient for
both type-I IFN and IL-12 signaling in response to infection with Listeria
monocytogenes, generation of Ag-specific, IFN-gamma-producing CD8 T cells was
unimpaired. However, a fraction of these CD8 T cells also produced IL-17 in an
IL-23-dependent manner. Furthermore, the addition of IL-23 in vitro was
sufficient for some naive CD8 T cells to differentiate into IFN-gamma/IL-17
dual-producing cells and was associated with increased expression of ROR-gammat
and ROR-alpha. Addition of IL-6 and TGF-beta to IL-23 further augmented
ROR-gammat and ROR-alpha expression and suppressed Eomes expression, thereby
enhancing IL-17 production by CD8 T cells. A loss of cytotoxic function
accompanied the production of IL-17, as the addition of IL-6 and TGF-beta
resulted in a marked reduction of granzyme B and perforin expression. Thus, CD8 T
cells retain sufficient plasticity to respond to environmental cues and can
acquire additional effector functions in response to their environmental context.

PMCID: PMC2729917
PMID: 19542449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Immunol. 2009 Jul 1;183(1):75-82. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0804154. Epub 2009 Jun 
17.

T-bet-deficient NOD mice are protected from diabetes due to defects in both T
cell and innate immune system function.

Esensten JH(1), Lee MR, Glimcher LH, Bluestone JA.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center and the Department of Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco, 94143, USA.

The transcription factor T-bet (Tbx21) is critical for Th1 polarization of CD4(+)
T cells. Genetic deletion of Tbx21 can cause either exacerbation or attenuation
of different autoimmune diseases in animal models. In the nonobese diabetic (NOD)
mouse, genetic deletion of the Ifng or the Il12b (IL-12p40) genes, which are both
critical Th1 cytokines, does not reduce the incidence of autoimmune diabetes.
These results suggest that autoimmune diabetes in the NOD may not be a Th1-driven
disease. However, we report that Tbx21 deficiency in the NOD mouse completely
blocks insulitis and diabetes due to defects both in the initiation of the
anti-islet immune response and in the function of CD4(+) effector T cells. We
find defective priming of naive islet-reactive T cells by the innate immune
system in Tbx21(-/-) animals. By contrast to naive cells, activated
islet-reactive BDC2.5 TCR-transgenic T cells do not require Tbx21 in recipient
animals for efficient adoptive transfer of diabetes. However, when these BDC2.5
TCR-transgenic effector cells lack Tbx21, they are less effective at entering the
pancreas and promoting diabetes than Tbx21(+/+) cells. Tbx21(-/-) regulatory T
cells function normally in vitro and diabetes can be restored in Tbx21(-/-) mice 
by reducing regulatory T cell numbers. Thus, the absence of diabetes in the
NOD.Tbx21(-/-) is due to intrinsic defects in both T cells and cells of the
innate immune system paired with the relative preservation of regulatory T cell
function.

PMCID: PMC2732575
PMID: 19535634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Immunol. 2009 Jul 1;183(1):642-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900511. Epub 2009 Jun 
17.

T-bet knockout prevents Helicobacter felis-induced gastric cancer.

Stoicov C(1), Fan X, Liu JH, Bowen G, Whary M, Kurt-Jones E, Houghton J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
01635, USA.

Helicobacter infection is the primary risk factor for gastric cancer, with the
cytokine environment within the gastric mucosa the strongest predictor of disease
risk. Elevated TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, and low IL-10 are associated with the highest
risk. In this study, we used C57BL/6 mice to identify T-bet as a central
regulator of the cytokine environment during Helicobacter felis infection. We
infected male and female C57BL/6 and C57BL/6-T-bet knockout (KO) litter mates
with H. felis and examined the bacterial colonization, immune response, and
mucosal damage at varying time points. T-bet KO mice maintained infection for 15 
mo at similar levels to wild-type mice. Infection and immune response did not
differ between male and female mice. Despite sustained infection, T-bet KO mice
respond with a blunted Th1 response associated with preservation of parietal and 
chief cells and protection from the development of gastric cancer. Unexpectedly, 
T-bet KO mice develop a gastric environment that would not be expected based on
the phenotype of T-bet KO CD4 cells alone. T-bet KO mice respond to H. felis
infection with a markedly blunted IL-1beta and TNF-alpha and elevated IL-10
levels. Activity of this one master regulator modulates the expression of the key
gastric mucosal cytokines associated with gastric cancer and may be a target for 
therapy to restore immune balance clinically in patients at risk for gastric
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3966469
PMID: 19535625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jun 30;106(26):10734-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0812538106. Epub 2009 Jun 15.

Targeting Tim-1 to overcome resistance to transplantation tolerance mediated by
CD8 T17 cells.

Yuan X(1), Ansari MJ, D'Addio F, Paez-Cortez J, Schmitt I, Donnarumma M, Boenisch
O, Zhao X, Popoola J, Clarkson MR, Yagita H, Akiba H, Freeman GJ, Iacomini J,
Turka LA, Glimcher LH, Sayegh MH.

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Research Center, Renal Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Children's Hospital Boston and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The ability to induce durable transplantation tolerance predictably and
consistently in the clinic is a highly desired but elusive goal. Progress is
hampered by lack of appropriate experimental models in which to study resistance 
to transplantation tolerance. Here, we demonstrate that T helper 1-associated T
box 21 transcription factor (Tbet) KO recipients exhibit allograft tolerance
resistance specifically mediated by IL-17-producing CD8 T (T17) cells.
Neutralization of IL-17 facilitates long-term cardiac allograft survival with
combined T cell co-stimulation (CD28-CD80/86 and CD154-CD40) blockade in Tbet KO 
recipients. We have used this T17-biased Tbet KO model of allograft tolerance
resistance to study the impact of targeting a T cell-co-stimulatory pathway, and 
demonstrate that targeting T cell Ig and mucin domain-1 (Tim-1) with anti-Tim-1
overcomes this resistance by specifically inhibiting the pathogenic
IL-17-producing CD8 T17 cells. These data indicate that in the absence of Th1
immunity, CD8 T17 alloreactivity constitutes a barrier to transplantation
tolerance. Targeting TIM-1 provides an approach to overcome resistance to
tolerance in clinical transplantation.

PMCID: PMC2705547
PMID: 19528638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Immunology. 2009 Jun;127(2):155-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03059.x.

Genetic and epigenetic networks controlling T helper 1 cell differentiation.

Placek K(1), Coffre M, Maiella S, Bianchi E, Rogge L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Significant progress has been made during the past years in our understanding of 
the mechanisms that control the differentiation of naïve CD4(+) T cells into
effector T-cell subsets with distinct functional properties. Previous work
allowed the identification of key molecules involved in regulating this highly
complex process, such as cytokines and their receptors, signal transducers and
transcription factors. More recently, the emphasis of research in this field has 
been to elucidate how the multiplicity of signals is integrated to shape a T
helper subset-specific gene-expression program controlling differentiation and
effector functions. In this review we will highlight advances that have been made
in unravelling the genetic and epigenetic networks controlling differentiation of
naïve CD4(+) T cells into interferon-gamma(IFN-gamma)-secreting T helper type 1
(Th1) cells.

PMCID: PMC2691780
PMID: 19476511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Clin Nephrol. 2009 Jun;71(6):608-16.

GATA-3 is upregulated in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with
minimal change nephrotic syndrome.

Komatsuda A(1), Wakui H, Iwamoto K, Togashi M, Masai R, Maki N, Sawada K.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Akita University School of Medicine,
Akita, Japan. komatsud@med.akita-u-ac-jp

BACKGROUND: An imbalance of Th1 and Th2 cytokines has been reported in MCNS.
Interleukin-13 (IL-13: Th2 cytokine) has been implicated in the pathogenesis of
MCNS, but Th1/Th2 regulators such as T-bet (Th1-specific transcription factor)
and GATA-3 (Th2-specific transcription factor) have not been examined.
METHODS: We isolated PBMC from 25 patients with MCNS during nephrosis and
remission phases, from 17 nephrotic patients with membranous nephropathy (MN),
and from 25 healthy subjects. We measured mRNA expression levels of T-bet,
GATA-3, Stat5A (regulator of Th2 priming), IFN-gamma (Th1 cytokine), IL-2 (Th1
cytokine and activator of Stat5), IL-4 (Th2 cytokine), and IL-13 in PBMC, using
real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: GATA-3, Stat5A, and IL-13 mRNA expression levels were higher in the
nephrotic MCNS group compared to the others. IL-2 mRNA expression levels were
higher in nephrotic patients with MCNS and MN than in MCNS patients in remission 
and healthy controls. There were no differences in mRNA expression levels of
T-bet, IFN-gamma, and IL-4 between MCNS and MN patients and healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to reveal increased mRNA expression levels
of GATA-3 and Stat5A in PBMC from MCNS patients in nephrosis. This study also
supports recent findings suggesting the role of IL-13 in the development of MCNS.
A predominant Th2 type of T cell activation may be involved in the pathogenesis
of MCNS.

PMID: 19473628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Hepatol Res. 2009 Jul;39(7):716-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1872-034X.2009.00503.x. Epub
2009 Mar 15.

Association of TBX21 T-1993C polymorphism with viral persistence but not disease 
progression in hepatitis B virus carriers.

Chen S(1), Zhao W, Tan W, Xu B, Dan Y, Mao Q, Kuang X, Wang Y, Deng G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, the Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing, China.

AIM: Transcription factor T-bet is responsible for the differentiation of naive T
lymphocytes, and its expression level is linked with different responses to some 
viral infections, including hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. In this report we 
examine whether promoter polymorphisms of the TBX21 gene (encoding T-bet) are
associated with susceptibility to HBV persistence or disease progression in
chronic HBV carriers.
METHODS: Three previously reported promoter polymorphisms, T-1993C, T-1514C and
G-1499A, were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length
polymorphism analysis. Two common polymorphisms, T-1993C and T-1514C, were
selected for genotyping in 1074 chronic HBV carriers, 310 spontaneously recovered
controls and 374 HBV naive controls. Of 1074 HBV carriers, 234 were considered to
be asymptomatic carriers and 840 were found to have chronic progressive liver
disease including cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Haplotypes were
constructed for each subject and associations with the susceptibility to
persistent HBV infection were estimated by logistic regression.
RESULTS: The -1993C allele in the TBX21 promoter was significantly more common
among chronic HBV carriers compared with recovered controls (chi(2) = 6.65, P =
0.01). In contrast, the frequency of TT haplotype at positions -1993/-1514, was
significantly higher in recovered controls than chronic HBV carriers (P = 0.0027,
odds ratio = 1.57; 95% confidence interval, 1.16-2.12). In HBV carriers, the
TBX21 promoter polymorphisms were not linked to disease progression.
CONCLUSION: The TBX21 promoter polymorphisms do not appear to be determinant of
disease progression in Chinese HBV carriers. The T-1993C polymorphism in the
TBX21 promoter influences susceptibility to persistent HBV infection.

PMID: 19473434  [PubMed]


177. Immunity. 2009 May;30(5):666-8. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.04.008.

The calculus of integrating differentiation: timing control of T-bet.

Boothby M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology & Immunology and Medicine, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, 1161 21(st) Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37232-2363, USA.
mark.boothby@vanderbilt.edu

Comment on
    Immunity. 2009 May;30(5):673-83.

In this issue of Immunity, Schulz et al. (2009) use mathematical modeling to
elucidate a signaling network controlling Ifng gene expression, thereby showing
the importance of an Interleukin-12-dependent, Interferon-gamma-independent
second phase of inducing the transcription factor T-bet.

PMID: 19464989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Exp Med. 2009 Jun 8;206(6):1365-78. doi: 10.1084/jem.20090127. Epub 2009 May
18.

iNKT cell development is orchestrated by different branches of TGF-beta
signaling.

Doisne JM(1), Bartholin L, Yan KP, Garcia CN, Duarte N, Le Luduec JB, Vincent D, 
Cyprian F, Horvat B, Martel S, Rimokh R, Losson R, Benlagha K, Marie JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U561/Groupe AVENIR,
Hôpital Cochin St Vincent de Paul, Université Descartes, Paris F-75014, France.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells constitute a distinct subset of T
lymphocytes exhibiting important immune-regulatory functions. Although various
steps of their differentiation have been well characterized, the factors
controlling their development remain poorly documented. Here, we show that
TGF-beta controls the differentiation program of iNKT cells. We demonstrate that 
TGF-beta signaling carefully and specifically orchestrates several steps of iNKT 
cell development. In vivo, this multifaceted role of TGF-beta involves the
concerted action of different pathways of TGF-beta signaling. Whereas the
Tif-1gamma branch controls lineage expansion, the Smad4 branch maintains the
maturation stage that is initially repressed by a Tif-1gamma/Smad4-independent
branch. Thus, these three different branches of TGF-beta signaling function in
concert as complementary effectors, allowing TGF-beta to fine tune the iNKT cell 
differentiation program.

PMCID: PMC2715067
PMID: 19451264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Nat Immunol. 2009 Jun;10(6):563-4. doi: 10.1038/ni0609-563.

Hybrid Treg cells: steel frames and plastic exteriors.

Barnes MJ(1), Powrie F.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
fiona.powrie@path.ox.ac.uk

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2009 Jun;10(6):595-602.

PMID: 19448654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Nat Immunol. 2009 Jun;10(6):603-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.1736.

A protective function for interleukin 17A in T cell-mediated intestinal
inflammation.

O'Connor W Jr(1), Kamanaka M, Booth CJ, Town T, Nakae S, Iwakura Y, Kolls JK,
Flavell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2009 Jun;10(6):568-70.

Interleukin 23 (IL-23) and IL-17 have been linked to the pathogenesis of several 
chronic inflammatory disorders, including inflammatory bowel disease. Yet as an
important function for IL-23 is emerging, the function of IL-17 in inflammatory
bowel disease remains unclear. Here we demonstrate IL-17A-mediated protection in 
the CD45RBhi transfer model of colitis. An accelerated wasting disease elicited
by T cells deficient in IL-17A correlated with higher expression of genes
encoding T helper type 1-type cytokines in colon tissue. IL-17A also modulated T 
helper type 1 polarization in vitro. Furthermore, T cells deficient in the IL-17 
receptor elicited an accelerated, aggressive wasting disease relative to that
elicited by wild-type T cells in recipient mice. Our data demonstrate a
protective function for IL-17 and identify T cells as not only the source but
also a target of IL-17 in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2709990
PMID: 19448631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;150(2):133-43. doi: 10.1159/000218116. Epub 2009
May 11.

Effects of live and inactivated VSL#3 probiotic preparations in the modulation of
in vitro and in vivo allergen-induced Th2 responses.

Mastrangeli G(1), Corinti S, Butteroni C, Afferni C, Bonura A, Boirivant M,
Colombo P, Di Felice G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious, Parasitic and Immune-Mediated Diseases, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The immunological mechanisms responsible for the immunomodulatory and
anti-allergic effects of probiotic bacteria are still poorly defined. The
combined effects of mixtures of different species of probiotic bacteria have been
explored only in part. The present study describes the immunomodulatory activity 
of the VSL#3 probiotic preparation in in vitro and in vivo systems.
METHODS: The activation and cytokine production by in vitro probiotic-stimulated 
bone-marrow dendritic cells (BM-DCs) and spleen cells isolated from naïve or Par 
j 1-sensitized mice were investigated. Mice were intranasally administered a
sonicate preparation of VSL#3 before immunization with rPar j 1. Serum antibody
levels and cytokine expression in the lung were determined.
RESULTS: Both live and sonicated VSL#3 preparations induced maturation and
cytokine production by BM-DCs. Cytokine production by spleen cells from naïve or 
Par j 1-sensitized mice was modulated by the probiotic preparations towards a
Treg/Th0 profile, characterized by increased IL-10 and IFN-gamma production. In
vivo prophylactic treatment with VSL#3 induced a significant reduction of serum
specific IgG1. At lung level, VSL#3 pre-treatment remarkably reduced IL-13 and
IL-4 mRNA expression and increased IL-10 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The VSL#3 preparations have not only the capacity to bias primary
immune responses towards a Treg/Th0-type profile, but also to modify in the same 
way the functional characteristics of established in vitro Th2 responses. In vivo
studies on a mouse model of Par j 1 sensitization indicate that the prophylactic 
intranasal treatment with probiotic bacteria is able to modulate the development 
of Th2-biased responses.

(c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19439979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Clin Periodontol. 2009 May;36(5):396-403. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-051X.2009.01390.x.

Over-expression of forkhead box P3 and its association with receptor activator of
nuclear factor-kappa B ligand, interleukin (IL) -17, IL-10 and transforming
growth factor-beta during the progression of chronic periodontitis.

Dutzan N(1), Gamonal J, Silva A, Sanz M, Vernal R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Conservative Dentistry, Dental School, Universidad de Chile,
Santiago de Chile, Chile.

AIM: T regulatory (Treg) cells have been detected in periodontitis lesions, and
forkhead box P3 (Foxp3) expression has been negatively correlated to receptor
activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand (RANKL). The aim of this study was to 
correlate T-helper type 1 (Th1), Th2, Th17 and Treg transcription factor
expressions, in gingival tissues from patients undergoing active periodontal
tissue destruction, with bone loss-associated cytokines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In 10 chronic periodontitis patients undergoing disease
progression, the mRNA expressions of T-bet, GATA-3, Foxp3, RORC2, interleukin
(IL)-1beta, IL-10, IL-17, RANKL, interferon (IFN)-gamma and transforming growth
factor (TGF)-beta1 were quantified using real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The levels of these markers were
compared between active and inactive periodontal lesions.
RESULTS: In active periodontal lesions, Foxp3, T-bet, RANKL, IL-17, IL-1beta and 
IFN-gamma were significantly over-expressed compared with inactive lesions. The
expression of IFN-gamma was the highest within the active periodontal lesions,
similar to that of TGF-beta1 within the inactive ones. There was a positive
correlation between RANKL and IL-17. Additionally, RANKL and IL-17 were
positively correlated with RORC2, but no correlation was detected with Foxp3.
CONCLUSIONS: These results lead us to speculate that Foxp3(+) cells that do not
have a regulatory function might have a role in the pathogenesis of active
periodontal lesions by down-regulating TGF-beta1 and IL-10 synthesis that lead to
the over-expression of Th17-associated cytokines RANKL and IL-17.

PMID: 19419438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Immunol. 2009 May 15;182(10):6226-36. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900123.

c-Maf regulates IL-10 expression during Th17 polarization.

Xu J(1), Yang Y, Qiu G, Lal G, Wu Z, Levy DE, Ochando JC, Bromberg JS, Ding Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene and Cell Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10029, USA.

IL-10 production by Th17 cells is critical for limiting autoimmunity and
inflammatory responses. Gene array analysis on Stat6 and T-bet double-deficient
Th17 cells identified the Th2 transcription factor c-Maf to be synergistically
up-regulated by IL-6 plus TGFbeta and associated with Th17 IL-10 production. Both
c-Maf and IL-10 induction during Th17 polarization depended on Stat3, but not
Stat6 or Stat1, and mechanistically differed from IL-10 regulation by Th2 or
IL-27 signals. TGFbeta was also synergistic with IL-27 to induce c-Maf, and it
induced Stat1-independent IL-10 expression in contrast to IL-27 alone. Retroviral
transduction of c-Maf was able to induce IL-10 expression in Stat6-deficient CD4 
and CD8 T cells, and c-Maf directly transactivated IL-10 gene expression through 
binding to a MARE (Maf recognition element) motif in the IL-10 promoter. Taken
together, these data reveal a novel role for c-Maf in regulating T effector
development, and they suggest that TGFbeta may antagonize Th17 immunity by IL-10 
production through c-Maf induction.

PMCID: PMC2834209
PMID: 19414776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Immunol. 2009 May 15;182(10):6179-86. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803821.

T-bet inhibits the in vivo differentiation of parasite-specific CD4+ Th17 cells
in a T cell-intrinsic manner.

Guo S(1), Cobb D, Smeltz RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Medical College of Virginia Campus, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

CD4(+) Th17 cells have emerged as a new T cell subset in the Th1/Th2 paradigm,
and efforts have shifted toward understanding the factors that regulate their
development in vivo. To analyze the role of the transcription factor T-bet in
regulation of Th17 cells, we used a murine model of Trypanosoma cruzi infection, 
a protozoan parasite that causes Chagas disease in humans. Infection of
Tbx21(-/-) mice led to normal, unimpaired development of Ag-specific CD4(+) T
cells producing IFN-gamma. However, a robust Th17 response developed concomitant 
with Th1 responses. Despite significant IFN-gamma production, the physiological
effects of Th17 responses prevailed as there was a sharp increase in
Gr-1(+)Ly6G(+) neutrophils. Adoptive transfer of T cells from infected Tbx21(-/-)
mice into Rag-2(-/-) mice (Tbx21(+/+)) revealed that CD4(+) T cells maintained
their IL-17-producing phenotype, including those cells capable of producing both 
IFN-gamma and IL-17. Furthermore, and in contrast to the effects of IL-2 on Th17 
development, IL-2 had no effect on IL-17 production by primed T cells.
Importantly, adoptive transfer of T cells from naive Tbx21(-/-) mice into
infected Rag-2(-/-) mice recapitulated the differentiation of T. cruzi-specific
Th17 cells observed in infected Tbx21(-/-) mice. Conversely, transfer of
wild-type T cells into infected Tbx21(-/-) mice did not reveal an increase in
Th17 development. These results demonstrate that T-bet regulates the
differentiation of T. cruzi-specific Th17 cells in vivo in a T cell-intrinsic
manner. These data provide important insight into the role of T-bet in regulation
of parasite-specific Th17 responses.

PMID: 19414771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Nat Immunol. 2009 Jun;10(6):595-602. doi: 10.1038/ni.1731. Epub 2009 May 3.

The transcription factor T-bet controls regulatory T cell homeostasis and
function during type 1 inflammation.

Koch MA(1), Tucker-Heard G, Perdue NR, Killebrew JR, Urdahl KB, Campbell DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2009 Jun;10(6):563-4.

Several subsets of Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells (T(reg) cells) work in concert to 
maintain immune homeostasis. However, the molecular bases underlying the
phenotypic and functional diversity of T(reg) cells remain obscure. We show that 
in response to interferon-gamma, Foxp3(+) T(reg) cells upregulated the T helper
type 1 (T(H)1)-specifying transcription factor T-bet. T-bet promoted expression
of the chemokine receptor CXCR3 on T(reg) cells, and T-bet(+) T(reg) cells
accumulated at sites of T(H)1 cell-mediated inflammation. Furthermore, T-bet
expression was required for the homeostasis and function of T(reg) cells during
type 1 inflammation. Thus, in a subset of CD4(+) T cells, the activities of the
transcription factors Foxp3 and T-bet are overlaid, which results in T(reg) cells
with unique homeostatic and migratory properties optimized for the suppression of
T(H)1 responses in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2712126
PMID: 19412181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Immunity. 2009 May;30(5):673-83. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.03.013. Epub 2009 Apr
30.

Sequential polarization and imprinting of type 1 T helper lymphocytes by
interferon-gamma and interleukin-12.

Schulz EG(1), Mariani L, Radbruch A, Höfer T.

Author information: 
(1)Theoretical Biophysics, Institute of Biology, Humboldt Universität,
Invalidenstrasse 42, 10115 Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2009 May;30(5):666-8.

Differentiation of naive T lymphocytes into type I T helper (Th1) cells requires 
interferon-gamma and interleukin-12. It is puzzling that interferon-gamma induces
the Th1 transcription factor T-bet, whereas interleukin-12 mediates Th1 cell
lineage differentiation. We use mathematical modeling to analyze the expression
kinetics of T-bet, interferon-gamma, and the IL-12 receptor beta2 chain
(IL-12Rbeta2) during Th1 cell differentiation, in the presence or absence of
interleukin-12 or interferon-gamma signaling. We show that interferon-gamma
induced initial T-bet expression, whereas IL-12Rbeta2 was repressed by T cell
receptor (TCR) signaling. The termination of TCR signaling permitted upregulation
of IL-12Rbeta2 by T-bet and interleukin-12 signaling that maintained T-bet
expression. This late expression of T-bet, accompanied by the upregulation of the
transcription factors Runx3 and Hlx, was required to imprint the Th cell for
interferon-gamma re-expression. Thus initial polarization and subsequent
imprinting of Th1 cells are mediated by interlinked, sequentially acting positive
feedback loops of TCR-interferon-gamma-Stat1-T-bet and interleukin-12-Stat4-T-bet
signaling.

PMID: 19409816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Eur J Immunol. 2009 May;39(5):1301-12. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838969.

Prostaglandin E2 enhances Th17 responses via modulation of IL-17 and IFN-gamma
production by memory CD4+ T cells.

Napolitani G(1), Acosta-Rodriguez EV, Lanzavecchia A, Sallusto F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Bellinzona, Switzerland.
giorgio.napolitani@irb.unisi.ch

The contribution of Th1 and Th17 cells in chronic inflammatory conditions leading
to autoimmunity remains highly controversial. In inflamed tissues, production of 
prostaglandins by COX-2 has been proposed to favor Th17 responses indirectly by
increasing IL-23 and blocking IL-12 release from APC. We report here that
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) can directly modulate cytokine production by human memory
CD4(+) T cells. TCR triggering in the presence of PGE2 increased IL-17 and
reduced IFN-gamma production by freshly isolated memory T cells or T-cell clones.
PGE2 triggered the EP2 and EP4 receptors expressed on T cells leading to a rapid 
increase of retinoic-acid-related orphan receptor-gammat (ROR-gammat) and
decrease of T-cell-specific T-box transcription factor 21 (T-bet) mRNA. Moreover,
PGE2 promoted the selective enrichment of IL-17-producing cells by differentially
modulating the proliferation of memory T-cell subsets in vitro. Taken together
our results indicate that T-cell effector function is a direct target for PGE2
modulation and suggest a novel mechanism by which inhibitors of prostaglandin
synthesis, such as COX-2 inhibitors, exert their anti-inflammatory effect.

PMID: 19384872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2009 Feb;29(2):106-10.

[Preliminary study on predictors for selection of immunosuppressive therapy or
androgens in treating aplastic anemia patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang XD(1), Zhang SS, Ma R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Xiyuan Hospital, China Academy of Chinese Medical
Sciences, Beijing.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the potential usefulness of a multivariable model,
established mainly upon peripheral T-cell subsets, Th1/Th2, T-bet and GATA-3 gene
expressions as well as TCM and Western medical diagnostic criteria, in predicting
the selection of immunosuppressive therapy (IST) or androgens in treating
patients with aplastic anemia (AA).
METHODS: Peripheral blood T cell subsets in 85 patients with AA were serially
analyzed by flow cytometry before and after treatment, and their T-bet and GATA-3
gene expressions were assessed meantime by Real-time PCR. Then analysis of
Logistic regression equation and ROC curves were performed based on the cases
responding to IST or androgens.
RESULTS: (1) According to the logistic equation and ROC curve of SPSS, setting
the false positive rate as 0.10, the P value was 0.832. When P> or =0.832,
patients were judged in the immunosuppressive dominant state, IST should be
applied; when P<0.832, it means patients in the bone marrow failure dominant
state, androgens should be added. (2) A novel theory is raised by the
above-mentioned analysis, which indicated that the genesis and development
process of AA could be divided in 2 stages, the abnormal immune dominant stage
and the bone marrow failure dominant stage. For treatment of patients in the two 
stages, IST and androgens is the preference respectively.
CONCLUSION: The multivariable model could be used for indicating which stage the 
AA patient is in, the abnormal immune stage or the bone marrow failure stage, and
thus to guide the proper selection of IST or androgens in clinical practice.

PMID: 19382467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Immunobiology. 2009;214(5):392-402. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2008.10.004. Epub 2008
Dec 5.

The expressions of Toll-like receptor 9 and T-bet in circulating B and T cells in
newly diagnosed, untreated systemic lupus erythematosus and correlations with
disease activity and laboratory data in a Chinese population.

Wu O(1), Chen GP, Chen H, Li XP, Xu JH, Zhao SS, Sheng J, Feng JB, Cai J, Fang
XH, Zhang WH, Li LH, Zhang N, Li J, Li JJ, Pan FM, Wang CZ, Ye DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Anhui Medical University, Anhui,
PR China.

Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) plays a controversial role in the pathogenesis of
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). T-bet may be involved in the processes
between the initiation of TLR9 activation and the antibodies' production. To
clarify the paradox of TLR9, we investigated the intracellular expressions of
TLR9 and T-bet in B and T cells in peripheral blood samples from 35 newly
diagnosed, untreated patients with SLE and 16 healthy subjects by flow cytometry 
(FCM). And we collected the clinic laboratory data obtained from the same
individual blood sample tested by FCM each time. And the correlations among the
expression levels of the two proteins and SLE laboratory data were calculated. We
found the percentages of B cells expressing TLR9 and T-bet and of T cells
expressing TLR9 were significantly elevated in SLE patients when compared with
healthy controls. There was a significantly negative relationship between the
proportion of B cells expressing TLR9 and SLE Disease Activity Index (SLEDAI)
score. The serum levels of anti-dsDNA antibody reversely correlated with the mean
fluorescence intensity (MFI) of B cells co-expressing T-bet and TLR9. The serum
levels of anti-C1q antibody significantly associated with the proportion of B
cells expressing T-bet. Also, the serum levels of IgM and IgA antibodies both
significantly correlated with TLR9 and T-bet expressions in T and B cells.
According to the immunological pathway knowledge and the mutually verified
associations, the following conclusions are made. Expressions of TLR9 and T-bet
were increased in patients with SLE. TLR9 may have a role to play in protecting
against lupus. And the increase of the co-expression of TLR9 and T-bet may be of 
benefit to the protective antibodies' production and pathogenic antibodies'
decline, and could be regarded as a good sign for lupus demission and/or
treatment.

PMID: 19362685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 May;123(5):1062-8, 1068.e1-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.02.025. Epub 2009 Apr 10.

TBX21 gene variants increase childhood asthma risk in combination with HLX1
variants.

Suttner K(1), Rosenstiel P, Depner M, Schedel M, Pinto LA, Ruether A, Adamski J, 
Klopp N, Illig T, Vogelberg C, Schreiber S, von Mutius E, Kabesch M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Paediatric Pneumology and Neonatology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The T cell-specific T-box transcription factor (TBX21) plays a
crucial role in the regulation of the immune system because this factor induces
the differentiation of T(H)1 and blocks T(H)2 commitment together with the
homeobox transcription factor HLX1.
OBJECTIVE: The role of genetic variants in TBX21 alone and in combination with
HLX1 polymorphisms was investigated in the development of T(H)2-associated atopy 
and asthma.
METHODS: The TBX21 gene was resequenced in 37 adult volunteers. Polymorphisms
identified were genotyped in a cross-sectional (N = 3099) and nested asthma
case-control population (N = 1872) using mainly matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Effects of promoter
polymorphisms on TBX21 gene expression were studied by reporter gene assays.
Furthermore, the impact of combinations of TBX21 and HLX1 polymorphisms on the
development of asthma was assessed by using a risk score model. Statistical
analyses were performed by using SAS/Genetics.
RESULTS: Forty-three polymorphisms were identified in the TBX21 gene. Considering
a minor allele frequency of at least 10%, single nucleotide polymorphisms were
assigned to 7 linkage disequilibrium blocks. Three tagging single nucleotide
polymorphisms increased childhood asthma risk significantly (odds ratio [OR],
2.60, 95% CI, 1.34-5.03, P = .003; OR, 1.39, 95% CI, 1.02-1.90, P = .039; and OR,
1.97, 95% CI, 1.18-3.30, P = .009). TBX21 promoter polymorphisms contained in 2
blocks significantly influenced TBX21 promoter activity. In a risk score model,
the combination of TBX21 and HLX1 polymorphisms increased the asthma risk by more
than 3-fold.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that TBX21 polymorphisms contribute to the
development of asthma, potentially by altering TBX21 promoter activity. A risk
score model indicates that TBX21 and HLX1 polymorphisms may have synergistic
effects on asthma risk.

PMID: 19362357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Apr;123(4):813-23.e3. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.01.055.

T-box 21 transcription factor is responsible for distorted T(H)2 differentiation 
in human peripheral CD4+ T cells.

Kaminuma O(1), Kitamura F, Miyatake S, Yamaoka K, Miyoshi H, Inokuma S, Tatsumi
H, Nemoto S, Kitamura N, Mori A, Hiroi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Regardless of T(H)1/T(H)2 theory, CD4(+) T cells of patients with
allergic asthma, a typical T(H)2 disease, and those of healthy subjects expressed
equivalent levels of IFN-gamma, even though T(H)2 cytokines were significantly
upregulated in asthmatic patients.
OBJECTIVE: The mechanisms underlying distorted T(H)2 cell polarization in human T
cells were elucidated.
METHODS: Cytokine-producing activity and the expression of T(H)1/T(H)2-specific
transcription factors in naïve, T(H)1/T(H)2, or both CD4(+) T cells derived from 
human peripheral and cord blood were comparatively analyzed. The mechanisms of
the differential expression of T-box 21 transcription factor (T-bet) in the cells
were assessed by determining the chromatin accessibility at the TBX21 gene. The
functional roles of T-bet and other transcription factors in human T(H)1/T(H)2
differentiation were further investigated.
RESULTS: T(H)2 cells derived from naive CD4(+) T cells in peripheral blood but
not in cord blood produced IFN-gamma. T-bet was expressed in peripheral, but not 
cord blood, resting naive T cells. Consistently, the accessibility at the
proximal TBX21 gene promoter in peripheral naive T cells was higher than that in 
cord blood naive T cells. IFN-gamma-producing activity was induced in
T(H)2-differentiated cord blood T cells by means of ectopic expression of T-bet. 
In addition, a reduction of T-bet in peripheral T cells suppressed IFN-gamma
production. T-bet not only upregulated IFN-gamma but also downregulated IL-4 and 
IL-13 gene transcription, independently of the modification of T(H)1/T(H)2
balance.
CONCLUSION: The expression of T-bet at a naive stage is crucial for the
development of IFN-gamma-producing T cells in human peripheral blood, even in
T(H)2-related diseases.

PMID: 19348920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Radiat Res. 2009 Mar;50(2):139-50.

Low dose, low dose rate photon radiation modifies leukocyte distribution and gene
expression in CD4(+) T cells.

Gridley DS(1), Rizvi A, Luo-Owen X, Makinde AY, Pecaut MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Loma Linda University and Medical Center, CA
92354, USA. dgridley@dominion.llumc.edu

A better understanding of low dose radiation effects is needed to accurately
estimate health risks. In this study, C57BL/6 mice were gamma-irradiated to total
doses of 0, 0.01, 0.05, and 0.1 Gy ((57)Co; ~0.02 cGy/h). Subsets per group were 
euthanized at the end of irradiation (day 0) and on days 4 and 21 thereafter.
Relative spleen mass and splenic white blood cell (WBC) counts, major leukocyte
populations, and spontaneous DNA synthesis were consistently higher in the
irradiated groups on day 0 compared to 0 Gy controls, although significance was
not always obtained. In the spleen, all three major leukocyte types were
significantly elevated on day 0 (P < 0.05). By day 21 post-irradiation the T, B, 
and natural killer (NK) cell counts, as well as CD4(+) T cells and CD4:CD8 T cell
ratio, were low especially in the 0.01 Gy group. Although blood analyses showed
no significant differences in leukocyte counts or red blood cell and platelet
characteristics, the total T cells, CD4(+) T cells, and NK cells were increased
by day 21 after 0.01 Gy (P < 0.05). Gene analysis of CD4(+) T cells negatively
isolated from spleens on day 0 after 0.1 Gy showed significantly enhanced
expression of Il27 and Tcfcp2, whereas Inha and Socs5 were down-regulated by 0.01
Gy and 0.1 Gy, respectively (P < 0.05). A trend for enhancement was noted in two 
additional genes (Il1r1 and Tbx21) in the 0.1 Gy group (P < 0.1). The data show
that protracted low dose photons had dose- and time-dependent effects on CD4(+) T
cells after whole-body exposure.

PMID: 19346678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2009 Sep 15;131(1-2):9-16. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2009.03.001. Epub 2009 Mar 14.

In vitro effect of vitamin E on lectin-stimulated porcine peripheral blood
mononuclear cells.

Hernández J(1), Soto-Canevett E, Pinelli-Saavedra A, Resendiz M, Moya-Camarena
SY, Klasing KC.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación en Alimentación y Desarrollo, A.C., Apdo. Postal No.
1735, Hermosillo 83000 Sonora, Mexico. jhdez@ciad.mx

In order to analyze the effect of vitamin E on Th1 and Th2 cytokine production,
porcine peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated from healthy pigs
(n=8) and cultured with either 0, 10, 50, or 100muM of vitamin E
(alpha-tocopherol). PBMC were stimulated with PHA for either, 24h to determine:
(a) the concentration of tocopherol incorporated into the cell membrane, (b)
cytokine production and (c) Th1 and Th2 regulators gene expression; or 72h to
determine the proliferation of PBMC. Vitamin E was incorporated into the PBMC in 
a dose dependent manner, giving as a result a high proliferation of cells
irrespective of the dose of vitamin E used. Regarding cytokine production,
vitamin E consistently decreases the mRNA expression and the percentage of cells 
producing IL-10. Vitamin E did not influence the production of IFN-gamma but the 
lowest level of vitamin E (10muM) was sufficient to maximally increase the
proportion of cells producing IL-2, to diminish IL-4, and discreetly increase the
mRNA expression of TBX21 vs. GATA3. In conclusion, our results revealed that
vitamin E is able to suppress IL-10 production and to influence the production of
IL-2, IL-4, and maybe TBX21. Vitamin E clearly has immunomodulatory effects,
though further work in vivo to determine the physiological nature of these
effects is warranted.

PMID: 19346007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Eur J Immunol. 2009 May;39(5):1288-300. doi: 10.1002/eji.200839112.

Homeostatic regulation of T effector to Treg ratios in an area of seasonal
malaria transmission.

Finney OC(1), Nwakanma D, Conway DJ, Walther M, Riley EM.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Programme, MRC Laboratories, Fajara, Banjul, The Gambia.

An important aspect of clinical immunity to malaria is the ability to
down-regulate inflammatory responses, once parasitaemia is under control, in
order to avoid immune-mediated pathology. The role of classical
(CD4(+)CD25(+)CD127(lo/-)FOXP3(+)) Treg in this process, however, remains
controversial. Thus, we have characterized the frequency, phenotype and function 
of Treg populations, over time, in healthy individuals in The Gambia. We observed
that both the percentage and the absolute number of CD4(+)FOXP3(+)CD127(lo/-) T
cells were higher among individuals living in a rural village with highly
seasonal malaria transmission than among individuals living in an urban area
where malaria rarely occurs. These CD4(+)FOXP3(+)CD127(lo/-) T cells exhibited an
effector memory and apoptosis-prone phenotype and suppressed cytokine production 
in response to malaria antigen. Cells from individuals exposed to malaria
expressed significantly higher levels of mRNA for forkhead box P3 and T-box 21
(T-BET) at the end of the malaria transmission season than at the end of the
non-transmission season. Importantly, the ratio of T-BET to forkhead box P3 was
remarkably consistent between populations and over time, indicating that in
healthy individuals, a transient increase in Th1 responses during the malaria
transmission season is balanced by a commensurate Treg response, ensuring that
immune homeostasis is maintained.

PMID: 19338000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Eur J Immunol. 2009 May;39(5):1241-51. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838913.

IFN-gamma-STAT1 signal regulates the differentiation of inducible Treg: potential
role for ROS-mediated apoptosis.

Chang JH(1), Kim YJ, Han SH, Kang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Department of Molecular Medicine and
Biopharmaceutical Science, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University,
Gwanak-gu, Seoul, Korea.

Regulatory CD4(+) T cells are important for the homeostasis of immune cells, and 
their absence correlates with autoimmune disorders. However, how the immune
system regulates Treg homeostasis remains unclear. We found that
IFN-gamma-deficient-mice had more forkhead box P3 (FOXP3(+)) cells than WT mice
in all secondary lymphoid organs except the thymus. However, T-bet- or
IL-4Ralpha-deficient mice did not show a similar increase. In vitro
differentiation studies showed that conversion of naïve T cells into FOXP3(+)
cells (neo-generated inducible Treg (iTreg)) by TGF-beta was significantly
inhibited by IFN-gamma in a STAT-1-dependent manner. Moreover, an in vivo
adoptive transfer study showed that inhibition of FOXP3(+) iTreg generation by
IFN-gamma was a T-cell autocrine effect. This inhibitory effect of IFN-gamma on
iTreg generation was significantly abrogated after N-acetyl-L-cysteine treatment 
both in vitro and in vivo, indicating that IFN-gamma regulation of iTreg
generation is dependent on ROS-mediated apoptosis. Therefore, our results suggest
that autocrine IFN-gamma can negatively regulate the neo-generation of FOXP3(+)
iTreg through ROS-mediated apoptosis in the periphery.

PMID: 19337996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Int Immunopharmacol. 2009 Jul;9(7-8):894-9. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2009.03.014.
Epub 2009 Mar 29.

Immunoregulatory effects of sinomenine on the T-bet/GATA-3 ratio and Th1/Th2
cytokine balance in the treatment of mesangial proliferative nephritis.

Cheng Y(1), Zhang J, Hou W, Wang D, Li F, Zhang Y, Yuan F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Xinqiao Hospital, PLA, The Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, PR China. chengyue20022@hotmail.com

Sinomenine has been used to treat autoimmune diseases for centuries. However, the
mechanism underlying its therapeutic effects remains unknown. Increasing
recognition of the importance of the Th1/Th2 imbalance in nephritis has raised
the questions of whether there is a Th1/Th2 imbalance in patients with mesangial 
proliferative nephritis (MsPGN) and whether sinomenine can modulate the Th1/Th2
imbalance. In this study, 25 MsPGN patients were treated with sinomenine and
followed for 3 months. The expression of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and the serum levels of interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma), interleukin (IL)-4, and IL-10 were studied at month 0, month 1, and 
month 3. The intra-renal expression of T-bet and GATA-3 was studied via
immunohistochemistry. Results reveal that PBMCs from MsPGN patients expressed
high levels of T-bet mRNA and low levels of GATA-3 mRNA, and the T-bet/GATA-3
ratio in MsPGN patients was significantly higher than that in healthy donors.
Meanwhile, MsPGN patients were found to have simultaneously elevated IFN-gamma
values and decreased IL-10 values. Immunohistochemistry revealed increased T-bet 
and decreased GATA-3 expression in renal tissues from MsPGN patients. Moreover,
sinomenine was found to cause a decrease in T-bet mRNA expression, resulting in a
drop in the T-bet/GATA-3 ratio. Sinomenine was also found to elicit a decrease in
the serum levels of IFN-gamma. These results suggest that a shift toward the Th1 
pathway of Th cell activation occurs in MsPGN patients, and that sinomenine has
the potential to counter this shift in the Th1/Th2 balance and thereby produce
therapeutic effects.

PMID: 19336263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Infect Immun. 2009 Jun;77(6):2576-87. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00827-07. Epub 2009 Mar
30.

Localized Th1-, Th2-, T regulatory cell-, and inflammation-associated hepatic and
pulmonary immune responses in Ascaris suum-infected swine are increased by
retinoic acid.

Dawson H(1), Solano-Aguilar G, Beal M, Beshah E, Vangimalla V, Jones E, Botero S,
Urban JF Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Diet, Genomics, & Immunology Laboratory, Beltsville Human Nutrition Research
Center, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA.
Harry.Dawson@ars.usda.gov

Pigs infected with Ascaris suum or controls were given 100 microg (low-dose) or
1,000 microg (high-dose) all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)/kg body weight in corn
oil or corn oil alone per os on days after inoculation (DAI) -1, +1, and +3 with 
infective eggs. Treatment with ATRA increased interleukin 4 (IL4) and IL12p70 in 
plasma of infected pigs at 7 DAI and augmented bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
eosinophilia observed at 7 and 14 DAI. To explore potential molecular mechanisms 
underlying these observations, a quantitative real-time reverse transcription
(RT)-PCR array was used to examine mRNA expression in tissue. Ascaris-infected
pigs had increased levels of liver mRNA for T-helper-2 (Th2)-associated
cytokines, mast cell markers, and T regulatory (Treg) cells, while infected pigs 
given ATRA had higher IL4, IL13, CCL11, CCL26, CCL17, CCL22, and TPSB1
expression. Gene expression for Th1-associated markers (IFNG, IL12B, and TBX21), 
the CXCR3 ligand (CXCL9), IL1B, and the putative Treg marker TNFRSF18 was also
increased. Expression of IL4, IL13, IL1B, IL6, CCL11, and CCL26 was increased in 
the lungs of infected pigs treated with ATRA. To determine a putative cellular
source of eosinophil chemoattractants, alveolar macrophages were treated with IL4
and/or ATRA in vitro. IL4 induced CCL11, CCL17, CCL22, and CCL26 mRNA, and ATRA
increased the basal and IL4-stimulated expression of CCL17 and CCL22. Thus, ATRA 
augments a diverse Th1-, Th2-, Treg-, and inflammation-associated response in
swine infected with A. suum, and the increased BAL eosinophilia may be related to
enhanced induction of eosinophil chemokine activity by alveolar macrophages.

PMCID: PMC2687331
PMID: 19332534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 May 15;382(4):751-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.03.101. Epub 2009 Mar 24.

STAT6 inhibits T-bet-independent Th1 cell differentiation.

Tamachi T(1), Takatori H, Fujiwara M, Hirose K, Maezawa Y, Kagami S, Suto A,
Watanabe N, Iwamoto I, Nakajima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Chiba University, Chiba City,
Chiba, Japan.

STAT6 plays critical roles in Th2 cell differentiation, whereas STAT4 and T-bet
are important for Th1 cell differentiation. However, it is still largely unknown 
about the cross talk of these transcription factors during Th1/Th2 cell
differentiation. To further address the regulatory mechanisms underlying Th1/Th2 
cell differentiation, we generated the mice lacking both STAT6 and T-bet
(STAT6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) mice). Importantly, although Th2 cell differentiation was
severely and similarly decreased in STAT6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) mice and STAT6(-/-)
mice, Th1 cell differentiation was rescued in part in STAT6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) mice
as compared with that in T-bet(-/-) mice. While no significant difference was
observed in the expression of IL-12Rbeta2 and STAT4 between STAT6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) 
CD4(+) T cells and T-bet(-/-) CD4(+) T cells, IL-12-induced STAT4 phosphorylation
was increased in STAT6(-/-)T-bet(-/-) CD4(+) T cells as compared with that in
T-bet(-/-) CD4(+) T cells. These results indicate that STAT6 inhibits
T-bet-independent Th1 cell differentiation by suppressing IL-12-STAT4 signaling.

PMID: 19324016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2008 Dec;28(12):1118-20.

[Effect of fumigation therapy with yinxieling on T-bet and GATA-3 protein
expression in the peripheral blood monocyte of patients with psoriasis vulgaris].

[Article in Chinese]

Wei G(1), Yue CW, Zhang CM.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan. weiguopfk@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of fumigating with Yinxieling (YXL) in treating
patients with psoriasis vulgaris and its influence on T-bet and GATA-3 protein
expressions in peripheral blood monocyte (PBMC).
METHODS: Western blot method was employed to detect the T-bet and GATA-3 protein 
expressions in PBMC of 30 psoriasis vulgaris patients before and after they
received fumigation therapy with YXL, also in 25 healthy persons for controls.
The therapeutic efficacy was observed and the relationship between PASI scores
and levels of T-bet and GATA-3 analyzed.
RESULTS: After treatment, 12 out of the 30 patients were cured, 9 were markedly
effective, 8 effective and 1 unchanged, the cure rate being 40.0% and the
effective rate 96.7%. Level of T-bet expression in PBMC of patients was 1.7917
+/- 0.3840, which was higher than that of healthy persons (0.8860 +/- 0.1486, P <
0.01), but the GATA3 expression was lower than that in control (0.8777 +/- 0.3114
vs. 1.2384 +/- 0.1783, P < 0.01). However, the two indexes were restored after
fumigation to 1.3410 +/- 0.3642 and 1.0883 +/- 0.2435 respectively, showing
significant difference to those before fumigation (P < 0.01). Correlation
analysis showed that PASI score was positively correlated with level of T-bet
expression (r = 0.7448, P < 0.01) and negatively correlated with level of GATA-3 
expression (r = -0.8291, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Fumigation therapy is effective in treating psoriasis vulgaris, its
mechanism is possibly by way of modulating the equilibrium of the transcription
factors T-bet and GATA-3 protein expressions in PBMC, and rectifying the immune
abnormality of Th1/Th2 subsets imbalance.

PMID: 19317171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Clin Immunol. 2009 Jun;131(3):385-94. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2009.02.009.

T-bet expression is regulated by EGR1-mediated signaling in activated T cells.

Shin HJ(1), Lee JB, Park SH, Chang J, Lee CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Center for Molecular Medicine, Samsung
Biomedical Research Institute, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon,
Gyeonggi, Republic of Korea.

T-bet is a Th1-specific transcription factor that is directly involved in three
important pathways for Th1 cell differentiation, namely TCR signaling, and the
IFN-gamma-STAT1 and IL-12-STAT4 pathways. A recent study also showed that T-bet
plays a vital role in innate immunity. However, the molecular mechanism
responsible for transcriptional activation of T-bet during T cell development is 
not yet known. Here, we characterize the essential human T-bet promoter elements 
and show that binding of EGR1 to this promoter induces T-bet transcription.
Notably, overexpression of EGR1 transactivates and, synergistically in concert
with TCR signaling, induces T-bet expression in activated T cells. In contrast,
depletion of EGR1 significantly decreases T-bet induction. Finally, we report a
positive correlation between EGR1 and T-bet expression during T helper cell
differentiation. Collectively, these findings provide molecular insight into
T-bet transcription and suggest that EGR1 is an upstream regulator of T-bet
induction.

PMID: 19307156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Virology. 2009 May 10;387(2):373-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.02.033. Epub 2009
Mar 21.

Induction of T helper 3 regulatory cells by dendritic cells infected with porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus.

Silva-Campa E(1), Flores-Mendoza L, Reséndiz M, Pinelli-Saavedra A, Mata-Haro V, 
Mwangi W, Hernández J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación en Alimentación y Desarrollo, A.C. Hermosillo, Sonora,
Mexico.

Delayed development of virus-specific immune response has been observed in pigs
infected with the porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV).
Several studies support the hypothesis that the PRRSV is capable of modulating
porcine immune system, but the mechanisms involved are yet to be defined. In this
study, we evaluated the induction of T regulatory cells by PRRSV-infected
dendritic cells (DCs). Our results showed that PRRSV-infected DCs significantly
increased Foxp3(+)CD25(+) T cells, an effect that was reversible by IFN-alpha
treatment, and this outcome was reproducible using two distinct PRRSV strains.
Analysis of the expressed cytokines suggested that the induction of
Foxp3(+)CD25(+) T cells is dependent on TGF-beta but not IL-10. In addition, a
significant up-regulation of Foxp3 mRNA, but not TBX21 or GATA3, was detected.
Importantly, our results showed that the induced Foxp3(+)CD25(+) T cells were
able to suppress the proliferation of PHA-stimulated PBMCs. The T cells induced
by the PRRSV-infected DCs fit the Foxp3(+)CD25(+) T helper 3 (Th3) regulatory
cell phenotype described in the literature. The induction of this cell phenotype 
depended, at least in part, on PRRSV viability because IFN-alpha treatment or
virus inactivation reversed these effects. In conclusion, this data supports the 
hypothesis that the PRRSV succeeds to establish and replicate in porcine cells
early post-infection, in part, by inducing Th3 regulatory cells as a mechanism of
modulating the porcine immune system.

PMID: 19304305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Immunol. 2009 Apr 1;182(7):4479-87. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0713927.

Transcriptional modulation of the immune response by peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-{alpha} agonists in autoimmune disease.

Gocke AR(1), Hussain RZ, Yang Y, Peng H, Weiner J, Ben LH, Drew PD, Stuve O,
Lovett-Racke AE, Racke MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, 75390, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPARalpha) agonists have been
shown to have a therapeutic benefit in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis 
(EAE), an animal model for multiple sclerosis (MS). In this study, we
investigated the mechanism by which the PPARalpha agonist gemfibrozil induces
immune deviation and protects mice from EAE. We demonstrated that treatment with 
gemfibrozil increases expression of the Th2 transcription factor GATA-3 and
decreases expression of the Th1 transcription factor T-bet in vitro and directly 
ex vivo. These changes correlated with an increase in nuclear PPARalpha
expression. Moreover, the protective effects of PPARalpha agonists in EAE were
shown to be partially dependent on IL-4 and to occur in a receptor-dependent
manner. PPARalpha was demonstrated, for the first time, to regulate the IL-4 and 
IL-5 genes and to bind the IL-4 promoter in the presence of steroid receptor
coactivator-1, indicating that PPARalpha can directly transactivate the IL-4
gene. Finally, therapeutic administration of PPARalpha agonists ameliorated
clinically established EAE, suggesting that PPARalpha agonists may provide a
treatment option for immune-mediated inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC2959196
PMID: 19299749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Semin Immunol. 2009 Apr;21(2):84-91. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2009.02.003.

Biochemical signaling pathways for memory T cell recall.

Farber DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, MSTF
Building, Room 400, 685 W. Baltimore Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, United States. 
dfarber@smail.umaryland.edu

Memory T cells exhibit low activation thresholds and rapid effector responses
following antigen stimulation, contrasting naive T cells with high activation
thresholds and no effector responses. Signaling mechanisms for the distinct
properties of naive and memory T cells remain poorly understood. Here, I will
discuss new results on signal transduction in naive and memory T cells that
suggest proximal control of activation threshold and a distinct biochemical
pathway to rapid recall. The signaling and transcriptional pathways controlling
immediate effector function in memory T cells closely resemble pathways for rapid
effector cytokine production in innate immune cells, suggesting memory T cells
use innate pathways for efficacious responses.

PMCID: PMC2683752
PMID: 19298946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Int J Radiat Biol. 2009 Mar;85(3):250-61. doi: 10.1080/09553000902748609.

Low-dose, low-dose-rate proton radiation modulates CD4(+) T cell gene expression.

Gridley DS(1), Pecaut MJ, Rizvi A, Coutrakon GB, Luo-Owen X, Makinde AY, Slater
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Radiation Research Laboratories, Loma Linda 
University, CA 92354, USA. dgridley@dominion.llumc.edu

PURPOSE: To evaluate cluster of differentiation 4(+) (CD4(+)) T cell gene
expression and related parameters after whole-body exposure to proton radiation
as it occurs in the spaceflight environment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were irradiated to total doses of 0, 0.01,
0.05, and 0.1 gray (Gy) at 0.1 cGy/h. On day 0 spleens were harvested from a
subset in the 0, 0.01 and 0.1 Gy groups; (CD4(+)) T cells were isolated; and
expression of 84 genes relevant to T helper (Th) cell function was determined
using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Remaining mice
were euthanized on days 0, 4, and 21 for additional analyses.
RESULTS: Genes with >2-fold difference and p < 0.05 compared to 0 Gy were noted. 
After 0.01 Gy, five genes were up-regulated (Ccr5, Cd40, Cebpb, Igsf6, Tnfsf4)
and three were down-regulated (Il4ra, Mapk8, Nfkb1). After 0.1 Gy there were nine
up-regulated genes (Ccr4, Cd40, Cebpb, Cxcr3, Socs5, Stat4, Tbx21, Tnfrsf4,
Tnfsf4); none were down-regulated. On day 0 after 0.01 Gy, CD4(+) T cell counts
and CD4:CD8 ratio were low in the spleen (p < 0.05). Spontaneous DNA synthesis in
both spleen and blood was lowest in the 0.01 Gy group on day 0; on days 4 and 21 
all p values were >0.1.
CONCLUSION: The data show that the pattern of gene expression in CD4(+) T cells
after protracted low-dose proton irradiation was significantly modified and
highly dependent upon total dose. The findings also suggest that low-dose
radiation, especially 0.01 Gy, may enhance CD4(+) T cell responsiveness.

PMID: 19296339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Pharmacogenomics. 2009 Mar;10(3):327-30.

Understanding clinical variability in response to asthma treatment.

Kukreti R, Guleria R.

PMID: 19294813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Exp Mol Med. 2009 Jan 31;41(1):33-41.

Association of TBX21 polymorphisms in a Korean population with rheumatoid
arthritis.

Chae SC(1), Shim SC, Chung HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wonkwang University, Iksan 570-749, Korea.
chaesc@wonkwang.ac.kr

TBX21 (T-bet) is a member of the T-box family of transcriptional factors that
contain a conserved DNA binding domain. TBX21 is a critical regulator of the
commitment to the Th1 lineage and IFN-gamma production. Th1 and Th2 cells
cross-regulate the differentiation of each other, and in this way TBX21 could be 
an attractive candidate gene for treating autoimmune disease such as rheumatoid
arthritis (RA). In present study, we analyzed the genotypic frequencies of six
polymorphisms of the TBX21 gene between the 367 RA patients and the 572 healthy
controls. We showed that the g.-1514T>C and c.99C>G polymorphisms are
suggestively associated with RA susceptibility. It is interesting that the
genotypic frequencies of the TBX21 polymorphisms (g.-1514T>C and c.2103A>C) in
the male RA patients were significantly different from the male control group
(P=0.0016 and 0.045, respectively). We also found that the g.-1514T>C and
c.2103A>C polymorphisms of the TBX21 gene in the male RA patients have
significant association with the levels of anti-CCP (P=0.05) and rheumatoid
factor (P=0.03), respectively. These results suggest that the polymorphisms of
the TBX21 gene might be associated with the susceptibility to male RA patients.

PMCID: PMC2679282
PMID: 19287198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Int Immunopharmacol. 2009 Jun;9(6):753-60. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2009.02.016.
Epub 2009 Mar 12.

Induction of type 1 cytokines during neem leaf glycoprotein assisted
carcinoembryonic antigen vaccination is associated with nitric oxide production.

Sarkar K(1), Bose A, Haque E, Chakraborty K, Chakraborty T, Goswami S, Ghosh D,
Baral R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunoregulation and Immunodiagnostics, Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute (CNCI), 37, S. P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata-700026, India.

Involvement of the nitric oxide (NO) release in CEAM phi NLGP (carcinoembryonic
antigen pulsed macrophages with neem leaf glycoprotein) vaccination and its
relationship with vaccine induced type 1 immune response were aimed to study in
the present communication. Vaccination with CEAM phi NLGP resulted in macrophage 
activation as evidenced by its increased number and expression of CD69 marker.
Activated macrophages demonstrated upregulation in synthesis of IL-12 and
downregulation in IL-10, along with excess IFN gamma production in splenic cells,
as evidenced from mRNA analysis. Induction of such type 1 immunity was further
confirmed by expression of type 1 specific transcription factor, T-bet and
enhancement of intracellular glutathione content. Such vaccination also induced
greater nitric oxide (NO) production from macrophages. Dependence of induced type
1 immune response on the NO release and vice versa was studied by in vitro
neutralization of IFN gamma/IL-12 and in vivo inhibition of NO production by
methylene blue. Obtained results clearly demonstrated the interdependence of two 
anti-tumor immune functions, namely, NO production and generation of type 1
immune response. Understanding of the mechanism of this NO related immune
modulation would have great impact in proposing CEAM phi NLGP vaccine in clinic
for the treatment of CEA+ tumors.

PMID: 19285575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Semin Immunol. 2009 Apr;21(2):92-8. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2009.02.002. Epub 2009
Mar 6.

Surviving the crash: transitioning from effector to memory CD8+ T cell.

D'Cruz LM(1), Rubinstein MP, Goldrath AW.

Author information: 
(1)University of California San Diego, Division of Biological Sciences, 9500
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0377, United States.

One outcome of infection is the formation of long-lived immunological memory,
which provides durable protection from symptomatic re-infection. In response to
infection or vaccination, T cells undergo dramatic proliferation and
differentiate into effector T cells that mediate removal of the pathogen.
Following pathogen clearance, the majority of effector cells die, restoring
lymphocyte homeostasis. However, a small number of antigen-specific cells survive
and seed the memory T cell population. Here, we focus on recent advances in
identifying the key proteins and transcription factors that allow a portion of
effector CD8(+) T cells to persist after contraction of the immune response,
forming a memory cell population programmed for long-term self-renewal and
survival. We also examine new findings addressing the role of environmental cues 
such as cytokines and co-stimulatory molecules in CD8(+) memory T cell formation 
and how the cell-extrinsic cues influence the molecular players of intracellular 
pathways important for memory formation.

PMCID: PMC2671236
PMID: 19269192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Nat Immunol. 2009 Apr;10(4):375-84. doi: 10.1038/ni.1704. Epub 2009 Mar 1.

The function of follicular helper T cells is regulated by the strength of T cell 
antigen receptor binding.

Fazilleau N(1), McHeyzer-Williams LJ, Rosen H, McHeyzer-Williams MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Sciences, La Jolla, California, USA.

How follicular helper T cells (T(FH) cells) differentiate to regulate B cell
immunity is critical for effective protein vaccination. Here we define three
transcription factor T-bet-expressing antigen-specific effector helper T cell
subsets with distinguishable function, migratory properties and developmental
programming in vivo. Expression of the transcriptional repressor Blimp-1
distinguished T zone 'lymphoid' effector helper T cells (CD62L(hi)CCR7(hi)) from 
CXCR5(lo) 'emigrant' effector helper T cells and CXCR5(hi) 'resident' T(FH) cells
expressing the transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 (CD62L(lo)CCR7(lo)). We then show 
by adoptive transfer and intact polyclonal responses that helper T cells with the
highest specific binding of peptide-major histocompatibility complex class II and
the most restricted T cell antigen receptor junctional diversity 'preferentially'
developed into the antigen-specific effector T(FH) compartment. Our studies
demonstrate a central function for differences in the binding strength of the T
cell antigen receptor in the antigen-specific mechanisms that 'program'
specialized effector T(FH) function in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2712297
PMID: 19252493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Respir Res. 2009 Feb 27;10:13. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-10-13.

Activated mammalian target of rapamycin is associated with T regulatory cell
insufficiency in nasal polyps.

Xu G(1), Xia J, Hua X, Zhou H, Yu C, Liu Z, Cai K, Shi J, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Cancer Center, Otorhinolaryngology Hospital of the First
Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China.
entxgfess@163.com

BACKGROUND: Decreased infiltration of Foxp3+ T regulatory cell (Treg) is
considered to be critical for the Th1/Th2 dysregulation of nasal polyps, while
the cellular mechanism underlying Foxp3+ Treg insufficiency is currently not well
defined.
METHODS: We attempted to investigate the tissue expression of phosphorylated
mammalian target of rapamycin (pmTOR) and infiltration of Foxp3+ Tregs in 28
nasal polyps and 16 controls by histological staining. We also evaluated the
effects of blocking the mTOR signaling pathway with rapamycin on T cell phenotype
selection and Foxp3+CD4+ Tregs expansion in a tissue culture system.
RESULTS: Significantly increased infiltration of pmTOR+ inflammatory cells and
decreased infiltration of Foxp3+CD4+ Tregs into nasal polyps was observed, with
an inverse association. In the tissue culture system, we detected significantly
elevated Foxp3 expression and IL-10 production, as well as an increased
percentage of Foxp3+ Tregs in nasal polyps after blocking the mTOR signaling
pathway with rapamycin.
CONCLUSION: Here we demonstrate for the first time that the mTOR signaling
pathway is associated with Foxp3+ Tregs insufficiency in nasal polyps. Inhibition
of the mTOR signaling pathway may be helpful for enhancement of Foxp3+ Treg
expansion, as well as modulation of T cell phenotype imbalances in nasal polyps.

PMCID: PMC2651851
PMID: 19250527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Immunol. 2009 Mar 1;182(5):3252-61. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803339.

The development of airway hyperreactivity in T-bet-deficient mice requires
CD1d-restricted NKT cells.

Kim HY(1), Pichavant M, Matangkasombut P, Koh YI, Savage PB, DeKruyff RH, Umetsu 
DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

T-bet(-/-) mice have been shown to have a profound deficiency in the ability to
generate invariant NKT (iNKT) cells in the periphery due to a halt in terminal
maturation, but despite this deficiency, T-bet(-/-) mice develop spontaneous
airway hyperreactivity (AHR) and airway inflammation. Because in some situations 
the development of AHR requires the presence of iNKT cells, we sought to more
clearly understand how AHR develops in T-bet(-/-) mice by examining T-bet(-/-)
mice in several distinct mouse models of asthma, including spontaneous,
OVA-induced and alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer)-induced AHR.
Surprisingly, we found that administration of alpha-GalCer, which very
specifically activates iNKT cells, greatly increased the AHR response in the
T-bet(-/-) mice. Moreover, in T-bet(-/-) mice, spontaneous AHR as well as AHR
induced with OVA or alpha-GalCer were all eliminated by blocking CD1d, the
restricting element of iNKT cells, using an anti-CD1d-blocking mAb. Although the 
number of the iNKT cells in T-bet(-/-) mice was reduced compared with that in
wild-type mice, the remaining iNKT cells produced primarily IL-4 and IL-13, and
only minimal amounts of IFN-gamma. We conclude therefore that the AHR that
develops in T-bet(-/-) mice is dependent on the presence of iNKT cells, and that 
whereas T-bet(-/-) have reduced numbers of iNKT cells, these are sufficient for
the development of AHR.

PMID: 19234223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Nephrol. 2009 Jan-Feb;22(1):123-9.

Overexpression of T-bet in T cells accelerates autoimmune glomerulonephritis in
mice with a dominant Th1 background.

Shimohata H(1), Yamada A, Yoh K, Ishizaki K, Morito N, Yamagata K, Takahashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Doctoral Program in Life System Medical 
Sciences, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: An imbalance of T helper 1 (Th1)/Th2 is thought to contribute to the 
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. The differentiation of T cells into Th1 or
Th2 subtypes is under the regulation of several transcription factors. Among
these, transcription factor T-bet has been demonstrated to play an important role
in Th1 cell differentiation.
METHODS: To examine how Th1/Th2 imbalance affects the development of autoimmune
disease, we overexpressed T-bet in the T lymphocytes of C57BL/6xBXSB/MpJ-Yaa F1
(Yaa) mice.
RESULTS: Yaa mice developed autoimmune nephritis similarly to BXSB/MpJ-Yaa mice, 
which are commonly used as a model for the Th1-dominant murine lupus. T-bet
overexpression in T cells aggravated the 50% mortality of T-bet transgenic Yaa
mice relative to Yaa mice, and increased proteinuria, the severity of
glomerulonephritis in T-bet transgenic Yaa mice. T-bet overexpression in Yaa mice
led simultaneously to an elevated ratio of Th1/Th2 immunoglobulin (IgG2a/IgG1).
Intracellular cytokine analysis showed that IL-4 and IL-5 was suppressed, and
IFN-gamma was induced in stimulated T cells from the T-bet transgenic Yaa mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that T-bet stimulated the differentiation of 
Th1 cells and accelerated the disease severity in Yaa mice. These results suggest
that Th1/Th2 imbalance contributes to the glomerulonephritis severity in Yaa
mice, and Th1/Th2 transcriptional regulation is important for autoimmune
glomerulonephritis.

PMID: 19229827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Br J Pharmacol. 2009 Apr;156(7):1107-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2009.00114.x.
Epub 2009 Feb 18.

Anti-inflammatory activity of p-coumaryl alcohol-gamma-O-methyl ether is mediated
through modulation of interferon-gamma production in Th cells.

Yu ES(1), Min HJ, Lee K, Lee MS, Nam JW, Seo EK, Hong JH, Hwang ES.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Division of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences and
Center for Cell Signaling & Drug Discovery Research, Ewha Womans University, 11-1
Daehyun-Dong, Sudaemun-Ku, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: p-Coumaryl alcohol-gamma-O-methyl ether (CAME) was
isolated from Alpinia galanga and shown to contain a phenylpropanoid structure
similar to p-coumaryl diacetate (CDA). CDA is known to have antioxidant and
anti-inflammatory activity, but the biochemical activities of CAME are unknown.
Inflammation is mediated by inflammatory cytokine production, in particular, by
CD4+ T helper cells (Th cells), but it is unclear whether phenylpropanoids affect
cytokine production in Th cells. In this study, we decided to investigate the
functions of CAME and CDA in CD4+ Th cells.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Mouse CD4+ Th cells were isolated from C57BL6 mice and
stimulated with an antibody against T cell receptors in the presence of
phenylpropanoids. Cytokine production was measured by elisa and intracellular
cytokine staining. Gene knockout mice and tetracycline-inducible transgenic mice 
were used to examine the molecular mechanisms of phenylpropanoids on modulation
of cytokine production.
KEY RESULTS: CAME potently reduced intracellular reactive oxygen species in Th
cells, as does CDA. However, although CDA was cytotoxic, CAME selectively and
potently suppresses interferon-gamma (IFNgamma) production in CD4+ Th cells,
without toxicity. This effect was caused by attenuated expression of the
transcription factor, T-box protein expressed in T cells (T-bet), and T-bet was
essential for CAME to inhibit IFNgamma production in CD4+ Th cells.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: CAME selectively and substantially suppresses
IFNgamma production in CD4+ Th cells by decreasing T-bet expression. As increased
IFNgamma production by CD4+ Th cells can mediate inflammatory immune responses, a
selective IFNgamma suppressor, such as CAME may be an effective, naturally
occurring, compound for modulating inflammatory immune disorders.

PMCID: PMC2697698
PMID: 19226286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Int Immunopharmacol. 2009 Apr;9(4):448-54. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2009.01.008.
Epub 2009 Feb 7.

Effect of naturally occurring hydroxychavicol acetate on the cytokine production 
in T helper cells.

Min HJ(1), Nam JW, Yu ES, Hong JH, Seo EK, Hwang ES.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Division of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha
Womans University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Naturally occurring phenolic compounds, such as chavicol analogues, have been
shown to have potent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities. We have
previously isolated two chavicol acetate analogues, acetoxychavicol acetate (ACA)
and hydroxychavicol acetate (HCA) from the rhizomes of Alpinia galanga. Although 
the function of ACA has been studied in many systems, the function of HCA has yet
to be systemically examined. In this study, we have comparably examined the
functions of ACA and HCA on the cytokine production in Th cells. ACA exhibited
potent antioxidant activity and increased cell apoptosis; therefore, cytokine
production by Th cells was diminished. Although HCA had neither antioxidant
activity nor pro-apoptotic function, it was shown to increase IL-2 production and
attenuate IFNgamma expression in Th cells. In addition, we demonstrated that HCA 
suppressed T-bet expression, which is responsible for IL-2 suppression and
IFNgamma induction in Th cells and inhibited T-bet-mediated Th1 cell
differentiation. Therefore, we suggest that HCA may be beneficial as therapeutics
for treating inflammatory immune disorders caused by extravagant activation of
Th1-mediated immune responses.

PMID: 19208458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Periodontol. 2009 Feb;80(2):290-6. doi: 10.1902/jop.2009.080287 .

Levels of interferon-gamma and transcription factor T-bet in progressive
periodontal lesions in patients with chronic periodontitis.

Dutzan N(1), Vernal R, Hernandez M, Dezerega A, Rivera O, Silva N, Aguillon JC,
Puente J, Pozo P, Gamonal J.

Author information: 
(1)Periodontal Biology Laboratory, Department of Conservative Dentistry,
Dentistry Faculty, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.

BACKGROUND: Periodontitis is an infection with an episodic pattern of
tissue-support destruction. During the generation of a primary CD4(+) T helper 1 
(Th1) response, interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) acts as a positive regulator by
selectively inducing Th1 differentiation through increased transcription of
T-bet. The aims of this work were to determine IFN-gamma levels in samples of
gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) and to determine IFN-gamma and transcription
factor T-bet expression in gingival tissue from patients undergoing the
progression of chronic periodontitis.
METHODS: One hundred six patients with moderate or advanced chronic periodontitis
were selected. Periodontitis was characterized by at least six sites with probing
depth >or=5 mm, clinical attachment loss >or=3 mm, and radiographic bone loss.
Periodontitis progression was determined by the tolerance method. GCF was
collected using a paper strip, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was
performed to determine the total amount of IFN-gamma. Gingival biopsies were
obtained from patients for real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction to determine IFN-gamma and T-bet expression. Statistical analysis was
performed using statistical software. Data were expressed as subject means +/-
SD. The chi(2) and Student t tests were used.
RESULTS: The total amount and concentration of cytokine IFN-gamma were
significantly higher in active sites than in inactive sites (99.90 versus 68.90
pg; P = 0.03; 106.62 pg/mg versus 75.64 pg/mg, P = 0.04, respectively). Active
sites showed a significantly lower Delta cycle threshold (Ct) of IFN-gamma than
inactive sites (P = 0.04), whereas the expression of transcription factor T-bet
was increased 1.42-fold in active sites compared to inactive sites.
CONCLUSION: The total amount and concentration of cytokine IFN-gamma in GCF
samples and transcription factor T-bet expression were increased in progressive
periodontal lesions in patients with chronic periodontitis.

PMID: 19186970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Nov;29(11):733-6.

[Study on the dendritic cell subsets in peripheral blood and its relationship
with the expressions of T-bet and GATA-3 in lymphocytes in severe aplastic
anemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Shao ZH, Fu R, Ruan EB, Qu W, Liang Y, Liu H, Wu YH, Song J, Wang HQ, 
Xing LM, Guan J, Li LJ, Liu H, Dong SW, You L, Zou P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology & Oncology, Tianjin Medical University General
Hospital, Tianjin 300052, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between the dendritic cell (DC)
subsets and transcriptive factors, T-bet, GATA-3, and immune imbalance in
acquired severe aplastic anemia (SAA).
METHODS: The DC1 (HLA-DR+Lin-CD11c+) and DC2 (HLA-DR+Lin-CD123+) in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMNC) were measured with flow cytometry (FCM), the
expressions of T-bet mRNA and GATA-3 mRNA in PBMNC with semiquantitative RT-PCR
and the plasma level of IFN gamma and IL-4 with ELISA in 29 SAA patients and 16
healthy controls.
RESULTS: The percentages of DC1 in PBMNC were (0.44 +/- 0.24)% and (0.73 +/-
0.30)% in untreated and recovered SAA patients respectively, both were higher
than that in controls (0.29 +/- 0.10)% (P < 0.05). The percentage of DC2 in the
untreated cases was lower than that of recovered ones or controls [(0.18 +/-
0.14)% vs (0.28 +/- 0.20)% and (0.29 +/- 0.13)%] (P < 0.05). DC1/DC2 ratios were 
3.45 +/- 2.71 and 2.90 +/- 0.95 in untreated and recovered groups respectively,
both were higher than that in controls (1.15 +/- 0.56) (P < 0.05). No statistic
difference in DC1/DC2 ratio was found between untreated and recovered patients (P
< 0.05). The relative mRNA expression levels of transcriptive factor T-bet were
0.37 +/- 0.07, 0.20 +/- 0.07 and 0.17 +/- 0.05 in the above 3 groups,
respectively, untreated group being higher than that of recovered group or
healthy controls (P < 0.05). There was no statistic difference of GATA-3
expression among the 3 groups (P > 0.05). T-bet/GATA-3 ratio was 0.72 +/- 0.13 in
untreated group, being higher than that of recovered group (0.33 +/- 0.08) or
controls (0.35 +/- 0.11). The plasma level of IFN gamma in the untreated group
was (50.9 +/- 1.1) ng/L, which was higher than that of recovered group [(49.7 +/-
0.9) ng/L] or controls [(49.7 +/- 0.7) ng/L]. There was significant positive
correlations between T-bet and DC1/DC2 ratio (r = 0.445, P < 0.01), as well as
between T-bet and IFN gamma (r = 0.402, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Either DC1/DC2 or T-bet/GATA-3 ratio might become an index to
estimate immune imbalance. High-expressed T-bet was related to the progress of
SAA. In patients with SAA, DC1/DC2 ratio returns to normal range later than that 
of routine blood test does, indicating that immunosuppressive therapy should not 
be withdrawn too earlier.

PMID: 19176008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Blood. 2009 Apr 9;113(15):3620-30. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-168351. Epub 2009
Jan 23.

Increased T-bet+ cytotoxic effectors and type I interferon-mediated processes in 
chronic graft-versus-host disease of the oral mucosa.

Imanguli MM(1), Swaim WD, League SC, Gress RE, Pavletic SZ, Hakim FT.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Transplantation and Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Although chronic graft-versus-host disease (cGVHD) is a major long-term
complication of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, little is
known of its pathogenesis. We have systematically examined oral mucosa among
cGVHD patients and determined that the clinical severity of oral cGVHD was
correlated with apoptotic epithelial cells, often found adjacent to infiltrating 
effector-memory T cells expressing markers of cytotoxicity and type I cytokine
polarization. Accumulation of T-bet(+) T-cell effectors was associated with both 
increased proliferation and the expression of the type I chemokine receptor
CXCR3. Concurrently, in both infiltrating cells and keratinocytes, we observed
increased expression of the CXCR3 ligand MIG (CXCL9) and interleukin-15 (IL-15), 
type I interferon (IFN)-inducible factors that support the migration, type I
differentiation, and expansion of alloreactive effectors. In severely affected
mucosa, we observed high levels of MxA, a protein specifically induced by type I 
IFN, and signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1)
phosphorylation, a critical step in the IFN-signaling pathway, along with
increased numbers of plasmacytoid dendritic cells. These data challenge the
current paradigm of cGVHD as a type II cytokine-driven disorder and support the
model that oral cGVHD results from type I IFN-driven immigration, proliferation, 
and differentiation of T-bet(+) type I T effectors. The clinical trials are
registered at http://www.clinicaltrials.gov as NCT00331968.

PMCID: PMC2668847
PMID: 19168793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2009 Nov;15(11):1617-8. doi: 10.1002/ibd.20861.

Upregulation of T-bet and tight junction molecules by Bifidobactrium longum
improves colonic inflammation of ulcerative colitis.

Takeda Y, Nakase H, Namba K, Inoue S, Ueno S, Uza N, Chiba T.

PMID: 19161180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Immunol. 2009 Feb 1;182(3):1370-8.

The adaptor molecule signaling lymphocytic activation molecule-associated protein
(SAP) regulates IFN-gamma and IL-4 production in V alpha 14 transgenic NKT cells 
via effects on GATA-3 and T-bet expression.

Cen O(1), Ueda A, Guzman L, Jain J, Bassiri H, Nichols KE, Stein PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

NKT cells comprise a rare regulatory T cell population of limited TCR diversity, 
with most cells using a Valpha14 Jalpha18 TCR. These cells exhibit a critical
dependence on the signaling adapter molecule, signaling lymphocytic activation
molecule-associated protein (SAP), for their ontogeny, an aspect not seen in
conventional alphabeta T cells. Prior studies demonstrate that SAP enhances
TCR-induced activation of NF-kappaB in CD4(+) T cells. Because NF-kappaB is
required for NKT cell development, SAP might promote the ontogeny of this lineage
by signaling to NF-kappaB. In this study, we demonstrate that forced expression
of the NF-kappaB target gene, Bcl-x(L), or inhibitory NF-kappaB kinase beta, a
catalytic subunit of the IkappaB kinase complex essential for NF-kappaB
activation, fails to restore NKT cell development in sap(-/-) mice, suggesting
that SAP mediates NKT cell development independently of NF-kappaB. To examine the
role of SAP in NKT cell function, we generated NKT cells in sap(-/-) mice by
expressing a transgene encoding the Valpha14 Jalpha18 component of the invariant 
TCR. These cells bound alpha-galactosylceramide-loaded CD1d tetramers, but
exhibited a very immature CD24(+)NK1.1(-) phenotype. Although sap(-/-)
tetramer-reactive cells proliferated in response to TCR activation, they did not 
produce appreciable levels of IL-4 or IFN-gamma. The reduction in cytokine
production correlated with the near absence of GATA-3 and T-bet, key
transcription factors regulating cytokine expression and maturation of NKT cells.
Ectopic expression of GATA-3 partially restored IL-4 production by the NKT cells.
Collectively, these data suggest that by promoting GATA-3 and T-bet expression,
SAP exerts control over NKT cell development and mature NKT cell cytokine
production.

PMCID: PMC2630172
PMID: 19155483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Immunity. 2009 Jan 16;30(1):155-67. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.12.009.

Global mapping of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 reveals specificity and plasticity in
lineage fate determination of differentiating CD4+ T cells.

Wei G(1), Wei L, Zhu J, Zang C, Hu-Li J, Yao Z, Cui K, Kanno Y, Roh TY, Watford
WT, Schones DE, Peng W, Sun HW, Paul WE, O'Shea JJ, Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2009 Jan 16;30(1):7-9.

Multipotential naive CD4(+) T cells differentiate into distinct lineages
including T helper 1 (Th1), Th2, Th17, and inducible T regulatory (iTreg) cells. 
The remarkable diversity of CD4(+) T cells begs the question whether the observed
changes reflect terminal differentiation with heritable epigenetic modifications 
or plasticity in T cell responses. We generated genome-wide histone H3 lysine 4
(H3K4) and lysine 27 (H3K27) trimethylation maps in naive, Th1, Th2, Th17, iTreg,
and natural Treg (nTreg) cells. We found that although modifications of
signature-cytokine genes (Ifng, Il4, and Il17) partially conform to the
expectation of lineage commitment, genes encoding transcription factors like
Tbx21 exhibit a broad spectrum of epigenetic states, consistent with our
demonstration of T-bet and interferon-gamma induction in nTreg cells. Our data
suggest an epigenetic mechanism underlying the specificity and plasticity of
effector and regulatory T cells and also provide a framework for understanding
complexity of CD4(+) T helper cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2722509
PMID: 19144320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Exp Med. 2009 Jan 16;206(1):51-9. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081242. Epub 2009 Jan 12.

Runx3 and T-box proteins cooperate to establish the transcriptional program of
effector CTLs.

Cruz-Guilloty F(1), Pipkin ME, Djuretic IM, Levanon D, Lotem J, Lichtenheld MG,
Groner Y, Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School and the Immune Disease Institute, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

Activation of naive CD8(+) T cells with antigen induces their differentiation
into effector cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTLs). CTLs lyse infected or aberrant
target cells by exocytosis of lytic granules containing the pore-forming protein 
perforin and a family of proteases termed granzymes. We show that effector CTL
differentiation occurs in two sequential phases in vitro, characterized by early 
induction of T-bet and late induction of Eomesodermin (Eomes), T-box
transcription factors that regulate the early and late phases of interferon (IFN)
gamma expression, respectively. In addition, we demonstrate a critical role for
the transcription factor Runx3 in CTL differentiation. Runx3 regulates Eomes
expression as well as expression of three cardinal markers of the effector CTL
program: IFN-gamma, perforin, and granzyme B. Our data point to the existence of 
an elaborate transcriptional network in which Runx3 initially induces and then
cooperates with T-box transcription factors to regulate gene transcription in
differentiating CTLs.

PMCID: PMC2626671
PMID: 19139168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Pediatr Res. 2009 Apr;65(4):447-52. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181993473.

Brief bout of exercise alters gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells of early- and late-pubertal males.

Radom-Aizik S(1), Zaldivar F Jr, Leu SY, Cooper DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, Irvine, Orange, California
92868, USA.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) are stimulated by exercise and
contribute not only to host defense, but also to growth, repair, and disease
pathogenesis. Whether PBMC gene expression is altered by exercise in children is 
not known. Ten early pubertal boys (8-12 y) and 10 late pubertal boys (15-18 y)
performed ten 2-min bouts of strenuous, constant work rate exercise with 1-min
rest intervals. PBMCs were isolated before and after exercise and microarray
(Affymetrix U133 + 2 chips) analyzed. Statistical criterion to identify gene
expression changes was less than 5% false discovery rate (FDR) with 95%
confidence interval. One thousand two hundred forty-six genes were altered in
older boys (517 up, 729 down), but only 109 were altered in the younger group (79
up, 30 down). In older boys, 13 gene pathways (using Expression Analysis
Systematic Explorer, p < 0.05) were found (e.g. natural killer cell cytotoxicity,
apoptosis). Epiregulin gene expression (EREG, a growth factor involved in wound
healing) increased in older boys. In older boys exercise altered genes such as
TBX21, GZMA, PGTDR, and CCL5 also play roles in pediatric inflammatory diseases
like asthma. Sixty-six genes were changed significantly in both groups. The
pattern of PBMC gene expression suggests the initiation of an immunologic
"danger" signal associated with a sudden change in energy expenditure.

PMCID: PMC4065861
PMID: 19127215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 15;182(2):766-73.

Cross-linking of CD80 on CD4+ T cells activates a calcium-dependent signaling
pathway.

Podojil JR(1), Miller SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology and Interdepartmental Immunobiology
Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois
60611, USA.

CD80 expressed on the surface of APCs provides a positive costimulatory signal to
naive CD4+ T cells via CD28 during activation. However, CD80 is also expressed on
the surface of activated CD4+ T cells, and cross-linking CD80 on the surface of
CD4+ T cells activated in the presence of Th1-promoting cytokines induces a
direct up-regulation of T-bet, IFN-gamma, and Bcl(XL) expression in primary CD4+ 
T cells. The present data show that naive CD4+ T cells activated in Th1-promoting
conditions in the presence of anti-CD80 mAb increase the level of IFN-gamma
produced by increasing the rate of IFN-gamma mRNA transcription, which is
supported by an increase in the level of T-bet phosphorylation and T-bet binding 
to the third intronic enhancer in the IFN-gamma locus. Furthermore, anti-CD80
mAb-induced increase in IFN-gamma expression and T-bet phosphorylation is
dependent upon the activation of a Ca2+-dependent pathway as shown by anti-CD80
mAb-induced intracellular Ca2+ flux following CD80 cross-linking. These findings 
indicate a novel regulatory role for CD80-mediated intracellular signals in CD4+ 
T cells and have important implications for disease therapies using
anti-costimulatory mAbs as use of an intact CD80 mAb may lead to CD80
cross-linking on activated T cells and enhanced proinflammatory cytokine
production.

PMCID: PMC2844901
PMID: 19124719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2008 Oct;28(10):900-2.

[Regulatory effect of procyanidins on the expressions of interferon-gamma,
interleukin-12 and transcription factor T-bet mRNA in peripheral blood
mononuclear cell of patients with alopecia areata].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu PC(1), Xuan GW, Chen DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of
TCM, Guangzhou. zpcgdtcm@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the regulatory effect of procyanidins (PC) on the
expressions of Th1 type cytokines (IFN-gamma and IL-12) and the transcription
factor T-bet mRNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) in patients with
alopecia areata (AA).
METHODS: Above-mentioned expressions were detected using RT-PCR technique in 20
AA patients (8 of mild and 12 of severe degree) and 10 healthy subjects after
phytoaemagglutinin (PHA) or PHA + PC stimulation.
RESULTS: After being stimulated by PHA and PHA + PC, in patients with severe AA, 
the expression of T-bet mRNA was 0.581 +/- 0.148 and 0.419 +/- 0.113
respectively; that of IFN-gamma mRNA, 0.689 +/- 0.219 and 0.430 +/- 0.162; and
that of IL-12 mRNA, 0.198 +/- 0.056 and 0.136 +/- 0.035, respectively. As
compared with those before stimulation, the respective difference was
statistically significant (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: PC can inhibit the expressions of Th1 type cytokines and
transcription factor T-bet in PBMC of severe AA patients, and reverse the Th1
responses. The authors offered that it maybe part of the acting mechanism of pine
needle for treatment of AA.

PMID: 19123327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Oral Microbiol Immunol. 2009 Feb;24(1):25-31. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-302X.2008.00469.x.

Factors involved in the T helper type 1 and type 2 cell commitment and osteoclast
regulation in inflammatory apical diseases.

Fukada SY(1), Silva TA, Garlet GP, Rosa AL, da Silva JS, Cunha FQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University
of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: Periapical chronic lesion formation involves activation of the
immune response and alveolar bone resorption around the tooth apex. However, the 
overall roles of T helper type 1 (Th1), Th2, and T-regulatory cell (Treg)
responses and osteoclast regulatory factors in periapical cysts and granulomas
have not been fully determined. This study aimed to investigate whether different
forms of apical periodontitis, namely cysts and granulomas, show different
balances of Th1, Th2 regulators, Treg markers, and factors involved in osteoclast
chemotaxis and activation.
METHODS: Gene expression of these factors was assessed using quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction, in samples obtained from healthy gingiva (n 
= 8), periapical granulomas (n = 20), and cysts (n = 10).
RESULTS: Periapical cysts exhibited a greater expression of GATA-3, while a
greater expression of T-bet, Foxp3, and interleukin-10 (IL-10) was seen in
granulomas. The expression of interferon-gamma, IL-4, and transforming growth
factor-beta was similar in both lesions. Regarding osteoclastic factors, while
the expression of SDF-1alpha/CXCL12 and CCR1 was higher in cysts, the expression 
of RANKL was significantly higher in granulomas. Both lesions exhibited similar
expression of CXCR4, CKbeta8/CCL23, and osteoprotegerin, which were significantly
higher than in control.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed a predominance of osteoclast activity in
granulomas that was correlated with the Th1 response. The concomitant expression 
of Treg cell markers suggests a possible suppression of the Th1 response in
granulomas. On the other hand, in cysts the Th2 activity is augmented. The
mechanisms of periradicular lesion development are still not fully understood but
the imbalance of immune and osteoclastic cell activity in cysts and granulomas
seems to be critically regulated by Treg cells.

PMID: 19121066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. In Silico Biol. 2009;9(5-6):355-63. doi: 10.3233/ISB-2009-0410.

In silico analysis of T-bet activity in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in
patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).

Fernandez-Becker NQ(1), Moss AC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.

T-bet (TBX21) is a transcription factor that regulates T-cell differentiation,
and has recently been implicated in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease (CD). The
regulatory networks through which T-bet affects immune function are unknown. An
NCBI gene expression profile from patients with CD and controls was analyzed.
T-bet transcription factor binding sites and promoter modules were identified
using promoter analysis software. Functional correlations between
T-bet-containing promoters were determined using data mining and ontological
analysis. T-bet expression in CD peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
(n=59) was significantly reduced compared to control (n=42) (p<0.0001) and
ulcerative colitis PBMCs (n=26), (p=0.005). The promoter regions of all genes
differentially-expressed in CD were probed for T-bet Transcription Factor Binding
Sites (TFBSs). Twenty-three genes contained transcription-factor binding sites
for T-bet; 8 were down-regulated, and 15 were up-regulated in CD-PBMCs. Three
genes (S100A16, ABHD3 and EZH1) that were down-regulated in CD-PBMCs contained a 
complex promoter module consisting of T-bet and EGRF transcription-factor binding
sites. Ontological analysis revealed that a significant number of
differentially-expressed genes that contain T-bet binding sites are involved in
innate immunity (8 genes, Z-score 4.11) and signal transduction (5 genes, Z-score
2.65). This combination of gene expression datasets and promoter analysis has
identified a network of genes that contain simple T-bet binding sites, and
complex T-bet promoter modules, in their promoter regions. These results
implicate a mechanism through which T-bet may influence innate immunity in CD.

PMID: 22430437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Clin Immunol. 2009 Apr;131(1):70-83. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2008.10.013. Epub 2008
Dec 21.

T-bet, pSTAT1 and pSTAT3 expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells during 
pregnancy correlates with post-partum activation of multiple sclerosis.

Iorio R(1), Frisullo G, Nociti V, Patanella KA, Bianco A, Marti A, Mirabella M,
Tonali PA, Batocchi AP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology, Department of Neuroscience, Catholic University, Rome,
Italy.

In pregnant women affected by multiple sclerosis (MS) we observed increased
percentages of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) T regulatory cells at the 1st and the 2nd
trimester of gestation that was associated with a decreased T-bet expression in
CD4(+) T cells. In women showing clinical relapse and/or new lesions at MRI after
delivery we found, a higher expression of T-bet, pSTAT1 and pSTAT3 in CD4(+),
CD8(+) T cells and CD14(+) cells, associated with an increase of IFNgamma and
IL17 production by PBMC at the 3rd trimester of gestation and after delivery. Our
data suggest that the expansion of circulating CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T
cells and the lower expression of T-bet in CD4(+) T cells may account for the
decreased MS activity during pregnancy. The expression of T-bet, pSTAT1 and
pSTAT3 in peripheral blood CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells and monocytes could be
useful to identify MS patients who will develop a relapse after delivery.

PMID: 19097824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Feb;123(2):479-85. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2008.10.035. 
Epub 2008 Dec 10.

Restoration of T-box-containing protein expressed in T cells protects against
allergen-induced asthma.

Park JW(1), Min HJ, Sohn JH, Kim JY, Hong JH, Sigrist KS, Glimcher LH, Hwang ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of Allergy, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: A T(H)1-specific transcription factor, T-box-containing protein
expressed in T cells (T-bet), controls the production of both T(H)1 and T(H)2
cytokines in T(H) cell differentiation by means of distinct mechanisms.
T-bet-deficient mice overproduce T(H)2 cytokines and have spontaneous airway
inflammation.
OBJECTIVES: We tested whether T-bet overexpression could protect against the
development or progression of asthma.
METHODS: We generated a T cell-specific and inducible line of T-bet-transgenic
mice on a T-bet-deficient genetic background and used it to study the function of
T-bet in an ovalbumin (OVA)-induced asthma model.
RESULTS: Induction of T-bet in a T cell-specific manner in an OVA model of asthma
concomitant with OVA injection prevented airway hyperresponsiveness, eosinophilic
and lymphocytic inflammation, and IL-5 and IL-13 production in bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid and also reduced serum IgE and T(H)2 cytokine production by
peripheral T cells. Even when T-bet expression was induced during later stages of
asthma progression, T-bet overexpression still attenuated airway
hyperresponsiveness and goblet cell hyperplasia, as well as T(H)2 cytokine
production.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that T-bet expression in T cells can prevent the
initiation of airway inflammation and progression of chronic inflammation and
might be extrapolated to human asthma.

PMID: 19081613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Nov 18;88(42):2999-3002.

[Effects of acute and chronic murine cytomegalovirus infections on the ratio of
regulatory T cells and expression of Th1/Th2 transcription factors T-bet/GATA-3].

[Article in Chinese]

Li YN(1), Zhou YF, Shu SN, Zhu DD, Yang ZF, Fang F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of acute and chronic murine cytomegalovirus
(MCMV) infections on the regulatory T cells (Treg) ratio and protein expression
of the Th1/Th2 transcription factors T-bet/GATA-3.
METHODS: 120 BALB/c mice were randomly divided into 2 equal groups: MCMV-infected
group undergoing infra-peritoneal injection of homogenate of salivary gland
containing MCMV, and mock infection group undergoing infra-peritoneal injection
of normal homogenate of salivary gland 1, 3, 7, 14, 28, 45, 60, 75, 90, and 120
days after infection 6 mice from each group were killed to examine the viral load
of the heart, lung, liver, and kidney by plaque assay to access the status of
MCMV infection. Suspension of splenocytes was prepared. The proportion of
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+Treg in the splenocytes was measured by flow cytometry. Western
blotting was used to detect the protein expression of T-bet/GATA-3.
RESULTS: The cutoff point between acute and chronic points was the 28th day. The 
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+Treg proportion in splenocytes significantly decreased during the 
acute infection stage and to the lowest level of (1.46+/-0.27)% at day 28,
significantly lower than that of the mock infection group [(2.78+/-0.29)%,
P<0.05]; then obviously increased in the chronic infection stage, increased to
(4.51+/-0.24)% at day 60, significantly higher than that of the mock infection
group [(2.69+/-0.12)%, P<0.05], and continued to increase still. The protein
level (K value) of T-bet of the MCMV infection group peaked to the level of
(0.618+/-0.053) on day 3, obviously higher than that of the mock infected group
[(0.205+/-0.026)], then decreased to the level similar to that of the mock
infection group on day 28, and was obviously lower than that of the mock
infection group on day 75. Whereas the protein level of GATA-3 of the MCMV group 
increased to (0.836+/-0.061) on day 3, markedly higher than that of the mock
infection group (0.398+/-0.022), peaked on day 7, then gradually decreased, and
remained at the levels similar to those of the mock infection group from day 75
to day 120.
CONCLUSION: In the acute infection stage, MCMV up-regulates the T-bet and GATA-3 
protein expression. But during the chronic infection stage, MCMV induces a marked
proliferation and activation of Treg cells which further inhibit the Th1 and Th2 
reactions, especially Th1 response. Treg proliferation may be an important
mechanism of chronic and persistent CMV infection in the host.

PMID: 19080080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2009 Jan;15(1):57-62. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e32831da8be.

Pharmacogenetics of asthma.

Lima JJ(1), Blake KV, Tantisira KG, Weiss ST.

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Pediatric Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacogenetics, Nemours
Children's Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida 32207, USA. Jlima@nemours.org

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Patient response to the asthma drug classes, bronchodilators, 
inhaled corticosteroids and leukotriene modifiers, are characterized by a large
degree of heterogeneity, which is attributable in part to genetic variation.
Herein, we review and update the pharmacogenetics and pharmaogenomics of common
asthma drugs.
RECENT FINDINGS: Early studies suggest that bronchodilator reversibility and
asthma worsening in patients on continuous short-acting and long-acting
beta-agonists are related to the Gly16Arg genotype for the ADRB2. More recent
studies including genome-wide association studies implicate variants in other
genes contribute to bronchodilator response heterogeneity and fail to replicate
asthma worsening associated with continuous beta-agonist use. Genetic
determinants of the safety of long-acting beta-agonist require further study.
Variants in CRHR1, TBX21, and FCER2 contribute to variability in response for
lung function, airways responsiveness, and exacerbations in patients taking
inhaled corticosteroids. Variants in ALOX5, LTA4H, LTC4S, ABCC1, CYSLTR2, and
SLCO2B1 contribute to variability in response to leukotriene modifiers.
SUMMARY: Identification of novel variants that contribute to response
heterogeneity supports future studies of single nucleotide polymorphism discovery
and include gene expression and genome-wide association studies. Statistical
models that predict the genomics of response to asthma drugs will complement
single nucleotide polymorphism discovery in moving toward personalized medicine.

PMCID: PMC2754311
PMID: 19077707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Br J Haematol. 2009 Mar;144(5):755-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07520.x.
Epub 2008 Dec 5.

Interleukin 18 and interleukin 18 binding protein in patients with idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura.

Shan NN(1), Zhu XJ, Peng J, Qin P, Zhuang XW, Wang HC, Hou M.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Oncology Centre, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, China.

To evaluate the balance of interleukin IL18 and its endogenous antagonist IL18
binding protein (IL18BP) in patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
(ITP), plasma IL18, IL18BP, interferon gamma (IFNG) and IL4 levels, as well as
platelet counts were measured in patients with active ITP (n = 23), ITP in
remission (n = 21) and in healthy subjects (n = 24) by enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Using real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction, the mRNA expression of IL18, IL18BP, IFNG, IL4, T-box (TBX21) and
GATA-binding protein 3(GATA3) were studied in all subjects. The results showed
that IL18 and IFNG protein and mRNA levels were significantly increased in
patients with active ITP than in control subjects, but that IL18BP were not
significantly elevated in ITP patients, which resulted in an elevated ratio of
IL18/IL18BP in patients with active disease. During remission stages, the levels 
of these cytokines were comparable to those of healthy controls. The elevated
levels of IL18/IL18BP in plasma during active stages of disease suggest a
possible role in the pathogenesis and course of ITP.

PMID: 19077159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Int Immunopharmacol. 2009 Mar;9(3):261-7. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2008.10.021. Epub
2008 Dec 4.

Quercetin regulates Th1/Th2 balance in a murine model of asthma.

Park HJ(1), Lee CM, Jung ID, Lee JS, Jeong YI, Chang JH, Chun SH, Kim MJ, Choi
IW, Ahn SC, Shin YK, Yeom SR, Park YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pusan National University College of Medicine, Busan
602-739, South Korea.

Quercetin is found to be the most active of the flavonoids in studies and many
medicinal plants owe much of their activity to their high Quercetin content.
Quercetin has demonstrated significant anti-inflammatory activity because of
direct inhibition of several initial processes of inflammation. However, its
anti-allergic effect in the Th1/Th2 immune response was poorly understood.
Recently, it was shown that T-bet and GATA-3 were master Th1 and Th2 regulatory
transcription factors. In this study, we have attempted to determine whether
Quercetin regulates Th1/Th2 cytokine production, T-bet and GATA-3 gene expression
in OVA-induced asthma model mice. Quercetin reduced the increased levels of IL-4,
Th2 cytokine production in OVA-sensitized and -challenged mice. The other side,
it increased IFN-gamma, Th1 cytokine production in Quercetin administrated mice. 
We also examined to ascertain whether Quercetin could influence Eosinophil
peroxidase (EPO) activity. The administration of Quercetin before the last airway
OVA challenge resulted in a significant inhibition of all asthmatic reactions.
Accordingly, this study may provide evidence that Quercetin plays a critical role
in the amelioration of the pathogenetic process of asthma in mice. These findings
provide new insight into the immunopharmacological role of Quercetin in terms of 
its effects in a murine model of asthma, and also broaden current perspectives in
our understanding of the immunopharmacological functions of Quercetin.

PMID: 19061976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Immunol. 2008 Dec 15;181(12):8700-10.

T-bet and eomesodermin play critical roles in directing T cell differentiation to
Th1 versus Th17.

Yang Y(1), Xu J, Niu Y, Bromberg JS, Ding Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene and Cell Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10029, USA.

Th1 and Th17 cells are crucial in immune regulation and autoimmune disease
development. By adding Stat6 deficiency to T-bet deficiency, and thus negating
effects from elevated levels of IL-4/Stat6/GATA3 Th2 signals in T-bet-deficient
cells, we investigated the signals important for Th1 and Th17 cell
differentiation and their role in colitis development. The data reveal that
Eomesodermin compensates T-bet deficiency for IFN-gamma and Th1 development.
However, without T-bet, IFN-gamma production and Th1 differentiation are
susceptible to inhibition by IL-6 and TGFbeta. As a result, Th17 development is
strongly favored, the threshold for TGFbeta requirement is lowered, and IL-6
drives Th17 differentiation, elucidating a critical role for T-bet in directing T
cell differentiation to Th1 vs Th17. In contrast to IL-6 plus TGFbeta-driven
Th17, IL-6-driven Th17 cells do not express IL-10 and they induce a more intense 
colitis. Naive CD4 T cells deficient in Stat6 and T-bet also induce a
Th17-dominant colitis development in vivo. Our data provide new insights into the
choice between Th1 and Th17 development and their roles in autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC2834216
PMID: 19050290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Immunol. 2008 Dec 15;181(12):8372-81.

T-bet dependent removal of Sin3A-histone deacetylase complexes at the Ifng locus 
drives Th1 differentiation.

Chang S(1), Collins PL, Aune TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Vanderbilt University School
of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Forming and removing epigenetic histone marks at gene loci are central processes 
in differentiation. Here, we explored mechanisms establishing long-range H4
acetylation marks at the Ifng locus during Th1 lineage commitment. In Th0 cells, 
histone deacetylase (HDAC)-Sin3A complexes recruited to the Ifng locus actively
prevented accumulation of H4 acetylation marks. Th1 differentiation caused loss
of HDAC-Sin3A complexes by T-bet-dependent mechanisms and accumulation of H4
acetylation marks. HDAC-Sin3A complexes were absent from the locus in NOD Th0
cells, obviating the need for Th1 differentiation signals to establish histone
marks and Th1 differentiation. Thus, Ifng transcription is actively prevented in 
Th0 cells via epigenetic mechanisms and epigenetic defects allow unregulated Ifng
transcription that may contribute to autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC2794428
PMID: 19050254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Exp Med. 2008 Dec 22;205(13):3133-44. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081937. Epub 2008 Dec 
1.

A novel role of CD4 Th17 cells in mediating cardiac allograft rejection and
vasculopathy.

Yuan X(1), Paez-Cortez J, Schmitt-Knosalla I, D'Addio F, Mfarrej B, Donnarumma M,
Habicht A, Clarkson MR, Iacomini J, Glimcher LH, Sayegh MH, Ansari MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Research Center, Renal Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

T-bet plays a crucial role in Th1 development. We investigated the role of T-bet 
in the development of allograft rejection in an established MHC class
II-mismatched (bm12 into B6) model of chronic allograft vasculopathy (CAV).
Intriguingly, and in contrast to IFN-gamma(-/-) mice that are protected from CAV,
T-bet(-/-) recipients develop markedly accelerated allograft rejection
accompanied by early severe vascular inflammation and vasculopathy, and
infiltration by predominantly IL-17-producing CD4 T cells. Concurrently,
T-bet(-/-) mice exhibit a T helper type 1 (Th1)-deficient environment
characterized by profound IFN-gamma deficiency, a Th2 switch characterized by
increased production of interleukin (IL) 4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13 cytokines, as 
well as increased production of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-12p40, and
IL-17. Neutralization of IL-17 inhibits accelerated allograft rejection and
vasculopathy in T-bet(-/-) mice. Interestingly, CD4 but not CD8 T cell deficiency
in T-bet(-/-) mice affords dramatic protection from vasculopathy and facilitates 
long-term graft acceptance. This is the first study establishing that in the
absence of Th1-mediated alloimmune responses, CD4 Th17 cells mediate an
aggressive proinflammatory response culminating in severe accelerated allograft
rejection and vasculopathy. These results have important implications for the
development of novel therapies to target this intractable problem in clinical
solid organ transplantation.

PMCID: PMC2605226
PMID: 19047438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Immunology. 2009 Jul;127(3):418-28. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2008.02963.x. Epub
2008 Nov 7.

Regulatory T cells fail to suppress CD4T+-bet+ T cells in relapsing multiple
sclerosis patients.

Frisullo G(1), Nociti V, Iorio R, Patanella AK, Caggiula M, Marti A, Sancricca C,
Angelucci F, Mirabella M, Tonali PA, Batocchi AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, Catholic University, Rome.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disease of the
central nervous system and a defect in the regulatory T-cell subset seems to be
involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. Foxp3 is a transcription factor that
is selectively expressed in CD4+ CD25+ regulatory T cells and is required for
their development and function. T-bet is a key transcription factor for the
development of T helper 1 (Th1) cells. We found that both the percentage of
circulating CD4+ CD25+ Foxp3+ cells and Foxp3 expression were lower in
relapsing-remitting (RR) MS patients during relapses than during remission.
Otherwise, the percentage of CD4+ T-bet+ T cells and T-bet expression in CD4+ T
cells were higher in relapsing than in remitting RRMS patients. CD4+ CD25+ T
cells both from relapsing and from remitting RRMS patients showed significantly
less capacity than corresponding cells from healthy subjects to suppress
autologous CD4+ CD25(-) T-cell proliferation, despite a similar Foxp3 expression 
level. CD4+ CD25+ T cells from healthy subjects and patients in remission clearly
reduced T-bet mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) in CD4+ CD25(-) T cells up to a
ratio of 1:10, whereas CD4+ CD25+ T cells from patients in relapse were able to
reduce T-bet expression only at a high ratio. Our data indicate that the
increased number of regulatory T (T-reg) cells and the increased Foxp3 expression
in circulating CD4+ CD25+ T cells may contribute to the maintenance of tolerance 
in the remission phase of MS. Moreover, the inhibitory capacity of CD4+ CD25+ T
cells seems to be impaired in relapsing patients under inflammatory conditions,
as shown by the high levels of T-bet expression in CD4+ T cells.

PMCID: PMC2712110
PMID: 19016907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Exp Med. 2008 Nov 24;205(12):2803-12. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081461. Epub 2008 Nov 
10.

Tpl2 kinase regulates T cell interferon-gamma production and host resistance to
Toxoplasma gondii.

Watford WT(1), Hissong BD, Durant LR, Yamane H, Muul LM, Kanno Y, Tato CM, Ramos 
HL, Berger AE, Mielke L, Pesu M, Solomon B, Frucht DM, Paul WE, Sher A, Jankovic 
D, Tsichlis PN, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch,
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. watfordw@mail.nih.gov

Tpl2 (Tumor progression locus 2), also known as Cot/MAP3K8, is a
hematopoietically expressed serine-threonine kinase. Tpl2 is known to have
critical functions in innate immunity in regulating tumor necrosis factor-alpha, 
Toll-like receptor, and G protein-coupled receptor signaling; however, our
understanding of its physiological role in T cells is limited. We investigated
the potential roles of Tpl2 in T cells and found that it was induced by
interleukin-12 in human and mouse T cells in a Stat4-dependent manner. Deficiency
of Tpl2 was associated with impaired interferon (IFN)-gamma production.
Accordingly, Tpl2(-/-) mice had impaired host defense against Toxoplasma gondii
with reduced parasite clearance and decreased IFN-gamma production. Furthermore, 
reconstitution of Rag2(-/-) mice with Tpl2-deficient T cells followed by T.
gondii infection recapitulated the IFN-gamma defect seen in the Tpl2-deficient
mice, confirming a T cell-intrinsic defect. CD4(+) T cells isolated from
Tpl2(-/-) mice showed poor induction of T-bet and failure to up-regulate Stat4
protein, which is associated with impaired TCR-dependent extracellular
signal-regulated kinase activation. These data underscore the role of Tpl2 as a
regulator of T helper cell lineage decisions and demonstrate that Tpl2 has an
important functional role in the regulation of Th1 responses.

PMCID: PMC2585846
PMID: 19001140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Exp Med. 2008 Nov 24;205(12):2763-79. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081398. Epub 2008 Nov 
10.

Tim-3 expression defines a novel population of dysfunctional T cells with highly 
elevated frequencies in progressive HIV-1 infection.

Jones RB(1), Ndhlovu LC, Barbour JD, Sheth PM, Jha AR, Long BR, Wong JC,
Satkunarajah M, Schweneker M, Chapman JM, Gyenes G, Vali B, Hyrcza MD, Yue FY,
Kovacs C, Sassi A, Loutfy M, Halpenny R, Persad D, Spotts G, Hecht FM, Chun TW,
McCune JM, Kaul R, Rini JM, Nixon DF, Ostrowski MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
brad.jones@utoronto.ca

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2008 Nov 24;205(12):2699-701.

Progressive loss of T cell functionality is a hallmark of chronic infection with 
human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1). We have identified a novel population of 
dysfunctional T cells marked by surface expression of the glycoprotein Tim-3. The
frequency of this population was increased in HIV-1-infected individuals to a
mean of 49.4 +/- SD 12.9% of CD8(+) T cells expressing Tim-3 in HIV-1-infected
chronic progressors versus 28.5 +/- 6.8% in HIV-1-uninfected individuals. Levels 
of Tim-3 expression on T cells from HIV-1-infected inviduals correlated
positively with HIV-1 viral load and CD38 expression and inversely with CD4(+) T 
cell count. In progressive HIV-1 infection, Tim-3 expression was up-regulated on 
HIV-1-specific CD8(+) T cells. Tim-3-expressing T cells failed to produce
cytokine or proliferate in response to antigen and exhibited impaired Stat5,
Erk1/2, and p38 signaling. Blocking the Tim-3 signaling pathway restored
proliferation and enhanced cytokine production in HIV-1-specific T cells. Thus,
Tim-3 represents a novel target for the therapeutic reversal of HIV-1-associated 
T cell dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC2585847
PMID: 19001139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Immunity. 2008 Nov 14;29(5):679-90. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.08.017.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 is required for the
transcription factor T-bet to promote T helper 1 cell-fate determination.

Thieu VT(1), Yu Q, Chang HC, Yeh N, Nguyen ET, Sehra S, Kaplan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN 46202, USA.

Transcriptional regulatory networks direct the development of specialized cell
types. The transcription factors signal tranducer and activator of transcription 
4 (Stat4) and T-bet are required for the interleukin-12 (IL-12)-stimulated
development of T helper 1 (Th1) cells, although the hierarchy of activity by
these factors has not been clearly defined. In this report, we show that these
factors did not function in a linear pathway and that each factor played a unique
role in programming chromatin architecture for Th1 gene expression, with subsets 
of genes depending on Stat4, T-bet, or both for expression in Th1 cells. T-bet
was not able to transactivate expression of Stat4-dependent genes in the absence 
of endogenous Stat4 expression. Thus, T-bet requires Stat4 to achieve complete
IL-12-dependent Th1 cell-fate determination. These data provide a basis for
understanding how transiently activated and lineage-specific transcription
factors cooperate in promoting cellular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2768040
PMID: 18993086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Hum Immunol. 2009 Jan;70(1):6-15. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2008.09.004. Epub 2008
Nov 5.

Neem leaf glycoprotein directs T-bet-associated type 1 immune commitment.

Bose A(1), Chakraborty K, Sarkar K, Goswami S, Haque E, Chakraborty T, Ghosh D,
Roy S, Laskar S, Baral R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunoregulation and Immunodiagnostics, Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute Kolkata, India.

Neem leaf glycoprotein (NLGP)-mediated immune activation and associated immune
polarization was studied. NLGP-induced activation is reflected in upregulation of
early activation marker CD69 on lymphocytes, monocytes, and dendritic cells.
Activation is also denoted by CD45RO enhancement, with a decrease in CD45RA
phenotype and CD62L (L-selectin). NLGP-activated T cells secrete greater amount
of signature T-helper (Th)1 cytokines interferon-gamma and a lower amount of the 
Th2 cytokine interleukin (IL)-4. Similar type 1 directiveness is also observed in
antigen-presenting monocytes and dendritic cells by upregulation of IL-12, tumor 
necrosis factor -alpha and downregulation of IL-10. Creation of the type 1
microenvironment is also assisted by NLGP-induced downregulation of FoxP3(+)
T-Reg cells. A type 1-specific transcription factor, T-bet, is upregulated in
circulating immune cells after their stimulation with NLGP. In the creation of
type 1 immune network, increased phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT4 with
decreased phosphorylation of STAT3 might have significance. We conclude that NLGP
may be effective in maintaining normal immune homeostasis by upregulating type 1 
response in immunosuppressed hosts, which may have significant role in the
induction of host protective antitumor functions.

PMID: 18983881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol. 2008;18(5):357-65.

Intranasal delivery of T-bet modulates the profile of helper T cell immune
responses in experimental asthma.

Wang SY(1), Yang M, Xu XP, Qiu GF, Ma J, Wang SJ, Huang XX, Xu HX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, China.

BACKGROUND: Allergic asthma is caused by aberrant helper T (T(H)) type 2 immune
responses in susceptible individuals, characterized by airway
hyperresponsiveness, chronic airway inflammation, and mucus hypersecretion. Its
prevalence continues to increase, but optimal treatment remains a challenge. The 
transcription factor T-bet is a master regulator of T(H)1 lineage commitment and 
strongly promotes interferon gamma expression during T(H)1 cell differentiation.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to explore the role of intranasal delivery
of T-bet on the differentiation of T(H) cell subsets and airway inflammation in
the ovalbumin (OVA)-induced mouse model of allergic airway inflammation.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were sensitized by intraperitoneal injection of OVA and
challenged with nebulized OVA. Four days before the inhalation challenge, the
sensitized mice were subjected to intranasal delivery of a recombinant
adeno-associated virus vector carrying murine T-bet gene (AAV-T-bet). Expression 
of the transcription factors T-bet, GATA3, and Foxp3 was then assayed in the
lungs, and airway histology was analyzed along with other inflammatory
parameters, such as eosinophils and cytokines in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
fluid, and total and OVA-specific immunoglobulin (Ig) E in serum.
RESULTS: Intranasal administration of AAV-T-bet efficiently balanced the
T(H)1/T(H)2 transcription factor and cytokine profile and significantly decreased
the number of eosinophils in BAL fluid. It also resulted in a reduction of
peribronchial inflammation scores and serum IgE levels in OVA-sensitized and
challenged mice during the effector phase.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that intranasal delivery of T-bet can promote a T(H)1 
immune response, restore a balanced Th immune response, and inhibit airway
inflammation during the challenge phase in a mouse model of allergic airway
inflammation.

PMID: 18973099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Immunol. 2009 Feb;46(4):587-91. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.07.029. Epub 2008 
Oct 25.

B cell receptor crosstalk: B cells express osteopontin through the combined
action of the alternate and classical BCR signaling pathways.

Guo B(1), Tumang JR, Rothstein TL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Oncology and Cell Biology, The Feinstein Institute for Medical
Research, 350 Community Drive, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA.

Classical BCR signaling requires a number of signalosome mediators that are
bypassed when BCR signaling follows an alternate pathway produced by prior
exposure of B cells to IL-4. The two pathways, classical and alternate, co-exist 
in IL-4-treated B cells. Here we report that operation of the IL-4-induced
alternate pathway in combination with the classical pathway changes the nature of
the B cell response to BCR engagement so that the cytokine, osteopontin (Opn), is
produced and secreted. Although Opn expression by B cells has not previously been
noted, anti-Ig-induced secretion by IL-4-treated B cells amounts to levels
comparable to those secreted by activated T cells. However, unlike T cell Opn
expression, B cell expression of Opn is not mediated by T-Bet. Because elevated
levels of IL-4 occur in association with severe illness, and because Opn is
strongly associated with autoimmunity, these results suggest that the
IL-4-induced alternate BCR signaling pathway may participate in the
pathophysiology of autoimmune dyscrasias.

PMCID: PMC2631101
PMID: 18952291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Immunol. 2008 Nov 1;181(9):6148-57.

Immunosurveillance of lung melanoma metastasis in EBI-3-deficient mice mediated
by CD8+ T cells.

Sauer KA(1), Maxeiner JH, Karwot R, Scholtes P, Lehr HA, Birkenbach M, Blumberg
RS, Finotto S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology of the Lung, I. Medical
Clinic, University of Mainz, Germany.

EBV-induced gene 3 (EBI-3) codes for a soluble type I receptor homologous to the 
p40 subunit of IL-12 that is expressed by APCs following activation. In this
study, we assessed the role of EBI-3 in a model of lung melanoma metastasis.
Intravenous injection of the B16-F10 cell line resulted in a significant
reduction of lung tumor metastasis in EBI-3(-/-) recipient mice compared with
wild-type mice. The immunological finding accompanying this effect was the
expansion of a newly described cell subset called IFN-gamma producing killer
dendritic cells associated with CD8(+) T cell responses in the lung of EBI-3(-/-)
mice including IFN-gamma release and TNF-alpha-induced programmed tumor cell
death. Depletion of CD8(+) T cells as well as targeting T-bet abrogated the
protective effects of EBI-3 deficiency on lung melanoma metastases. Finally,
adoptive transfer of EBI-3(-/-) CD8(+) T cells into tumor bearing wild-type mice 
inhibited lung metastasis in recipient mice. Taken together, these data
demonstrate that targeting EBI-3 leads to a T-bet-mediated antitumor CD8(+) T
cell responses in the lung.

PMCID: PMC3996841
PMID: 18941205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Hum Immunol. 2008 Dec;69(12):837-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2008.09.008. Epub 2008 
Oct 20.

Increased expression of T-bet in circulating B cells from a patient with multiple
sclerosis and celiac disease.

Frisullo G(1), Nociti V, Iorio R, Patanella AK, Marti A, Cammarota G, Mirabella
M, Attilio Tonali P, Batocchi AP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology, Department of Neurosciences, Catholic University,
Rome, Italy.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) and celiac disease (CD) are considered to be
T-cell-mediated autoimmune diseases. We describe a woman affected by a
relapsing-remitting demyelinating disease of the central nervous system and
occult CD (MS-CD), who showed during neurologic exacerbations a strong increased 
expression of T-bet, the key transcription factor for the development of Th1
cells, in circulating T, B cells and monocytes. Conversely, no difference of
T-bet expression was observed in B cells from relapsing-remitting MS patients,
either in relapse or in remission, and in controls. In the MS-CD patient, the
interaction between MS- and CD-related inflammatory processes may result in an
amplification of Th1 immune response.

PMID: 18940217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Hematol Oncol. 2009 Mar;27(1):31-9. doi: 10.1002/hon.878.

Prognostic impact of tumour-infiltrating Th2 and regulatory T cells in classical 
Hodgkin lymphoma.

Schreck S(1), Friebel D, Buettner M, Distel L, Grabenbauer G, Young LS,
Niedobitek G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, University Hospital of the
Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany.
sabine.schreck@uk-erlangen.de

Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma (cHL) is morphologically characterized by a small
number of tumour cells, Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells, surrounded by
numerous tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL). The functional role of these TIL 
is still controversial. While generally considered to represent an anti-tumour
immune response, TIL in cHL might result from the profoundly deregulated immunity
of cHL patients. Eighty-seven cases of cHL were available to evaluate the
prognostical significance of tumour-infiltrating cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL), T
helper 1 (Th1) cells, T helper 2 (Th2) cells and regulatory T cells (Treg). We
confirm that in cHL the microenvironment is dominated by Th2 cells and Treg and
show that large numbers of Th2 cells are associated with significantly improved
disease-free survival (p = 0.021) and event-free survival (p = 0.012).
Furthermore, a high ratio of Treg over Th2 cells resulted in a significantly
shortened disease-free survival (p = 0.025). These observations suggest that Treg
may exert inhibitory effects on anti-tumour immune responses mediated through Th2
cells and that Th2 cells may be more important for effective anti-tumour immunity
than anticipated.

Copyright 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 18924115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;148(3):251-60. doi: 10.1159/000161585. Epub 2008
Oct 10.

Safety and immunogenicity of a cluster specific immunotherapy in children with
bronchial asthma and mite allergy.

Schubert R(1), Eickmeier O, Garn H, Baer PC, Mueller T, Schulze J, Rose MA,
Rosewich M, Renz H, Zielen S.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Pulmonology and Allergology, Department of Internal Medicine III,
J.W. Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. ralf.schubert@kgu.de

BACKGROUND: Cluster specific immunotherapy (SIT) is a modern form of allergen
immunotherapy allowing safe administration of high allergen doses in a short time
interval compared to classic SIT. In the current study, we investigated the
safety profile and immunological effect of cluster SIT in children with allergic 
asthma due to house dust mite allergy.
METHODS: A total of 34 children (6-18 years) with allergic asthma were assigned
to cluster (n = 22) or classic SIT (n = 12). To achieve a maintenance dose of
allergen extract, cluster patients received 14 injections of house dust mite
allergen within 6 weeks, whereas the classic SIT group received 14 injections
within 14 weeks. Safety was monitored by recording adverse events. Immunogenicity
was measured by specific IgG(Mite) and IgG4(Mite), by antibody-blocking
properties on basophil activation, and by the T cell subset transcription factors
Foxp3, T-bet, and GATA-3.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in local and systemic side effects
between the two groups. In the cluster group, serum levels of specific IgG(Mite) 
(p < 0.001) and specific IgG4(Mite) (p < 0.001) significantly increased after 8
weeks, while it took 12 weeks in the classic SIT group. These data were confirmed
by blocking CD63 expression as well as release of cysteinyl leukotrienes after in
vitro basophil stimulation. No differences in transcription factor expression
were found in the two groups.
CONCLUSION: Cluster SIT is safe in children. Additionally, our data demonstrated 
an even more rapid induction of specific immune tolerance. Cluster SIT is an
attractive alternative to conventional up-dosing schedules with fewer
consultations for the patients.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18849616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;148(3):239-50. doi: 10.1159/000161584. Epub 2008
Oct 10.

Molecular events in human T cells treated with diesel exhaust particles or
formaldehyde that underlie their diminished interferon-gamma and interleukin-10
production.

Sasaki Y(1), Ohtani T, Ito Y, Mizuashi M, Nakagawa S, Furukawa T, Horii A, Aiba
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan.

BACKGROUND: A series of epidemiological and experimental studies have suggested
that diesel exhaust particles (DEP) and formaldehyde (FA) may help trigger T
helper type 2 (Th2)-mediated allergic responses.
METHODS: To identify the molecular events by which DEP and FA induce a Th2-skewed
immune response, we stimulated T cells from healthy subjects with
anti-CD3/anti-CD28 monoclonal antibodies and examined the effect of pretreatment 
with DEP or FA on mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and nuclear factor
(NF)-kappaB by Western blotting and colorimetric NF-kappaB assays. We also
examined the mRNA expression profiles of the T cells by microarray and real-time 
PCR analyses.
RESULTS: FA selectively suppressed interferon (IFN)-gamma and interleukin-10 mRNA
expression and protein production in stimulated T cells, as we previously
reported with DEP. In the present study, we found that both DEP and FA suppressed
NF-kappaB signaling and activated MAPKs. Both also significantly suppressed the
mRNA expression of T-bet, Txk and c-Maf. Microarrays revealed significant
augmentation of the expression of 2 FoxO3a-dependent genes, namely
glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper and growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible 
gene 45 alpha (Gadd45a), which are known to modulate T cell immune responses.
Treatment with N-acetylcysteine reversed the augmented Gadd45a mRNA response and 
caused the suppressed IFN-gamma mRNA response to recover.
CONCLUSIONS: DEP and FA have similar transcriptional and nontranscriptional
effects on T cell signaling that together promote a Th2-skewed immune response.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18849615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Blood. 2009 Mar 12;113(11):2470-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-05-157073. Epub 2008
Oct 7.

The Axl/Gas6 pathway is required for optimal cytokine signaling during human
natural killer cell development.

Park IK(1), Giovenzana C, Hughes TL, Yu J, Trotta R, Caligiuri MA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research
Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Interleukin-15 (IL-15) is essential for natural killer (NK) cell differentiation.
In this study, we assessed whether the receptor tyrosine kinase Axl and its
ligand, Gas6, are involved in IL-15-mediated human NK differentiation from
CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs). Blocking the Axl-Gas6 interaction 
with a soluble Axl fusion protein (Axl-Fc) or the vitamin K inhibitor warfarin
significantly diminished the absolute number and percentage of CD3(-)CD56(+) NK
cells derived from human CD34(+) HPCs cultured in the presence of IL-15, probably
resulting in part from reduced phosphorylation of STAT5. In addition,
CD3(-)CD56(+) NK cells derived from culture of CD34(+) HPCs with IL-15 and Axl-Fc
had a significantly diminished capacity to express interferon-gamma or its master
regulator, T-BET. Culture of CD34(+) HPCs in the presence of c-Kit ligand and
Axl-Fc resulted in a significant decrease in the frequency of NK precursor cells 
responding to IL-15, probably the result of reduced c-Kit phosphorylation.
Collectively, our data suggest that the Axl/Gas6 pathway contributes to normal
human NK-cell development, at least in part via its regulatory effects on both
the IL-15 and c-Kit signaling pathways in CD34(+) HPCs, and to functional NK-cell
maturation via an effect on the master regulatory transcription factor T-BET.

PMCID: PMC2656272
PMID: 18840707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2008 Oct;33(5):465-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2710.2008.00961.x.

What do we know about the genetics of aspirin intolerance?

Palikhe NS(1), Kim SH, Park HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy & Rheumatology, Ajou University School of Medicine,
Suwon, Korea.

Although acetylsalicylic acid is prescribed for a broad range of diseases, it can
induce a wide array of clinically recognized hypersensitivity reactions,
including aspirin-intolerant asthma (AIA) with rhinitis and aspirin-intolerant
urticaria (AIU) with anaphylaxis. Altered eicosanoid metabolism is the generally 
accepted mechanism of aspirin intolerance; the overproduction of cysteinyl
leucotrienes has been suggested to play a causative role in both AIA and AIU.
Genetic markers suggested for AIA include HLA-DPBI*0301, leucotriene C4 synthase 
(LTC4S), ALOX5, CYSLT, PGE2, TBXA2R and TBX21. Similarly, HLA-DB1*0609, ALOX5,
FCER1A and HNMT have been identified as possible genetic markers for AIU. An
additional low-risk genetic marker for AIA is MS4A2, which encodes the beta-chain
of FCER1. Other single and sets of two or more interacting genetic markers are
currently being investigated. Analyses of the genetic backgrounds of patients
with AIA and AIU will promote the development of early diagnostic and therapeutic
interventions, which may reduce the incidence of AIA and AIU.

PMID: 18834360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Am J Nephrol. 2009;29(4):283-91. doi: 10.1159/000159275. Epub 2008 Sep 29.

Endogenous hepatocyte growth factor attenuates inflammatory response in
glycerol-induced acute kidney injury.

Homsi E(1), Janino P, Amano M, Saraiva Camara NO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, School of Medical Sciences,
State University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. ehomsi@aclnet.com.br

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is overexpressed after acute kidney
injury (AKI). The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of endogenous HGF in
the progression of the inflammatory response in glycerol-induced AKI (Gly-AKI) in
rats.
METHODS: Renal and systemic HGF expressions were evaluated during the development
of Gly-AKI. Subsequently, the blockade of endogenous HGF was analyzed in rats
treated with anti-HGF antibody concomitant to glycerol injection. Apoptosis, cell
infiltration and chemokine and cytokine profiles were investigated.
RESULTS: We detected an early peak of renal and plasma HGF protein expressions 3 
h after glycerol injection. The pharmacological blockade of the endogenous HGF
exacerbated the renal impairment, the tubular apoptosis, the renal expression of 
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 and the macrophage, CD43+, CD4+ and CD8+ T
lymphocytes renal infiltration. The analysis of mRNA expressions of Th1 (t-bet,
TNF-alpha, IL-1beta) and Th2 (gata-3, IL-4, IL-10) cytokines showed a
Th1-polarized response in Gly-AKI rats that was aggravated with the anti-HGF
treatment.
CONCLUSION: Endogenous HGF attenuates the renal inflammatory response, leukocyte 
infiltration and Th1 polarization after glycerol injection. The control of
cellular immune response may partly explain the protective effect of endogenous
HGF in the development of Gly-AKI.

PMID: 18824844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2464-74. doi: 10.1002/eji.200737952.

T-bet expression by dendritic cells is required for the repolarization of
allergic airway inflammation.

Heckman KL(1), Radhakrishnan S, Peikert T, Iijima K, McGregor HC, Bell MP, Kita
H, Pease LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

By cross-linking B7-DC on dendritic cells (DC) the human IgM antibody (B7-DC XAb)
shifts polarized immune responses from Th2 to Th1 in an antigen-specific manner. 
The molecular determinants governing the ability of DC to reprogram the polarity 
of T cell recall responses are not yet known. In addition to the expected role of
T-bet expressed by T cells in regulating Th1 responses, we find using in vitro
assays and an established in vivo model of allergic airway inflammation that
T-bet expression by DC is also required for the polarity shift promoted by B7-DC 
XAb. T-bet expression by both T cells and DC is critically important for B7-DC
XAb-induced down-regulation of IL-4, up-regulation of IFN-gamma and suppression
of allergic airway inflammation. Moreover, retroviral reconstitution of T-bet
expression in T-bet-deficient DC rescued their ability to modulate both naive and
memory T-cell responses from Th2 to Th1. Our observations further our
understanding of the critical mediators controlling the ability of DC to modify
the responses of previously activated T cells and reveal the interesting use of
the same transcription factor to regulate the inductive phenotype of DC and the
inducible phenotype of T cells.

PMCID: PMC3730252
PMID: 18819071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Chem Immunol Allergy. 2008;94:83-92. doi: 10.1159/000154869.

T-cell regulation in asthmatic diseases.

Finotto S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Lung Immunology, First Medical Clinic,
Mainz, Germany. finotto@mail.uni-mainz.de

Effector and regulatory T cells (Tregs) play a fundamental role in the airways in
allergic asthma. Here, the role of T cells in the immunopathogenesis of human
asthma as well as in animal models of allergic airway inflammation is reviewed.
Recent data have shown that Th2 and Th17 effector T cells augment experimental
airway inflammation, while Tregs have an important anti-inflammatory function.
The local induction of Th2 cells is critically dependent on the balance between
the transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3, while Th17 and Tregs require the
transcription factors ROR-gammat and Foxp3, respectively. Cytokine signaling
controls the development and activation of all the above T-cell subsets. For
instance, local blockade of the membrane-bound interleukin (IL)-6R results in
induction of lung CD4+CD25+ Foxp3+Tregs producing TGF-Beta and IL-10. In humans, 
it has been suggested that asthmatic patients have increased Th2 but decreased
Tregs, however the role of Th17 cells in allergic asthma remains to be
elucidated. However, the currently available data suggest that allergic asthma is
a multifaceted disease that is actively controlled by T lymphocytes. A better
understanding of effector and Treg activation will most likely lead to novel
treatment strategies in the near future.

PMID: 18802339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Immunol. 2008 Sep 15;181(6):3906-14.

CD8+ Th17 mediate costimulation blockade-resistant allograft rejection in
T-bet-deficient mice.

Burrell BE(1), Csencsits K, Lu G, Grabauskiene S, Bishop DK.

Author information: 
(1)Section of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Michigan
School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

While studying Th responses induced by cardiac transplantation, we observed that 
mice deficient in the Th1 transcription factor T-bet (T-bet(-/-)) mount both Th1 
and Th17 responses, whereas wild-type recipients mount only Th1 responses. Cells 
producing both IFN-gamma and IL-17 were readily detectable within the rejecting
graft of T-bet(-/-) recipients, but were absent from the spleen, indicating that 
the in vivo microenvironment influences Th function. In addition, disrupting
CD40-CD40L costimulatory interactions was highly effective at prolonging
allograft survival in WT mice, but ineffective in T-bet(-/-) recipients. In this 
study, we report that CD8(+) Th17 mediate costimulation blockade-resistant
rejection in T-bet(-/-) allograft recipients. Depleting CD8(+) cells or
neutralizing IL-17 or the Th17-inducing cytokine IL-6 ablated the Th17 response
and reversed costimulation blockade-resistant graft rejection. Neutralizing IL-4 
in IFN-gamma(-/-) allograft recipients did not induce Th17, suggesting that
T-bet, rather than IL-4 and IFN-gamma (known inhibitors of Th17), plays a
critical role in negatively regulating Th17 in the transplant setting.

PMCID: PMC2709752
PMID: 18768845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2008 Sep;1(5):649-60. doi: 10.1586/17512433.1.5.649.

Genetic influences on response to asthma pharmacotherapy.

Lima JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pediatric Clinical Pharmacology, Pharmacogenetics Center, Nemours
Children's Clinic, 807 Children's Way, Jacksonville, FL 32207, USA.
jlima@nemours.org.

Asthma is a complex inflammatory disease that affects 300 million people
worldwide. Safe and effective drugs control the symptoms but heterogeneity in
response is large and attributable, in part, to genetic variation. Polymorphisms 
in several genes influence response to asthma drugs. The genotype of the ADRB2
Gly16Arg single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) associates with asthma worsening
during continuous therapy with ß-agonists. SNPs in four genes influence response 
to inhaled corticosteroids: CRHR1, ACP, TBX21 and FCER2. Polymorphisms in
leukotriene pathway and transporter genes influence response to zileuton and the 
leukotriene receptor antagonists, including ALOX5, LTA4H, LTC4S, ABCC1 and
SLCO2B1. Known sequence variants explain a small fraction of response
heterogeneity to asthma drugs. More studies are required to formulate a genetic
signature that will lead to the personalization of asthma treatment.

PMID: 24422736  [PubMed]


255. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2008 Sep;53(12 Suppl):1525-32.

[Transcriptional regulation of selectin ligand expression in human leukocytes].

[Article in Japanese]

Kannagi R(1), Chen GY, Sakuma K, Ohmori K.

Author information: 
(1)rkannagi@aichi-cc.jp

PMID: 21089360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Gen Virol. 2008 Sep;89(Pt 9):2262-8. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.2008/001305-0.

A 3'-untranslated region polymorphism in the TBX21 gene encoding T-bet is a risk 
factor for genital herpes simplex virus type 2 infection in humans.

Svensson A(1), Bergin AM, Löwhagen GB, Tunbäck P, Bellner L, Padyukov L, Eriksson
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Inflammation Research, University of
Gothenburg, and Department of Dermatovenerology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
Gothenburg, Sweden.

It was recently shown that the transcription factor T-bet is crucial for adequate
innate and acquired immune responses to genital herpes simplex virus type 2
(HSV-2) infection in mice. To test the possible genetic influence of variations
in the TBX21 gene encoding T-bet on susceptibility to infection, this study
evaluated the frequencies of five different single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in the human TBX21 gene in 159 HSV-2-infected individuals and compared
them with those in 186 healthy HSV-2-seronegative controls. The data showed that 
one variation (rs17244587) in the 3'-untranslated region of TBX21 was strongly
associated with the incidence of genital HSV-2 infection. The frequency of the A 
allele at this position was 0.19 in the group of HSV-2-infected individuals
compared with 0.05 in the group of uninfected controls (P=9.3x10(-8)).
Furthermore, a homozygous AA genotype was found only among HSV-2-infected
individuals and not in seronegative controls. These results indicate that the
host genetic background may affect susceptibility to HSV-2 infection in humans,
with TBX21 as a strong candidate gene.

PMID: 18753235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Immunol. 2008 Aug 15;181(4):2338-47.

Blimp-1 attenuates Th1 differentiation by repression of ifng, tbx21, and bcl6
gene expression.

Cimmino L(1), Martins GA, Liao J, Magnusdottir E, Grunig G, Perez RK, Calame KL.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Human Nutrition, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

T cell-specific deletion of Blimp-1 causes abnormal T cell homeostasis and
function, leading to spontaneous, fatal colitis in mice. Herein we explore the
role of Blimp-1 in Th1/Th2 differentiation. Blimp-1 mRNA and protein are more
highly expressed in Th2 cells compared with Th1 cells, and Blimp-1 attenuates
IFN-gamma production in CD4 cells activated under nonpolarizing conditions.
Although Blimp-1-deficient T cells differentiate normally to Th2 cytokines in
vitro, Blimp-1 is required in vivo for normal Th2 humoral responses to NP-KLH
(4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenylacetyl/keyhole lymphocyte hemocyanin) immunization. Lack 
of Blimp-1 in CD4 T cells causes increased IFN-gamma, T-bet, and Bcl-6 mRNA. By
chromatin immunoprecipitation we show that Blimp-1 binds directly to a distal
regulatory region in the ifng gene and at multiple sites in tbx21 and bcl6 genes.
Our data provide evidence that Blimp-1 functions in Th2 cells to reinforce Th2
differentiation by repressing critical Th1 genes.

PMID: 18684923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Shock. 2009 Feb;31(2):157-63. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31817fbf4d.

Differential immunological phenotypes are exhibited after scald and flame burns.

Tschöp J(1), Martignoni A, Reid MD, Adediran SG, Gardner J, Noel GJ, Ogle CK,
Neely AN, Caldwell CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Shriners Hospital for Children, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0558, USA.

A dysfunctional immune system is known to be part of the pathophysiology after
burn trauma. However, reports that support this have used a variety of methods,
with numerous variables, to induce thermal injury. We hypothesized that, all
other parameters being equal, an injury infliction by a scald would yield
different immunological responses than one inflicted by a flame. Here, we
demonstrated that both burn methods produced a full-thickness burn, yet there was
more of an increase in subdermal temperature, hematocrit, mortality, and serum
IL-6 concentrations associated with the scald burn. On postinjury day 1, the
scald-burned mice showed diminished lymphocyte numbers, interferon gamma
production, and lymphocyte T-bet expression as compared with sham- and
flame-burned mice. On postburn day 8, spleens from both sets of thermally injured
animals showed an increase in proinflammatory myeloid cells as compared with
sham-burned mice. Furthermore, the T-cell numbers, T-bet expression, and
phenotype were changed such that interferon gamma production was higher in
scald-burned mice than in sham- and flame-burned mice. Altogether, the data show 
that differential immunological phenotypes were observed depending on the thermal
injury method used.

PMCID: PMC2674561
PMID: 18650781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Immunol. 2008 Aug 1;181(3):2211-9.

Excessive production of IFN-gamma in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
and its contribution to induction of B lymphocyte stimulator/B cell-activating
factor/TNF ligand superfamily-13B.

Harigai M(1), Kawamoto M, Hara M, Kubota T, Kamatani N, Miyasaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacovigilance, Tokyo Medical and Dental University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. mharigai.mpha@tmd.ac.jp

Expression and immunological significance of IFN-gamma, a pivotal cytokine in
murine lupus, have not been clearly demonstrated in human systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). In the present study we investigated the expression of
IFN-gamma in peripheral blood T cells from patients with SLE and its role in the 
production of the soluble B lymphocyte stimulator (sBLyS). Peripheral blood T
cells from patients with SLE expressed significantly larger amounts of IFN-gamma 
in response to stimulation with anti-CD3 mAb plus anti-CD28 mAb than those from
normal controls as shown by three analytical methods, including ELISA, flow
cytometry, and quantitative RT-PCR. The ratio of IFN-gamma-producing T cells to
effector memory T cells in CD3(+)CD4(+) and CD3(+)CD8(+) populations in patients 
with SLE was significantly higher than that of normal controls. The T-box
expressed in T cells (T-bet) mRNA/GATA-binding protein-3 (GATA-3) mRNA ratio was 
significantly higher in patients with SLE than in normal controls. T cell culture
supernatants from patients with SLE contained significantly higher sBLyS-inducing
activity than normal controls; this was almost completely inhibited by the
addition of anti-human IFN-gamma mAb. Percentages of BLyS-expressing peripheral
blood monocytes in patients with SLE were significantly higher than those of
normal controls. Monocytes from patients with SLE produced significantly larger
amounts of sBLyS in response to IFN-gamma than those from normal controls. Taken 
together, these data strongly indicate that the overexpression of IFN-gamma in
peripheral blood T cells contributes to the immunopathogenesis of SLE via the
induction of sBLyS by monocytes/macrophages, which would promote B cell
activation and maturation.

PMID: 18641361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Jul 18;4(7):e1000106. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000106.

NK cell-like behavior of Valpha14i NK T cells during MCMV infection.

Wesley JD(1), Tessmer MS, Chaukos D, Brossay L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology and Graduate Program in
Pathobiology, Division of Biology and Medicine, Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island, United States of America.

Immunity to the murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) is critically dependent on the
innate response for initial containment of viral replication, resolution of
active infection, and proper induction of the adaptive phase of the anti-viral
response. In contrast to NK cells, the Valpha14 invariant natural killer T cell
response to MCMV has not been examined. We found that Valpha14i NK T cells become
activated and produce significant levels of IFN-gamma, but do not proliferate or 
produce IL-4 following MCMV infection. In vivo treatment with an anti-CD1d mAb
and adoptive transfer of Valpha14i NK T cells into MCMV-infected CD1d(-/-) mice
demonstrate that CD1d is dispensable for Valpha14i NK T cell activation. In
contrast, both IFN-alpha/beta and IL-12 are required for optimal activation.
Valpha14i NK T cell-derived IFN-gamma is partially dependent on IFN-alpha/beta
but highly dependent on IL-12. Valpha14i NK T cells contribute to the immune
response to MCMV and amplify NK cell-derived IFN-gamma. Importantly, mortality is
increased in CD1d(-/-) mice in response to high dose MCMV infection when compared
to heterozygote littermate controls. Collectively, these findings illustrate the 
plasticity of Valpha14i NK T cells that act as effector T cells during bacterial 
infection, but have NK cell-like behavior during the innate immune response to
MCMV infection.

PMCID: PMC2442879
PMID: 18636102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Science. 2008 Jul 18;321(5887):408-11. doi: 10.1126/science.1159806.

Anomalous type 17 response to viral infection by CD8+ T cells lacking T-bet and
eomesodermin.

Intlekofer AM(1), Banerjee A, Takemoto N, Gordon SM, Dejong CS, Shin H, Hunter
CA, Wherry EJ, Lindsten T, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

When intracellular pathogens invade mammalian hosts, naïve CD8+ T cells
differentiate into cytotoxic killers, which lyse infected target cells and
secrete cytokines that activate intracellular microbicides. We show that CD8+ T
cells deficient in the transcription factors T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes) fail 
to differentiate into functional killers required for defense against lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus. Instead, virus-specific CD8+ T cells lacking both T-bet
and Eomes differentiate into an interleukin-17-secreting lineage, reminiscent of 
the helper T cell fate that has been implicated in autoimmunity and extracellular
microbial defense. Upon viral infection, mice with T cells lacking both T-bet and
Eomes develop a CD8+ T cell-dependent, progressive inflammatory and wasting
syndrome characterized by multi-organ infiltration of neutrophils. T-bet and
Eomes, thus, ensure that CD8+ T cells adopt an appropriate course of
intracellular rather than extracellular destruction.

PMCID: PMC2807624
PMID: 18635804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Surg Res. 2009 Mar;152(1):118-27. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2008.01.027. Epub 2008 Mar
13.

Preoperative GATA3 mRNA expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells is
up-regulated in patients with postoperative infection following hepatobiliary
pancreatic surgery.

Kawamoto J(1), Kimura F, Yoshitomi H, Shimizu H, Yoshidome H, Ohtsuka M, Kato A, 
Nozawa S, Furukawa K, Mitsuhashi N, Takeuchi D, Miyazaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Chiba University Graduate School of Medicine,
Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Aggressive hepatobiliary pancreatic surgery has been associated with 
high complication rates. Correlations of Th1/Th2 balance and toll-like receptor
(TLR) 2/4 expression with postoperative infection following surgery were
prospectively evaluated.
METHODS: Plasma concentrations of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-10, soluble lymphocyte
activation gene (sLAG)-3, and soluble CD30 were determined by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay, and expression levels of T-bet, GATA-3, TLR2, and TLR4 mRNA 
in peripheral blood mononuclear cells were assayed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction perioperatively in 56 consecutive
patients who underwent hepatobiliary pancreatic surgery.
RESULTS: Of the 56 patients, 30 patients had postoperative infection.
Postoperative plasma levels of IL-6 and IL-10 were significantly higher in
patients with postoperative infection than in those without infection (P < 0.05).
Plasma soluble CD30 level and GATA-3 mRNA expression level were significantly
higher preoperatively, and remained higher by postoperative d 7 in patients with 
postoperative infection (P < 0.05). Soluble lymphocyte activation gene levels
were not significantly different between the two groups. T-bet mRNA expression
level was significantly higher on postoperative d 3, 7, and 14 in patients with
postoperative infection (P < 0.05). Preoperative expression levels of GATA-3 mRNA
correlated significantly with those of TLR2 and TLR4 mRNA (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that in patients with postoperative infection,
Th1/Th2 balance shifts toward Th2 dominance preoperatively.

PMID: 18619618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2008 Aug;15(8):1165-70. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00084-08. Epub
2008 Jun 25.

Differential expression of interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-4 delta 2 mRNA, but not
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta), TGF-beta RII, Foxp3, gamma
interferon, T-bet, or GATA-3 mRNA, in patients with fast and slow responses to
antituberculosis treatment.

Djoba Siawaya JF(1), Bapela NB, Ronacher K, Beyers N, van Helden P, Walzl G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, MRC Centre for Molecular and
Cellular Biology, DST and NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical TB Research,
Stellenbosch University, Cape Town 7505, South Africa. joe@sun.ac.za

This study investigated interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-4 delta 2, transforming growth
factor beta (TGF-beta), TGF-beta RII, Foxp3, GATA-3, T-bet, and gamma interferon 
(IFN-gamma) transcription in peripheral blood samples of adult pulmonary
tuberculosis patients prior to and after 1 week of therapy. Twenty patients with 
positive results for sputum culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis were enrolled 
and treated with directly observed short-course antituberculosis chemotherapy.
Early treatment response was assessed. At the end of the intensive phase of
treatment (month 2), 12 patients remained sputum culture positive (slow
responders) and 8 converted to a negative culture (fast responders). Only the
expression levels of IL-4 (4-fold decrease) and IL-4 delta 2 (32-fold increase)
changed significantly during the first week of therapy in the 20 patients. No
baseline differences were present between the responder groups, but fast
responders had significantly higher IL-4 transcripts than slow responders at week
1. Fast responders showed a 19-fold upregulation and slow responders a 47-fold
upregulation of IL-4 delta 2 at week 1. Only slow responders also showed a
significant decrease in IL-4 expression at week 1. There were no significant
differences in expression of TGF-beta, TGF-beta RII, Foxp3, IFN-gamma, and GATA-3
between the groups. These data show that differential IL-4-related gene
expression in the early stage of antituberculosis treatment accompanies
differential treatment responses and may hold promise as a marker for treatment
effect.

PMCID: PMC2519297
PMID: 18579694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2008;146 Suppl 1:33-5. doi: 10.1159/000126058. Epub
2008 May 27.

Downregulation of IL-13 gene transcription by T-bet in human T cells.

Suzuki K(1), Kaminuma O, Hiroi T, Kitamura F, Miyatake S, Takaiwa F, Tatsumi H,
Nemoto S, Kitamura N, Mori A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Downregulation of a Th2 cytokine, IL-4, by a Th1-specific
transcription factor, T-bet, has been demonstrated. However, the regulatory role 
of T-bet in another Th2 cytokine, IL-13, is not fully delineated.
METHODS: IL-13 mRNA expression in Jurkat cells was examined by quantitative
RT-PCR, while the transcriptional activity of 5'-flanking region in the IL-13
gene encompassing -1077 to +49 was investigated by fluorescence-based promoter
reporter assay. The effect of T-bet was investigated by transfection of the cells
with the T-bet expression vector.
RESULTS: Stimulation with phorbol ester plus Ca2+ ionophore clearly induced IL-13
gene transcription in Jurkat cells. Ectopically expressed T-bet significantly
suppressed the inducible mRNA expression and promoter activity of IL-13.
CONCLUSION: IL-13 expression was downregulated by T-bet at the level of gene
transcription, independently of the modulation of Th1/Th2 balance. T-bet is the
potential key factor in the development of Th1/Th2-related diseases.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18504404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Clin Immunol. 2008 Sep;128(3):392-9. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2008.04.009. Epub 2008
Jun 20.

CC-4047 promotes Th1 cell differentiation and reprograms polarized human Th2
cells by enhancing transcription factor T-bet.

Xu W(1), Celeridad M, Sankar S, Webb DR, Bennett BL.

Author information: 
(1)Celgene Corporation, 4550 Towne Centre Court, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.
wxu@celgene.com

The IMiDs immunomodulatory drugs are an expanding family of compounds under
investigation in a broad range of diseases because they exhibit immunomodulatory 
and anti-tumorigenic properties. Although the molecular targets remain
unidentified, the broad activity of select IMiDs immunomodulatory drugs on cell
signaling pathways and transcription regulation has been partly described. One
characteristic of these compounds is their ability to act as a co-stimulus of TCR
ligation leading to increased IL-2, TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma expression indicative
of a Th1 phenotype. Because clinical evidence for this response has been observed
in thalidomide and lenalidomide treated patients, we investigated the effect of
CC-4047 on T cell activation and differentiation at the molecular level. We used 
primary human CD4(+) T cells as a model and found that CC-4047 enhances the
expression of transcription factor T-bet in both naive and pre-polarized Th2
cells. This modulation leads to upregulation of Th1 markers and cytokine
production. By increasing the expression of T-bet, CC-4047 promotes the
differentiation of naive T-cells to Th1 as well as effectively reverting Th2
cells into Th1-like effector cells in vitro. These findings elucidate a novel
mechanism of action of CC-4047 on T cell differentiation, suggesting that certain
IMiDs immunomodulatory drugs may have expanded clinical application in treating
both allergic diseases and certain T cell lymphomas where a predominant Th2
phenotype is displayed.

PMID: 18565795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Stem Cells. 2008 Aug;26(8):2114-23. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0370. Epub 2008
Jun 5.

Osteopontin promotes the development of natural killer cells from hematopoietic
stem cells.

Chung JW(1), Kim MS, Piao ZH, Jeong M, Yoon SR, Shin N, Kim SY, Hwang ES, Yang Y,
Lee YH, Kim YS, Choi I.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Yusong, Taejon 305-333, Republic of Korea.

The detailed mechanisms driving the development of natural killer (NK) cells from
hematopoietic stem cells remain to be clearly elucidated. Here, we show that
osteopontin (OPN) is a key factor for NK development. OPN-deficient mice
evidenced severe impairments of NK development in bone marrow (BM) and spleen in 
which the NK populations that express CD122 and NK cell receptors were reduced.
However, the absence of intrinsic OPN expression did not affect NK development,
whereas the absence of OPN in the microenvironment caused a significant reduction
in NK population. The expression of OPN was induced by interleukin (IL)-15 in BM 
stromal cells, and the defect in NK differentiation in IL-15(-/-) hematopoietic
precursor cells (HPC) was recovered by addition of recombinant OPN, suggesting
that the microenvironmental OPN may be a key factor in IL-15-mediated NK
differentiation. In addition, OPN-driven NK maturation was reduced in
T-bet-deficient HPC, suggesting that T-bet is required for OPN-mediated NK
development. Collectively, these results show that paracrine OPN signaling drives
NK-lineage commitment, thus ultimately promoting NK cell development. Disclosure 
of potential conflicts of interest is found at the end of this article.

PMID: 18535152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Immunol. 2008 Jun 15;180(12):8004-10.

T-bet plays a key role in NK-mediated control of melanoma metastatic disease.

Werneck MB(1), Lugo-Villarino G, Hwang ES, Cantor H, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Antitumor responses depend on type 1 immunity, which is severely impaired in mice
deficient for the T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) transcription factor. Both
T-bet-deficient (T-bet(-/-)) NK and CTL show defective function, which can be
overcome by strong stimuli due to the expression of eomesodermin, another member 
of the T-box family. The effective response from T-bet(-/-) mice to viral
infection and tumor initiation corroborates with these findings. However,
T-bet(-/-) animals fail to control cancer metastasis and are, therefore, highly
susceptible to tumor spread. The mechanism of T-bet-dependent resistance to
metastatic disease is not known. In this study, we show that T-bet plays a role
in inhibiting cancer metastasis by regulating the longevity and function of NK
cells. Our data demonstrate that the absence of a proper innate immune response
driven by NK cells in T-bet(-/-) mice precludes the initiation of a potent
adaptive response to tumors. Adoptive transfer of wild-type activated NK cells
protects T-bet(-/-) animals after melanoma challenge showing that reconstitution 
of the NK compartment in these mice is sufficient to mediate a significant
reduction in tumor burden. Transfer of T-bet(-/-) A-NK cells fails to do so, due 
to their reduced in vivo survival, inefficient lysis of cancer cells, and poor
IFN-gamma production. Taken together, these results show for the first time an
irreplaceable role for T-bet in the NK-mediated cross-talk between innate and
adaptive immune responses to metastatic disease.

PMCID: PMC3709580
PMID: 18523263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Aug 15;178(4):379-88. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200711-1648OC. Epub 2008 May 29.

Interferon-gamma regulates idiopathic pneumonia syndrome, a Th17+CD4+
T-cell-mediated graft-versus-host disease.

Mauermann N(1), Burian J, von Garnier C, Dirnhofer S, Germano D, Schuett C, Tamm 
M, Bingisser R, Eriksson U, Hunziker L.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Research and Internal Medicine, Experimental Critical Care
Medicine, University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.

RATIONALE: Pulmonary complications of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
include infections and graft-versus-host diseases, such as idiopathic pneumonia
syndrome (IPS). Conflicting data exist regarding the role of the interferon
(IFN)-gamma-producing Th1 CD4(+) T-cell subset and IL-17A in IPS.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the role of IFN-gamma and IL-17A in the establishment of
pulmonary graft-versus-host disease.
METHODS: A semiallogeneic murine model based on C57BL/6 x BALB/c as recipients
with transplantation of BALB/c RAG2(-/-) bone marrow and transfer of different
genetic knockout T cells (T-bet(-/-), IFN-gamma(-/-), IFN-gammaR(-/-)) on a
BALB/c background. Lung tissue was examined for parenchymal changes and
infiltrating cells by histology and fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: After transfer of semiallogeneic bone marrow
together with donor CD4(+) T cells lacking IFN-gamma or T-bet-a T-box
transcription factor controlling Th1 commitment-we found severe inflammation in
the lungs, but no enhancement in other organs. In contrast, wild-type donor
CD4(+) T cells mediated minimal inflammation only, and donor CD8(+) T cells were 
not required for IPS development. Mechanistically, the absence of IFN-gamma or
IFN-gamma signaling in pulmonary parenchymal cells promoted expansion of
IL-17A-producing CD4(+) T cells and local IL-17A release. In vivo depletion of
IL-17A reduced disease severity.
CONCLUSIONS: One mechanism of IFN-gamma protection against IPS is negative
regulation of the expansion of pathogenic IL-17A-producing CD4(+) T cells through
interaction with the IFN-gamma receptor on the pulmonary parenchymal cell
population.

PMID: 18511701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Respiration. 2008;76(2):205-15. doi: 10.1159/000135606. Epub 2008 May 28.

Mechanisms altering airway smooth muscle cell Ca+ homeostasis in two asthma
models.

Kellner J(1), Tantzscher J, Oelmez H, Edelmann M, Fischer R, Huber RM, Bergner A.

Author information: 
(1)Pneumology, Medizinische Klinik Innenstadt, Ludwig Maximilian University,
Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Asthma is characterized by airway remodeling, altered mucus
production and airway smooth muscle cell (ASMC) contraction causing extensive
airway narrowing. In particular, alterations of ASMC contractility seem to be of 
crucial importance. The elevation of the cytoplasmic Ca(2+) concentration is a
key event leading to ASMC contraction and changes in the agonist-induced Ca(2+)
increase in ASMC have been reported in asthma.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate mechanisms underlying these
changes.
METHODS: Murine tracheal smooth muscle cells (MTSMC) from T-bet KO mice and human
bronchial smooth muscle cells (HBSMC) incubated with IL-13 and IL-4 served as
asthma models. Acetylcholine-induced changes in the cytoplasmic Ca(2+)
concentration were recorded using fluorescence microscopy and the expression of
Ca(2+) homeostasis regulating proteins was investigated with Western blot
analysis.
RESULTS: Acetylcholine-induced Ca(2+) transients were elevated in both asthma
models. This correlated with an increased Ca(2+) content of the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (SR). In MTSMC from T-bet KO mice, the expression of the SR Ca(2+)
buffers calreticulin and calsequestrin was higher compared to wild-type mice. In 
HBSMC incubated with IL-13 or IL-4, the expression of ryanodine receptors,
inositol-3-phosphate receptors and sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)
ATPases 2 was increased compared to HBSMC without incubation with interleukins.
The enlarged acetylcholine-induced Ca(2+) transients could be reversed by
blocking inositol-3-phosphate receptors.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that in the murine asthma model the SR Ca(2+) buffer
capacity is increased, while in the human asthma model the expression of SR
Ca(2+) channels is altered. The investigation of the Ca(2+) homeostasis of ASMC
has the potential to provide new therapeutical options in asthma.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18506104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Psychiatry. 2008 Aug;13(8):800-12. doi: 10.1038/mp.2008.59. Epub 2008 May 27.

Polymorphisms in inflammation-related genes are associated with susceptibility to
major depression and antidepressant response.

Wong ML(1), Dong C, Maestre-Mesa J, Licinio J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Center on Pharmacogenomics, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

There are clinical parallels between the nature and course of depressive symptoms
in major depressive disorder (MDD) and those of inflammatory disorders. However, 
the characterization of a possible immune system dysregulation in MDD has been
challenging. Emerging data support the role of T-cell dysfunction. Here we report
the association of MDD and antidepressant response to genes important in the
modulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and immune functions in
Mexican Americans with major depression. Specifically, single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in two genes critical for T-cell function are associated
with susceptibility to MDD: PSMB4 (proteasome beta4 subunit), important for
antigen processing, and TBX21 (T bet), critical for differentiation. Our analyses
revealed a significant combined allele dose-effect: individuals who had one, two 
and three risk alleles were 2.3, 3.2 and 9.8 times more likely to have the
diagnosis of MDD, respectively. We found associations of several SNPs and
antidepressant response; those genes support the role of T cell (CD3E, PRKCH,
PSMD9 and STAT3) and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (UCN3) functions in
treatment response. We also describe in MDD increased levels of CXCL10/IP-10,
which decreased in response to antidepressants. This further suggests
predominance of type 1 T-cell activity in MDD. T-cell function variations that we
describe here may account for 47.8% of the attributable risk in Mexican Americans
with moderate MDD. Immune function genes are highly variable; therefore,
different genes might be implicated in distinct population groups.

PMCID: PMC2650233
PMID: 18504423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Immunol. 2008 May 15;180(10):6997-7008.

Development of inflammatory bowel disease in Long-Evans Cinnamon rats based on
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cell dysfunction.

Ishimaru N(1), Yamada A, Kohashi M, Arakaki R, Takahashi T, Izumi K, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Molecular Pathology, Institute of Health Biosciences,
University of Tokushima Graduate School, Kuramotocho, Tokushima, Japan.
ishimaru@dent.tokushima-u.ac.jp

A mutant strain with defective thymic selection of the Long-Evans Cinnamon (LEC) 
rat was found to spontaneously develop inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)-like
colitis. The secretion of Th1-type cytokines including IFN-gamma and IL-2 from T 
cells of mesenteric lymph node cells (MLNs) and lamina propria mononuclear cells,
but not spleen cells, in LEC rats was significantly increased more than that of
the control Long-Evans Agouti rats through up-regulated expression of T-bet and
phosphorylation of STAT-1 leading to NF-kappaB activation. In addition, the
number of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T (Treg) cells of the thymus, MLNs,
and lamina propria mononuclear cells from LEC rats was significantly reduced,
comparing with that of the control rats. Moreover, bone marrow cell transfer from
LEC rats into irradiated control rats revealed significantly reduced
CD25(+)Foxp3(+) Treg cells in thymus, spleen, and MLNs compared with those from
control rats. Indeed, adoptive transfer with T cells of MLNs, not spleen cells,
from LEC rats into SCID mice resulted in the development of inflammatory lesions 
resembling the IBD-like lesions observed in LEC rats. These results indicate that
the dysfunction of the regulatory system controlled by Treg cells may play a
crucial role in the development of IBD-like lesions through up-regulated T-bet,
STAT-1, and NF-kappaB activation of peripheral T cells in LEC rats.

PMID: 18453622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Immunol. 2008 May 15;180(10):6970-6.

Functional Th1 cells are required for surgical adhesion formation in a murine
model.

Tzianabos AO(1), Holsti MA, Zheng XX, Stucchi AF, Kuchroo VK, Strom TB, Glimcher 
LH, Cruikshank WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Channing Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Tissue trauma in the peritoneal and pelvic cavities following surgery or
bacterial infection results in adhesions that are a debilitating cause of
intestinal obstruction, chronic pelvic pain, and infertility in women. We
recently demonstrated that CD4(+) alphabeta T cells are essential for development
of this process. Using a murine model of experimental adhesion formation, we now 
demonstrate that adhesion formation is characterized by the selective recruitment
of Tim-3(+), CCR5(+), CXCR3(+), IFN-gamma(+) cells, indicating the presence of a 
Th1 phenotype. We further demonstrate that adhesion formation is critically
dependent on the function of Th1 cells because mice genetically deficient for
IFN-gamma, T-bet, or treated with Abs to the Th1-selective chemoattractant IL-16 
show significantly less adhesion formation than wild-type mice. In addition,
disrupting the interaction of the Th1-specific regulatory molecule Tim-3, with
its ligand, significantly exacerbates adhesion formation. This enhanced response 
is associated with increases in the level of neutrophil-attracting chemokines KC 
and MIP-2, known to play a role in adhesiogenesis. These data demonstrate that
the CD4(+) T cells orchestrating adhesion formation are of the Th1 phenotype and 
delineate the central role of T-bet, Tim-3, IFN-gamma, and IL-16 in mediating
this pathogenic tissue response.

PMCID: PMC3832137
PMID: 18453619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Immunol. 2008 May 15;180(10):6656-62.

Overlapping and distinct roles of STAT4 and T-bet in the regulation of T cell
differentiation and allergic airway inflammation.

Furuta S(1), Kagami S, Tamachi T, Ikeda K, Fujiwara M, Suto A, Hirose K, Watanabe
N, Saito Y, Iwamoto I, Nakajima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Chiba University Hospital,
Chiba, Japan.

T-bet and STAT4 play critical roles in helper T cell differentiation, especially 
for Th1 cells. However, it is still unknown about the relative importance and
redundancy of T-bet and STAT4 for Th1 differentiation. It is also unknown about
their independent role of T-bet and STAT4 in the regulation of allergic airway
inflammation. In this study, we addressed these issues by comparing
T-bet-deficient (T-bet(-/-)) mice, STAT4(-/-) mice, and T-bet- and
STAT4-double-deficient (T-bet(-/-)STAT4(-/-)) mice on the same genetic
background. Th1 differentiation was severely decreased in T-bet(-/-) mice and
STAT4(-/-) mice as compared with that in wild-type mice, but Th1 differentiation 
was still observed in T-bet(-/-) mice and STAT4(-/-) mice. However, Th1 cells
were hardly detected in T-bet(-/-)STAT4(-/-) mice. In contrast, the maintenance
of Th17 cells was enhanced in T-bet(-/-) mice but was reduced in STAT4(-/-) mice 
and T-bet(-/-)STAT4(-/-) mice. In vivo, Ag-induced eosinophil and neutrophil
recruitment into the airways was enhanced in T-bet(-/-) mice but was attenuated
in STAT4(-/-) mice and T-bet(-/-)STAT4(-/-) mice. Ag-induced IL-17 production in 
the airways was also diminished in STAT4(-/-) mice and T-bet(-/-)STAT4(-/-) mice.
These results indicate that STAT4 not only plays an indispensable role in
T-bet-independent Th1 differentiation but also is involved in the maintenance of 
Th17 cells and the enhancement of allergic airway inflammation.

PMID: 18453585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jun 27;371(2):278-82. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.04.060. Epub 2008 Apr 22.

Isoeleutherin and eleutherinol, naturally occurring selective modulators of Th
cell-mediated immune responses.

Hong JH(1), Yu ES, Han AR, Nam JW, Seo EK, Hwang ES.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-701,
Republic of Korea.

Natural compounds possessing naphthopyran moiety have been attracted by their
anti-bacterial, anti-fungal, and anti-viral activities, as well as anti-tumor
activities. Although chemical structures were critical for the potential
biological activities, the detailed functional mechanisms remained unclear. Here,
we have studied the effects of naphthopyran derivatives (eleutherin,
isoeleutherin, and eleutherinol) on T helper cell-mediated immune responses to
understand the mechanisms of their anti-microbial and anti-tumor activities. The 
study revealed that isoeleutherin, which has 1,4-naphthoquinone ring with
alpha-methyl group, selectively and specifically stimulated IFNgamma production
through the activation of T-bet gene transcription, thus enhancing Th1-mediated
immune responses. However, a natural naphthopyran-4-one, eleutherinol
dramatically inhibited both IFNgamma and IL-2 productions during Th cell
activation by suppressing the gene transcriptions of cytokines. Therefore, we
suggest that the chemical modification and chirality of naphthopyran moiety in
isoeleutherin and eleutherinol may be critical for the selective modulation of T 
helper cell-mediated immune responses.

PMID: 18435915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Genes Immun. 2008 Jun;9(4):302-8. doi: 10.1038/gene.2008.18. Epub 2008 Apr 17.

Onecut transcription factor OC2 is a direct target of T-bet in type-1 T-helper
cells.

Furuno K(1), Ikeda K, Hamano S, Fukuyama K, Sonoda M, Hara T, Sasazuki T,
Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

T-box transcription factor, T-bet, has a central role in the differentiation of
T-helper (Th) progenitor cells to Th1 or Th2 effector cells, partly by regulating
the expression of genes such as interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). However, the direct
target genes, especially those mediating the transcriptional network initiated by
T-bet, are not yet fully understood. By combining chromatin immunoprecipitation
from Th1 cells with human cytosine-phosphate-guanine-island array analysis,
Onecut 2 (OC2), which encodes a member of the ONECUT class of transcriptional
activators, was identified as a direct target gene of T-bet. OC2 is expressed in 
Th1 but not Th2 cells and reporter assays showed that T-bet transactivates OC2
transcription through putative T-bet half-sites locating -451 to -347 of OC2
promoter region. Moreover, we found that OC2 binds and transactivates human T-bet
promoter. These results suggest that not only cell-extrinsic regulation via the
IFN-gamma/STAT1 pathway, but also cell-intrinsic transcriptional positive
feedback loop between T-bet and OC2 could be involved in Th1 development.

PMID: 18418398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Immunol Cell Biol. 2008 Oct;86(7):616-21. doi: 10.1038/icb.2008.29. Epub 2008 Apr
15.

Prolactin can modulate CD4+ T-cell response through receptor-mediated alterations
in the expression of T-bet.

Tomio A(1), Schust DJ, Kawana K, Yasugi T, Kawana Y, Mahalingaiah S, Fujii T,
Taketani Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Low-dose prolactin induces proinflammatory responses and antibody production,
whereas high-dose prolactin suppresses these responses. Mechanisms for these
opposing effects remain incompletely defined. We have previously demonstrated
that T-bet, a key transcription factor directing T helper type 1 inflammatory
responses, is regulated by female steroid hormones in human mucosal epithelial
cells via Stat1 and 5 pathways. T-bet was also modulated in a CD4+ T cell line by
prolactin exposure. Prolactin rapidly induced T-bet transcription through
phosphorylation of JAK2 and Stat5, but not Stat1. Phosphorylated Stat5 then bound
to the T-bet regulatory region. These effects were weaker with high-dose
prolactin exposures. Upon long-term prolactin exposure, low-dose prolactin
induced T-bet expression, whereas high-dose prolactin tended to suppress it.
Prolactin induced the suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) 1 and 3 in a
dose-dependent manner. With high-dose exposure, this was associated with an
inhibition of the phosphorylation of T-bet regulatory region-bound Stat5.
Further, the dose-dependent prolactin effects on T-bet expression were confirmed 
in murine primary CD4+ T cells. These data suggest that the divergent immune
effects of low- and high-dose prolactin may involve modulation of T-bet and
alterations in the balance of the prolactin/JAK2/Stat5 and the prolactin/SOCS1
and 3 pathways.

PMID: 18414429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Genes Immun. 2008 Jun;9(4):316-27. doi: 10.1038/gene.2008.20. Epub 2008 Apr 10.

Stat4-dependent, T-bet-independent regulation of IL-10 in NK cells.

Grant LR(1), Yao ZJ, Hedrich CM, Wang F, Moorthy A, Wilson K, Ranatunga D, Bream 
JH.

Author information: 
(1)W Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns
Hopkins University, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205-1901, 
USA.

Interleukin-10 (IL-10) is intensely studied, yet little is known about the
mechanisms that control IL-10 expression. We identified striking similarities
between IL-10 and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) regulation in mouse natural killer
(NK) cells. Like IFN-gamma, IL-10 expression is induced by IL-2 and IL-12 and
IL-2+IL-12 stimulation is synergistic. Unlike IFN-gamma, neither IL-18 nor Ly-49D
cross-linking induced IL-10 expression however. Additionally, the IL-12 homologs 
IL-23 and IL-27 also do not regulate NK cell-specific IL-10. We determined that a
small population of NK cells accounts for IL-10 production. The induction of
IL-10 by IL-2+IL-12 treatment in NK cells appears to be biphasic, with an initial
burst of expression which diminishes by 12 h but spikes again at 18 h. We
determined that much like IFN-gamma, Stat4 is largely required for IL-12-induced 
IL-10. Conversely, we observed normal induction of IL-10 in T-bet-deficient NK
cells. We identified a Stat4-binding element in the fourth intron of the Il10
gene, which is completely conserved between mouse and human. This intronic Stat4 
motif is within a conserved noncoding sequence, which is also a target for
cytokine-induced histone acetylation. These findings highlight tissue- and
receptor-specific IL-10 regulatory mechanisms, which may be part of an early
feedback loop.

PMCID: PMC2689787
PMID: 18401353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Br J Sports Med. 2009 Oct;43(11):845-50. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2007.043562. Epub 2008
Apr 2.

Regular Tai Chi Chuan exercise improves T cell helper function of patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus with an increase in T-bet transcription factor and IL-12
production.

Yeh SH(1), Chuang H, Lin LW, Hsiao CY, Wang PW, Liu RT, Yang KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Kaohsiung,
Chang Gung University, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Exercise has been shown to be beneficial in the treatment of type 2
diabetes mellitus (DM); its benefit to immune function, however, remains to be
determined.
OBJECTIVE: This study investigated the effect of a 12-week course of Tai Chi
Chuan (TCC) exercise on T cell helper (Th) reaction in patients with type 2 DM.
METHODS: A case-control study was performed in 30 pairs of patients with type 2
DM and normal age-matched adults. Fasting blood glucose, HbA1c, mediators
(interleukin (IL)-12, IL-4 and transforming growth factor (TGF)beta) and
transcription factors (T-bet, GATA-3 and FoxP3) of Th1/Th2/T regulatory (Treg)
reaction were measured before and after a 12-week TCC exercise programme.
RESULTS: Fasting glucose and HbA1c levels in the patients with type 2 DM were
significantly higher than in age-matched controls before exercise. After TCC
exercise, HbA1c levels in patients with type 2 DM significantly decreased (7.59
(0.32)% vs 7.16 (0.22)%; p = 0.047) and blood levels of IL-12 increased
significantly (5.96 (1.10) vs 12.96 (3.07); p = 0.035). To study the molecular
Th1/Th2/Treg reaction, patients with type 2 DM were found to have lower T-bet but
not GATA-3 or FoxP3 expression than normal controls before TCC exercise. After
the 12-week TCC exercise T-bet expression significantly increased in patients
with type 2 DM.
CONCLUSIONS: A 12-week TCC exercise programme decreases HbA1c levels along with
an increase in the Th1 reaction. A combination of TCC with medication may provide
an even better improvement in both metabolism and immunity of patients with type 
2 DM.

PMID: 18385192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Int Immunol. 2008 Jun;20(6):739-52. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxn032. Epub 2008 Mar 28.

IL-27R deficiency delays the onset of colitis and protects from helminth-induced 
pathology in a model of chronic IBD.

Villarino AV(1), Artis D, Bezbradica JS, Miller O, Saris CJ, Joyce S, Hunter CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. alejandro.villarino@ucsf.edu

Members of the IL-6/IL-12 cytokine family play central roles in Crohn's disease. 
The present findings demonstrate that IL-27, a close relative of IL-12 and IL-23,
can promote the onset of colitis in mice. We report that, compared with
IL-10-deficient animals, which succumb to chronic intestinal disease at 3-6
months of age, mice lacking both IL-10 and the IL-27R (IL-27R/WSX-1) exhibit
delayed pathology and prolonged survival (>1 year). Moreover, unlike highly
susceptible IL-10-deficient counterparts, they were able to clear infection with 
Trichuris muris, a colon-dwelling nematode. In both models of intestinal
inflammation, improved clinical outcome was associated with reduced inflammation 
and profound attenuation of T(h)1 responses and, consistent with these in vivo
findings, we confirmed that during in vitro differentiation, IL-27 directly
promotes CD4(+) T cell IFN-gamma production through effects on Tbet, a key T(h)1 
transcription factor. We also found that its ability to suppress T(h)2 responses,
which was clearly evident in helminth-infected IL-10-/-IL-27R-/- mice, was
largely Tbet independent. Taken together, these studies demonstrate that, in the 
absence of IL-10, IL-27 can promote T(h)1-type and suppress T(h)2-type intestinal
inflammation but, ultimately, is not required for the development of inflammatory
bowel disease.

PMID: 18375937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Int Immunol. 2008 May;20(5):645-57. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxn021. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

Requirements for the natural killer cell-mediated induction of IgG1 and IgG2a
expression in B lymphocytes.

Gao N(1), Jennings P, Yuan D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Department of Molecular Pathology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Upon interaction with resting B lymphocytes, IL-2-propagated NK cells can
initiate the process of Ig constant region switch recombination (CSR) by inducing
germ line transcripts for gamma2a (Igamma2a) as well as increased levels of mRNA 
for activation-induced cytidine deaminase enzyme. Whereas both these processes
are necessary for CSR, they are not sufficient because the cells do not proceed
to the expression of mature mRNA for gamma2a (VDJCgamma2a). In addition, NK cells
can also upregulate mRNA for the T-box transcription factor (T-bet) in B cells
without being able to induce further differentiation. Using transgenic B cells
with B cell receptor specificity for nitrophenol (NP), we have now shown that
NP-Ficoll-stimulated B cells can be induced by NK cells to express IgG2a as well 
as IgG1 presumably due to the completion of the process of switch recombination. 
The inductive ability of NK cells does not require IFN-gamma but does require
signals transmitted via CD48 by direct cell contact. In addition, NP-Ficoll on
its own can induce proliferation of antigen-specific B cells as well as germ line
transcripts of gamma1; however, expression of VDJCgamma1 mRNA also requires NK
cell interaction with B lymphocytes. Therefore, in the presence of antigen, NK
cells can provide a necessary signal that substitutes for cytokines in the
induction of IgG2a as well as IgG1 expression. This in vitro analysis provides a 
mechanistic basis for understanding the documented NK cell effects on
T-independent B cell responses in vivo.

PMID: 18339657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 Apr;121(4):1000-5.e8. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2008.01.004. Epub 2008 Mar 4.

Human immature myeloid dendritic cells trigger a TH2-polarizing program via
Jagged-1/Notch interaction.

Liotta F(1), Frosali F, Querci V, Mantei A, Filì L, Maggi L, Mazzinghi B, Angeli 
R, Ronconi E, Santarlasci V, Biagioli T, Lasagni L, Ballerini C, Parronchi P,
Scheffold A, Cosmi L, Maggi E, Romagnani S, Annunziato F.

Author information: 
(1)Excellence Center for Research, Transfer, and High Education, De Novo Therapy,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The mechanisms by which human dendritic cells (DCs) activate a
TH1-polarizing or TH2-polarizing program are still partially unclear.
OBJECTIVE: Study of the mechanisms responsible for the TH1/TH2-polarizing
activity of human circulating myeloid DCs before and after ligation of their
Toll-like receptors (TLRs).
METHODS: IL-4 and IFN-gamma production by CD4+ T cells was assessed in cocultures
with myeloid DCs before or after TLR triggering. Expression of Jagged-1 and
Delta-4 Notch ligands and of GATA-3 and T-box expressed in T cells transcription 
factors was evaluated by real-time quantitative PCR. Signal transducer and
activator of transcription 4 and 6 phosphorylation was assessed by flow
cytometry. Knockdown of Jagged-1 or Delta-4 was performed by transfection of DCs 
with appropriate silencing mRNAs.
RESULTS: Myeloid immature DCs constitutively expressed Jagged-1, which induces in
CD4+ T cells a TH2 polarization, as shown by Jagged-1 gene silencing. The TH2
polarization associated with high GATA-3/T-box expressed in T cells ratio and was
at least partially dependent on the early induction of IL-4. Maturation of DCs by
TLR ligation resulted in the reduction of Jagged-1 and upregulation of Delta-4,
which was at least in part responsible for the polarization of CD4+ T cells to
the TH1 phenotype.
CONCLUSION: CD4+ T-cell responses are usually characterized by a prevalent TH2
phenotype unless TLRs are triggered on DCs by microbial components.

PMID: 18313135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Immunol Invest. 2008;37(2):97-111. doi: 10.1080/08820130701690725.

Tat-mediated intracellular delivery of T-bet protein into THP-1 cells can induce 
Th1-type response.

Yang M(1), Wang S, Wang S, Ma J, Xu X, Mao C, Ma B, Tong J, Qiu G, Shao Q, Ding
Q, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medical Technology, Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang, China.

T-bet, a Th1-specific transcription factor, can promote the production of
IFN-gamma. IFN-gamma is the principal Th1 effector cytokine and it has a crucial 
role in Th1 differentiation, which can drive the differentiation of naïve CD4+T
cells into T-helper 1 (Th1) cells. In our study, a human T-bet gene was fused
with a gene fragment encoding HIV-1 protein transduction domain in a bacterial
expression vector to produce a Tat/T-bet fusion protein. The expressed and
purified Tat/T-bet proteins were transduced efficiently into THP-1 cells in a
time- and dose-dependent manner; when Tat/T-bet pretreated THP-1 cells were
co-cultured with CD4+T cells, the IFN-gamma level increased higher to about 7
pg/ml, 10-folds as compared with the normal level when tested at 48 hours. The
results demonstrated that the Tat/T-bet fusion protein can be efficiently
transduced into antigen-presenting cells (APCs) like THP-1 cells and then
regulated Th1/Th2 balance, which may act as a potential tool for gene therapy.

PMID: 18300036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Feb 27;432(3):217-21. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.12.027. Epub
2007 Dec 23.

Chronic nicotine stimulation modulates the immune response of mucosal T cells to 
Th1-dominant pattern via nAChR by upregulation of Th1-specific transcriptional
factor.

Kikuchi H(1), Itoh J, Fukuda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hematology, Hirosaki University School of
Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho, Hirosaki, Aomori, Japan.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) consists of Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative 
colitis (UC). The etiology has not been clarified yet, but immune disorder is
thought to be involved in the pathogenic physiology. Recently, general consensus 
has been reached that CD and UC are distinct, especially in respect of the immune
response. Interestingly, smoking has diverse effects on CD, Th1-type enteritis,
and on UC, Th2-type. However, the mechanisms remain obscure. Therefore, we
hypothesized that nicotine altered the distinct immune responses in each form of 
IBD to affect their pathophysiology. In this study, we first demonstrated by
RT-PCR analysis that human lamina propria T (LPT) cells had nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor (nAChR), and express alpha7 nAChR subunit universally. In 
addition, the expression of T-bet mRNA in human LPT cells was significantly
upregulated after the culture with 10(-7)M and 10(-5)M nicotine for 9 days, while
chronic nicotine stimulation showed negligible effect on the expression of GATA-3
mRNA by real-time PCR. The effect of nicotine was inhibited by mecamylamine
(MEC). These results suggested that nicotine could modulate the immune balance to
Th1-dominant via nAChR in the intestine, to improve Th2-type enteritis. This may 
provide the experimental evidence for the fact that nicotine has a beneficial
influence on UC, and exacerbates CD. Furthermore, it is of great interest that
nicotine acts oppositely on CD and UC by modulation of the mucosal immune balance
via the neurotransmitter receptor.

PMID: 18248893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Am J Pathol. 2008 Mar;172(3):650-8. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.061249. Epub 2008
Feb 2.

Controlled delivery of T-box21 small interfering RNA ameliorates autoimmune
alopecia (Alopecia Areata) in a C3H/HeJ mouse model.

Nakamura M(1), Jo J, Tabata Y, Ishikawa O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan.

Autoimmune alopecia (alopecia areata) is considered to be triggered by a collapse
of immune privilege in hair follicles. Here we confirmed that infiltrating CD4 T 
lymphocytes around hair follicles of patients with alopecia areata were primarily
CCR5-positive with few CCR4-positive cells, suggesting a dominant role of Th1
cells in the alopecic lesion. Given this finding, we sought to elucidate the
effect of cytokine therapy in C3H/HeJ mice, a mouse model of alopecia areata, by 
applying recombinant interleukin-4 and neutralizing anti-interferon-gamma
antibody. We found that local injections of both interleukin-4 and neutralizing
anti-interferon-gamma antibody effectively treated alopecia in C3H/HeJ mice.
Results from immunohistochemistry and semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction demonstrated that intralesional injection
of interleukin-4 suppressed CD8 T cell infiltrates around the hair follicles and 
repressed enhanced interferon-gamma mRNA expression in the affected alopecic
skin. Furthermore, Th1 transcription factor T-box21 small interfering RNAs
conjugated to cationized gelatin showed mitigating effects on alopecia in C3H/HeJ
mice, resulting in the restoration of hair shaft elongation. Taken together, the 
use of gelatin-small interfering RNA conjugates promises to be a novel,
efficient, and safe tool as an alternative gene therapy for the treatment of
various human diseases. To our knowledge, this is the first report of effective
controlled delivery of small interfering RNA using biodegradable cationized
gelatin microspheres in an animal model of disease.

PMCID: PMC2258260
PMID: 18245811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Mar;19(3):477-85. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2007030392. Epub 2008
Jan 30.

T-bet deficiency attenuates renal injury in experimental crescentic
glomerulonephritis.

Phoon RK(1), Kitching AR, Odobasic D, Jones LK, Semple TJ, Holdsworth SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Monash University, Monash Medical Centre, Level 5
Block E, 246 Clayton Road, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia.

T-bet is a transcription factor that is essential for T helper (Th)1 lineage
commitment and optimal IFN-gamma production by CD4(+) T cells. We examined the
role of T-bet in the development of experimental crescentic glomerulonephritis,
which is induced by Th1-predominant, delayed-type hypersensitivity-like responses
directed against a nephritogenic antigen. Anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM)
glomerulonephritis was induced in T-bet(-/-) and wild-type C57BL/6 mice. Compared
with wild-type controls, renal injury was attenuated in T-bet(-/-) mice with
glomerulonephritis, evidenced by less proteinuria, glomerular crescents, and
tubulointerstitial inflammation. Accumulation of glomerular CD4(+) T cells and
macrophages was decreased, and was associated with reduced intrarenal expression 
of the potent Th1 chemoattractants CCL5/RANTES and CXCL9/Mig. Supporting the
pro-inflammatory nature of T-bet signaling, assessment of systemic immunity
confirmed that T-bet(-/-) mice had a reduction in Th1 immunity. The kinetic
profile of T-bet mRNA in wild-type mice supported the hypothesis that T-bet
deficiency attenuates renal injury in part by shifting the Th1/Th2 balance away
from a Th1 phenotype. Expression of renal and splenic IL-17A, characteristically 
expressed by the Th17 subset of effector T cells, which have been implicated in
the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease, was increased in T-bet(-/-) mice. We
conclude that T-bet directs Th1 responses that induce renal injury in
experimental crescentic glomerulonephritis.

PMCID: PMC2391047
PMID: 18235099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jan 31;358(5):528-30. doi: 10.1056/NEJMcibr0707718.

Inflammatory bowel disease--live transmission.

Hecht GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition, University of Illinois, Chicago, 
USA.

PMID: 18234759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Reprod Sci. 2008 Jan;15(1):83-90. doi: 10.1177/1933719107309690.

Cyclic regulation of T-Bet and GATA-3 in human endometrium.

Inman D(1), Kawana K, Schust D, Lininger R, Young S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599, USA. danielle_inman@med.unc.edu

Endometrial cytokine expression is poorly understood. T-Bet and GATA-3 regulate
cytokine expression in T-lymphocytes. Previous work has demonstrated expression
of T-Bet in human endometrium. Changes in human endometrial T-Bet and GATA-3 mRNA
and protein expression during the normal menstrual cycle were characterized.
Human endometrium from each phase of the menstrual cycle underwent real-time
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry to
examine expression and localization. T-Bet and GATA-3 mRNA were increased in the 
late secretory phase. Progesterone receptor (PR) mRNA was increased during the
proliferative and early secretory phases. T-Bet and GATA-3 proteins localized
cytoplasmically in the late secretory phase. PR protein displayed nuclear
localization and maximal immunostaining during the early secretory phase. T-Bet
and GATA-3 are expressed in endometrial epithelium cyclically during the
menstrual cycle. T-Bet and GATA-3 are both upregulated during the late secretory 
phase and in the same cell types. The expression patterns of T-Bet and GATA-3
oppose PR, suggesting antagonistic function and/or regulation between PR and
T-Bet/GATA-3.

PMCID: PMC2645712
PMID: 18212358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Immunol. 2008 Feb 1;180(3):1655-61.

Suppression of Th2 cell development by Notch ligands Delta1 and Delta4.

Sun J(1), Krawczyk CJ, Pearce EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 380 South University Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Notch signaling plays important roles in Th cell activation. We show that in
response to TLR ligation, dendritic cells up-regulate expression of Notch ligands
Delta1 and Delta4 via a MyD88-dependent pathway. Expression of Delta1 or Delta4
by dendritic cells enhanced their ability to activate naive Th cells and promote 
Th1 cell development, and allowed them to strongly inhibit Th2 cell development. 
Promotion of Th1 cell development was dependent on IFN-gamma and T-bet expression
by responding Th cells. However, the inhibition of Th2 cell development occurred 
independently of IFN-gamma or T-bet, and resulted from a block in IL-4-initiated 
commitment to the Th2 lineage. The promotion of Th1 cell development by Delta is 
not a reflection of the delivery of pro-Th1 instructional signal, but rather it
is the result of a block in the downstream effects initiated by IL-4 signaling.

PMCID: PMC4457297
PMID: 18209061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Am J Chin Med. 2007;35(6):1011-20.

Effect and mechanism of ligustrazine on Th1/Th2 cytokines in a rat asthma model.

Xiong L(1), Fang ZY, Tao XN, Bai M, Feng G.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Pulmonary Diseases of Ministry of Health, Department of Respiratory
Diseases, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science 
and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China.

Ligustrazine is an alkaloid isolated from the rhizome of Chuanxiong (Ligusticum
chuanxiong Hort), which is known to possess antioxidant, anti-inflammatory,
anti-fibrosis and immunomodulative effects. It is used clinically to treat asthma
as an assistant therapy of glucocorticoid. The purpose of this study was to
explore the effects of intraperitoneal ligustrazine on Th1/Th2 cytokines in a rat
asthma model and the underlying mechanism. SD rats were sensitized and challenged
with ovalbumin (OVA) to establish an asthmatic model. Within 24 hours after the
last ovalbumin challenge, changes in airway histology were observed. The
concentrations of IL-4 and IFN-gamma in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were 
measured by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The protein expressions of
GATA-3 and T-bet in lung were measured by Western blot. The results showed that
an increase of Th2 cytokine and an inhibition of Th1 cytokine were accompanied by
an increased expression of GATA-3 protein and a decreased expression of T-bet
protein in rat asthmatic airways compared to those in normal control group.
Intraperitoneal ligustrazine administration could significantly lower the level
of IL-4 in BALF and the expression of GATA-3 protein in lung and also increase
the level of IFN-gamma and T-bet in asthmatic rats, resulting in a decreased
percentage of eosinophils (EOS) in BALF and ameliorated airway inflammatory cell 
infiltration. In conclusion, ligustrazine inhibits OVA induced airway
inflammation by modulating key master switches GATA-3 and T-bet that result in
reversing the Th2 cytokine patterns in asthma.

PMID: 18186587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Immunol. 2008 Jan 15;180(2):693-7.

Cutting edge: T-bet and IL-27R are critical for in vivo IFN-gamma production by
CD8 T cells during infection.

Mayer KD(1), Mohrs K, Reiley W, Wittmer S, Kohlmeier JE, Pearl JE, Cooper AM,
Johnson LL, Woodland DL, Mohrs M.

Author information: 
(1)Trudeau Institute, Saranac Lake, NY 12983, USA.

CD8+ T cells are a major source of IFN-gamma, a key effector cytokine in immune
responses against many viruses and protozoa. Although the transcription factor
T-bet is required for IFN-gamma expression in CD4+ T cells, it is reportedly
dispensable in CD8+ T cells, where the transcription factor Eomesodermin is
thought to be sufficient. The diverse functions of IFN-gamma are mediated through
the IFN-gammaR and STAT1. In CD4+ T cells, STAT1 appears to be critical for the
activation of T-bet and IFN-gamma, suggesting an IFN-gamma-dependent positive
feedback loop. However, STAT1 can also be activated by other cytokines, including
IL-27. In the present study we show that, in contrast to in vitro conditions and 
the prevailing paradigm, T-bet is critical for the in vivo IFN-gamma production
by CD8+ T cells upon infection of mice with diverse pathogens. Whereas IFN-gammaR
signals are dispensable for the T-bet-dependent IFN-gamma production, direct
IL-27Ralpha signals are critical.

PMID: 18178806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Gut. 2008 May;57(5):605-12. doi: 10.1136/gut.2007.130922. Epub 2008 Jan 4.

Blockade of transforming growth factor beta upregulates T-box transcription
factor T-bet, and increases T helper cell type 1 cytokine and matrix
metalloproteinase-3 production in the human gut mucosa.

Di Sabatino A(1), Pickard KM, Rampton D, Kruidenier L, Rovedatti L, Leakey NA,
Corazza GR, Monteleone G, MacDonald TT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infectious Disease, Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts,
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Whitechapel, London E1 2AT, UK.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The role of transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) in
inhibiting T cell function in the normal gut has been studied in animal models.
However, the impact of TGFbeta inhibition on T cells in the normal human gut
remains poorly understood. The effect of TGFbeta blockade in normal intestinal
biopsies grown ex vivo and lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMCs) on T-bet, a
T-box transcription factor required for T helper cell type (Th)1 differentiation,
interferon gamma (IFN gamma) production, T cell apoptosis and matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-3 production has therefore been tested.
METHODS: TGFbeta transcripts were determined by quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR in laser-captured gut epithelium and lamina propria. Biopsies
and LPMCs were cultured with anti-TGFbeta neutralising antibody. After 24 h
culture, T-bet was determined by immunoblotting, and T cell apoptosis was
assessed by flow cytometry. IFN gamma, tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha),
interleukin (IL) 2, IL6, IL8, IL10, IL12p70 and IL17 were measured by ELISA.
MMP-3 and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 were assessed by 
immunoblotting.
RESULTS: A higher number of TGFbeta transcripts was found in the lamina propria
than in the epithelium in normal gut. T-bet expression was significantly higher
in biopsies and LPMCs cultured with anti-TGFbeta antibody than in those cultured 
with control antibody. TGFbeta blockade downregulated T cell apoptosis, and
induced a significant increase in IFN gamma, TNFalpha, IL2, IL6, IL8 and IL17
production. A higher expression of MMP-3, but not TIMP-1, was observed in the
tissue and supernatant of biopsies treated with anti-TGFbeta antibody.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings support a crucial role for TGFbeta in dampening T
cell-mediated tissue-damaging responses in the human gut.

PMID: 18178611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jan 15;105(2):646-51. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0709969105. Epub 2008 Jan 3.

Functional deficit of T regulatory cells in Fulani, an ethnic group with low
susceptibility to Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Torcia MG(1), Santarlasci V, Cosmi L, Clemente A, Maggi L, Mangano VD, Verra F,
Bancone G, Nebie I, Sirima BS, Liotta F, Frosali F, Angeli R, Severini C,
Sannella AR, Bonini P, Lucibello M, Maggi E, Garaci E, Coluzzi M, Cozzolino F,
Annunziato F, Romagnani S, Modiano D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiopathology, University of Firenze, Viale
Pieraccini 6, 50139 Firenze, Italy. g.torcia@dfc.unifi.it

Previous interethnic comparative studies on the susceptibility to malaria
performed in West Africa showed that Fulani are more resistant to Plasmodium
falciparum malaria than are sympatric ethnic groups. This lower susceptibility is
not associated to classic malaria-resistance genes, and the analysis of the
immune response to P. falciparum sporozoite and blood stage antigens, as well as 
non-malaria antigens, revealed higher immune reactivity in Fulani. In the present
study we compared the expression profile of a panel of genes involved in immune
response in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from Fulani and sympatric
Mossi from Burkina Faso. An increased expression of T helper 1 (TH1)-related
genes (IL-18, IFNgamma, and TBX21) and TH2-related genes (IL-4 and GATA3) and a
reduced expression of genes distinctive of T regulatory activity (CTLA4 and
FOXP3) were observed in Fulani. Microarray analysis on RNA from CD4+ CD25+ (T
regulatory) cells, performed with a panel of cDNA probes specific for 96 genes
involved in immune modulation, indicated obvious differences between the two
ethnic groups with 23% of genes, including TGFbeta, TGFbetaRs, CTLA4, and FOXP3, 
less expressed in Fulani compared with Mossi and European donors not exposed to
malaria. As further indications of a low T regulatory cell activity, Fulani
showed lower serum levels of TGFbeta and higher concentrations of the
proinflammatory chemokines CXCL10 and CCL22 compared with Mossi; moreover, the
proliferative response of Fulani to malaria antigens was not affected by the
depletion of CD25+ regulatory cells whereas that of Mossi was significantly
increased. The results suggest that the higher resistance to malaria of the
Fulani could derive from a functional deficit of T regulatory cells.

PMCID: PMC2206590
PMID: 18174328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Int J Mol Med. 2008 Jan;21(1):57-61.

Aqueous extract of the Helianthus annuus seed alleviates asthmatic symptoms in
vivo.

Heo JC(1), Woo SU, Kweon MA, Park JY, Lee HK, Son M, Rho JR, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Food and Bio-Industry Research Institute, Kyungpook National University, Daegu
702-701, Korea.

Molecular inflammation is a pivotal process in various degenerative immune
diseases, including asthma and atopic dermatitis. In this study, we examined the 
effects of Helianthus annuus seed (HAS) aqueous extract on an in vivo
anti-asthmatic model. Ovalbumin-induced mice were orally administered the aqueous
extract of Helianthus annuus seeds, and their lungs were assessed by hematoxylin 
and eosin staining. Moreover, the expression levels of IL-4/IL-13 cytokines and
IgE were determined. HAS extract induced a decrease in CD4+ cell number,
IL-4/IL-13 expression, and IgE secretion levels in the lungs. Our findings
collectively suggest that the HAS extract has considerable potential in reducing 
the asthma-like symptoms induced by a mouse ovalbumin challenge model. However,
further isolation and purification of the extract is required to determine the
specific factor(s) responsible for its anti-asthmatic activity.

PMID: 18097616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Pediatr Nephrol. 2008 Mar;23(3):395-401. Epub 2007 Dec 19.

Expression of mRNA for functional molecules in urinary sediment in
glomerulonephritis.

Tsugawa K(1), Oki E, Suzuki K, Imaizumi T, Ito E, Tanaka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho,
Hirosaki 036-8562, Japan. kojituga@royal.ocn.ne.jp

Recent studies have suggested that gene expression studies using urinary sediment
might be a non-invasive approach to assessing activity and pathogenesis in
glomerulonephritis. However, little information is available regarding the mRNA
expression patterns of functional molecules, such as T-bet, GATA-3, FOXP3, and
retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I), in urinary sediment, from patients with
immunocomplex-mediated glomerulonephritis. Fourteen lupus nephritis (LN)
patients, 13 IgA nephropathy (IgAN) patients, and 12 healthy controls were
enrolled in the study. The mRNA expressions of T-bet, GATA-3, FOXP3 and RIG-I in 
urinary sediment were measured using real time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction. We also studied the expression of RIG-I in kidney tissue specimens
obtained from LN and IgAN patients. Significant differences in the expression
patterns of GATA-3, FOXP3 and RIG-I, and marginal differences in T-bet
expression, were observed between the three study groups. Immunofluorescent
staining for RIG-I was observed in the tissue specimens from the LN patients, but
not in those from the IgAN patients. The mRNA expression patterns of T-bet,
GATA-3, FOXP3 and RIG-I in urinary sediment differ according to diagnostic
category. These results suggest that the measurement of these target gene
expressions might be a useful, non-invasive method for clinical monitoring and
studying of pathogenesis in glomerulonephritis.

PMID: 18095005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2007 Feb;17(2):348-58.

Functions of metallothionein generating interleukin-10-producing regulatory CD4+ 
T cells potentiate suppression of collagen-induced arthritis.

Huh S(1), Lee K, Yun HS, Paik DJ, Kim JM, Youn J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang
University, Seoul, Korea.

Metallothionein, a cysteine-rich stress response protein that is naturally
induced by a variety of immunologic stressors, has been shown to suppress
autoimmune disorders through mechanisms not yet fully defined. In the present
study, we examined the underlying mechanisms by which metallothionein might
mediate such regulation of autoimmunity. Naïve CD4+ T cells from
metallothionein-deficient mice differentiated to produce significantly less
IL-10, TGF-gamma, and repressor of GATA, but more IFN-gamma and T-bet, when
compared with those from wild-type mice. The levels of IL-4 and GATA-3 production
were not different between the two groups of mice. Conversely, treatment with
exogenous metallothionein during the priming phase drove naïve wild-type CD4+ T
cells to differentiate into cells producing more IL-10 and TGF-beta, but less
IFN-gamma than untreated cells. Metallothionein-primed cells were hyporesponsive 
to restimulation, and suppressive to T cell proliferation in an IL-10-dependent
manner. Lymphocytes from metallothionein-deficient mice displayed significantly
elevated levels of AP-1 and JNK activities in response to stimulation compared
with those from wild-type controls. Importantly, transgenic mice overexpressing
metallothionein exhibited significantly reduced susceptibility to
collagen-induced arthritis and enhanced IL-10 level in the serum, relative to
their nontransgenic littermates. Taken together, these data suggest that
metallothionein is able to promote the generation of IL-10- and
TGF-beta-producing type 1 regulatory T-like cells by downregulating JNK-dependent
AP-1 activity. Thus, metallothionein may play an important role in the regulation
of Th1-dependent autoimmune arthritis, and may represent both a potential target 
for therapeutic manipulation and a critical element in the diagnostic assessment 
of disease potential.

PMID: 18051768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Nov 28;8:71.

The candidate genes TAF5L, TCF7, PDCD1, IL6 and ICAM1 cannot be excluded from
having effects in type 1 diabetes.

Cooper JD(1), Smyth DJ, Bailey R, Payne F, Downes K, Godfrey LM, Masters J,
Zeitels LR, Vella A, Walker NM, Todd JA.

Author information: 
(1)Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation
Laboratory, Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
jason.cooper@cimr.cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: As genes associated with immune-mediated diseases have an increased
prior probability of being associated with other immune-mediated diseases, we
tested three such genes, IL23R, IRF5 and CD40, for an association with type 1
diabetes. In addition, we tested seven genes, TAF5L, PDCD1, TCF7, IL12B, IL6,
ICAM1 and TBX21, with published marginal or inconsistent evidence of an
association with type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: We genotyped reported polymorphisms of the ten genes, nonsynonymous SNPs
(nsSNPs) and, for the IL12B and IL6 regions, tag SNPs in up to 7,888 case, 8,858 
control and 3,142 parent-child trio samples. In addition, we analysed data from
the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium genome-wide association study to
determine whether there was any further evidence of an association in each gene
region.
RESULTS: We found some evidence of associations between type 1 diabetes and
TAF5L, PDCD1, TCF7 and IL6 (ORs = 1.05 - 1.13; P = 0.0291 - 4.16 x 10-4). No
evidence of an association was obtained for IL12B, IRF5, IL23R, ICAM1, TBX21 and 
CD40, although there was some evidence of an association (OR = 1.10; P = 0.0257) 
from the genome-wide association study for the ICAM1 region.
CONCLUSION: We failed to exclude the possibility of some effect in type 1
diabetes for TAF5L, PDCD1, TCF7, IL6 and ICAM1. Additional studies, of these and 
other candidate genes, employing much larger sample sizes and analysis of
additional polymorphisms in each gene and its flanking region will be required to
ascertain their contributions to type 1 diabetes susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2217539
PMID: 18045485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Sep;21(17):796-9.

[Expression of T-bet in nasopharyngeal associated lymphatic tissue of patients
with allergic rhinitis].

[Article in Chinese]

Qu S(1), Li T, Wen W, Shi J, Luo C, Chen Y, Lin Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, the People's Hospital of Guangxi Chuang
Autonmous Region, Nanning, 530021, China. qshdoctor@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the pattern and value of the expression of T-bet in
nasopharyngeal-associated lymphatic tissue (NALT) of patients with or without
allergic rhinitis (AR).
METHOD: T-bet and CD4/T-bet expression in adenoids, tonsils and nasal mucosa was 
respectively detected with single stain and double stain of immunohistochemistry.
RESULT: The positive ratio of T-bet expression in tonsils, adenoids and nasal
mucosa between AR group and the control group had statistically different (P <
0.05). There was statistical difference of T-bet expression in tonsils from AR
group in three different age groups (P < 0.05). The difference was that T-bet
expression in adults group was significantly lower than that in children group
and adolescent group. There was no difference of T-bet expression among different
age groups in non-AR group. There were some positive expression of CD4 and T-bet 
in tonsils, adenoids and nasal mucosa from two groups and most positive
expression of T-bet on CD4 positive cell.
CONCLUSION: T-bet expression was down-regulated in NALT of patients with AR.
T-bet expression of NALT is associated with allergic mucosal inflammation and
functional status of NALT, as well as the weak Th1 response at the level of
transfer factor in local mucosa of respiratory tract in AR patients.

PMID: 17993020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 4;283(1):128-36. Epub 2007 Nov 6.

T helper cell-specific regulation of inducible costimulator expression via
distinct mechanisms mediated by T-bet and GATA-3.

Tan AH(1), Goh SY, Wong SC, Lam KP.

Author information: 
(1)Singapore Immunology Network Laboratory of Immune Regulation, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, 8A Biomedical Grove, Biopolis 138648,
Singapore.

Inducible costimulator (ICOS) expression is critical for T cell-mediated
immunity. We showed previously that T cell receptor and CD28 co-engagement
up-regulate ICOS expression in activated T cells via the induction of NFATc2.
Here, we examined the regulation of ICOS expression by Th-specific transcription 
factors T-bet and GATA-3. Overexpression of T-bet or GATA-3 alone could enhance, 
and NFATc2 could further synergize with either of them to increase, icos
transcription. Although T-bet acted on the icos promoter, GATA-3 operated via an 
icos 3'-un-translated region element. Interestingly, NFATc2 was found to bind
promiscuously the icos promoter in developing Th0, Th1, and Th2 cells but became 
selectively associated with T-bet at the promoter and with GATA-3 at the
3'-untranslated region in fully differentiated Th1 and Th2 cells, respectively.
Collectively, our results reveal a temporally evolving circuit in which the
non-selectively expressed NFATc2 cooperates with Th-restricted T-bet or GATA-3 to
direct transcription of a costimulatory gene via distinct regulatory elements in 
different Th cells undergoing differentiation.

PMID: 17986443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Gut. 2008 Jul;57(7):887-92. Epub 2007 Oct 26.

Interleukin 21 contributes to the mucosal T helper cell type 1 response in
coeliac disease.

Fina D(1), Sarra M, Caruso R, Del Vecchio Blanco G, Pallone F, MacDonald TT,
Monteleone G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Centro di Eccellenza per lo studio delle
malattie complesse e multifattoriali, Universitè Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    Gut. 2008 Jul;57(7):879-81.

BACKGROUND: In coeliac disease (CD), the upper bowel lesion is associated with a 
marked infiltration of the mucosa with Th1 cells secreting interferon gamma
(IFNgamma) and expressing the Th1-associated transcription factor, T-bet.
However, the molecular mechanisms which regulate T-bet and promote the Th1 cell
response are unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To examine whether interleukin 21 (IL21), a cytokine that regulates T 
cell activation, has a role in CD.
METHODS: Duodenal mucosal samples were taken from CD patients and normal
controls. IL21 and T-bet were examined by real-time PCR and western blotting, and
IFNgamma was assessed by real-time PCR and ELISA. The effect of blockade of
endogenous IL21 on the expression of T-bet was examined in an ex vivo culture of 
biopsies taken from untreated CD patients. Finally, the role of IL21 in
controlling T-bet and IFNgamma was also evaluated in cultures of biopsies taken
from treated CD patients and cultured with a peptic-tryptic digest of gliadin
(PT) in the presence or absence of a neutralising IL21 antibody.
RESULTS: Enhanced IL21 RNA and protein expression was seen in duodenal samples
from untreated CD patients. Blockade of IL21 activity in biopsies of untreated CD
patients reduced T-bet and IFNgamma secretion. Stimulation of treated CD biopsies
with PT enhanced IL21 expression, and neutralisation of IL21 largely prevented
PT-driven T-bet and IFNgamma induction.
CONCLUSIONS: IL21 is overproduced in the mucosa of CD patients, where it helps
sustain T-bet expression and IFNgamma production.

PMID: 17965065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;30(7):509-17.

[The effects of imiquimod on an animal model of asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

Yin KS(1), Jin SX, Bian T, Wu QZ, Wang X, Yao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the mechanism of imiquimod on asthma animals.
METHODS: (1) 40 mice and 48 rats were divided into 4 groups: control, asthma,
dexamethasone and imiquimod groups. The asthma model was established. The mice
and rats in the imiquimod group were exposed to an aerosol of 0.15% imiquimod.
Lung inflammation and airway responsiveness were measured 24 h after the last
ovalbumin (OVA) challenge. The expression of Interleukin-4 (IL-4), interferon
gamma (IFN-gamma), eotaxin, macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC), thymus and
activation-regulated chemokine (TARC), T-bet, GATA-3, STAT6 mRNA in the lung were
determined by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The
levels of eotaxin, MDC, and TARC in sera were tested by enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The expression of T-bet, GATA-3 and STAT6 proteins
in the lung were measured by Western blot. (2) Parabronchial lymphnodes (PBLN)
were isolated and cultured. The PBLN cells were divided into blank control,
positive control, dexamethasone and drug groups (1 - 3 subgroups), cultured for
different hours, and the expressions of IL-4 and IFN-gamma in supernatants were
determined by ELISA, The mRNA expressions of the cytokines in cells weredetected 
by RT-PCR. (3) Flow cytometry was used to detect intracellular IL-4 and IFN-gamma
production in spleen T lymphocytes. (4) CD(4)(+) T cell of spleen pellets were
subject to assessment of T-bet and GATA-3 protein and mRNA expression
respectively.
RESULTS: The expiration resistance was determined before and after injection of
acetylcholine chloride (20 - 160 microg/ml), and expiration resistances of the
asthmatic group (6.26 +/- 0.85), (11.55 +/- 3.09), (28.74 +/- 5.94), (3710.83 +/-
197.49) cm H(2)Oxml(-1)xs(-1), were significantly elevated compared with those of
the control group (1.34 +/- 0.16), (3.47 +/- 0.49), (9.29 +/- 1.27), (25.22 +/-
5.44) cm H(2)Oxml(-1)xs(-1), D = 88.98, 56.00, 45.00, 108.00, all P < 0.01). The 
numbers of eosinophils and lymphocytes, the thicknesses of WA/Pi and ASM/Pi in
the asthmatic group [(26.0 +/- 1.6)/mm(2), (45.2 +/- 3.2)/mm(2), 12.0 +/- 1.4,
6.7 +/- 0.6] were all significantly higher than those of the imiquimod group
[(12.4 +/- 2.9)/mm(2), (24.2 +/- 3.7)/mm(2), 9.2 +/- 0.6, 4.0 +/- 0.5, D or q =
193.00, 16.92, 185.50, 7.66, all P < 0.01]. In the imiquimod group, the mRNA and 
protein expressions of T-bet (0.48 +/- 0.08, 0.48 +/- 0.17) were significantly
increased compared with those of the asthmatic group (0.08 +/- 0.12, 0.18 +/-
0.06, D = 120.96, 177.98, all P < 0.01), the mRNA and protein expressions of
GATA-3 in the imiquimod group were both significantly decreased compared with
those of the asthmatic group (D = 166.96, 310.97, all P < 0.01). In the control
group, only low concentrations of IFN-gamma [(22 +/- 5, 31 +/- 5) pg/ml] were
detected in PBLN cell cultures. After 24 or 48 h stimulation, the concentrations 
of IFN-gamma in drug 2 subgroup [(149 +/- 31), (154 +/- 28) pg/ml] and drug 3
subgroup [(166 +/- 30), (158 +/- 31) pg/ml] were increased significantly; Levels 
of IL-4 [druug 2 subgroup: (23 +/- 5), (39 +/- 11) pg/ml, drug 3 subgroup: (43
+/- 13), (56 +/- 12) pg/ml] were increased slowly compared with those in the OVA 
group (drug 2 subgroup 24 h IL-4, D = 9.90; drug 3 subgroup 24 h IL-4, D = 8.79, 
drug 2 subgroup 48 h IL-4, D = 8.80, drug 3 subgroup 48 h IL-4, D = 8.10, drug 2 
subgroup 24 h IFN-gamma, q = 4.80, drug 3 subgroup 24 h IFN-gamma, q = 6.40, drug
2 subgroup 48 h IFN-gamma, q = 3.95, drug 3 subgroup 48 h IFN-gamma, q = 4.31,
all P < 0.05). After imiquimod treatment, the mRNA and protein levels of T-bet in
imiquimod group CD(4)(+) T cells were increased significantly compared with those
in OVA group, and the mRNA and protein levels of GATA-3 were decreased
significantly in CD(4)(+) T cells of imiquimod group compared with those in OVA
group. The eotaxin, MDC and TARC levels of serum in asthma group [(593 +/- 41)
pg/ml, (170 +/- 20) pg/ml, (221 +/- 25) pg/ml] were significant different from
those in control group [(288 +/- 66) pg/ml, (100 +/- 33) pg/ml, (84 +/- 49)
pg/ml], (eotaxin: q = 12.20, MDC: q = 8.00, TARC: q = 10.50, all P < 0.01). MDC
and TARC levels of serum in imiquimod group [(84 +/- 13) pg/ml, (163 +/- 35)
pg/ml] decreased as compared with those in asthma group (MDC: q = 9.80, TARC: q =
4.50, all P < 0.01) and MDC levels in imiquimod group were no different with
normal group (q = 1.80, P > 0.05). eotaxin levels of serum in imiquimod group
[(501 +/- 76) pg/ml] increased as compared with those from normal group (q =
8.50, P < 0.01), and decreased as compared with those from asthma group (q =
3.70, P < 0.05). (4) The expression of eoaxin, MDC, TARC and STAT(6) on the
bronchial epithelium in imiquimod group was decreased as compared with asthma
group, but increased as compared with normal group. The eotaxin, MDC and TARC
mRNA expression of the lung in asthma group (0.85 +/- 0.11, 0.96 +/- 0.10, 0.94
+/- 0.28) had significant differences from those in the control group (0.45 +/-
0.08, 0.39 +/- 0.09, 0.24 +/- 0.08, eotaxin: q = 3.00, MDC: q = 15.40, TARC: q = 
5.90, all P < 0.01) and those in imiquimod group (0.65 +/- 0.17, 0.66 +/- 0.12,
0.66 +/- 0.34, eotaxin: q = 1.50, MDC: q = 8.10, TARC: q = 2.40, all P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggested that imiquimod can inhibit the airway
inflammation of asthma animals by reducing GATA-3 mRNA and protein expression and
increasing T-bet, STAT(6) mRNA and protein expression.

PMID: 17961405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 Jan;121(1):51-6. Epub 2007 Oct 18.

T cell-specific T-box transcription factor haplotype is associated with allergic 
asthma in children.

Munthe-Kaas MC(1), Carlsen KH, Håland G, Devulapalli CS, Gervin K, Egeland T,
Carlsen KL, Undlien D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
m.c.munthe-kaas@medisin.uio.no

BACKGROUND: T cell-specific T-box transcription factor (T-bet) is a member of the
T-box family of transcription factors regulating lineage commitment of T(H)
lymphocytes toward a predominant T(H)1 phenotype. Asthma and allergy are common
complex diseases characterized by T(H)2-mediated inflammation.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to assess possible relationships between the T-bet gene
(TBX21) and asthma and allergy in children.
METHOD: Twelve single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the TBX21 region were
genotyped in 948 children from the Environment and Childhood Asthma study. Allele
and haplotype frequencies were compared in children with and without asthma (by
10 years) and allergy (> or =1 positive skin prick test response), as well as for
the quantitative traits bronchial hyperresponsiveness determined by means of
methacholine bronchial challenge testing, lung function determined by means of
forced flow volume loops, fractional exhaled nitric oxide measurement, eosinophil
count, and serum total IgE level.
RESULTS: Allergic asthma was significantly associated with 2 of the tested SNPs
(rs11650354 and rs16947078) and further associated with the particular haplotype 
including these SNPs, with homozygote status resulting in an odds ratio of 8.3
(95% CI, 2.5-26.9) for allergic asthma. Neither nonallergic asthma or "allergy
alone" nor the remaining quantitative variables were associated with TBX21 SNPs
or haplotypes.
CONCLUSION: An association between a specific TBX21 haplotype and allergic asthma
in children is demonstrated for the first time and might explain previously
detected associations between SNPs within TBX21 and asthma and bronchial
hyperresponsiveness.

PMID: 17949803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(24):8510-21. Epub 2007 Oct 8.

T-bet's ability to regulate individual target genes requires the conserved T-box 
domain to recruit histone methyltransferase activity and a separate family
member-specific transactivation domain.

Lewis MD(1), Miller SA, Miazgowicz MM, Beima KM, Weinmann AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Appropriate cellular differentiation and specification rely upon the ability of
key developmental transcription factors to precisely establish gene expression
patterns. These transcription factors often regulate epigenetic events. However, 
it has been unclear whether this is the only role that they play in functionally 
regulating developmental gene expression pathways or whether they also
participate in downstream transactivation events at the same promoter. The T-box 
transcription factor family is important in cellular specification events in many
developmental systems, and determining the molecular mechanisms by which this
family regulates gene expression networks warrants attention. Here, we examine
the mechanism by which T-bet, a critical T-box protein in the immune system,
influences transcription. T-bet is both necessary and sufficient to induce
permissive histone H3-K4 dimethyl modifications at the CXCR3 and IFN-gamma
promoters. A T-bet structure-function analysis revealed that the conserved T-box 
domain, with a small C-terminal portion, is required for recruiting histone
methyltransferase activity to promoters. Interestingly, this function is
conserved in the T-box family and is necessary, but not sufficient, to induce
transcription, with an independent transactivation activity also required. The
requirement for two separable functional activities may ultimately contribute to 
the stringent role for T-box proteins in establishing specific developmental gene
expression pathways.

PMCID: PMC2169399
PMID: 17923685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Cell. 2007 Oct 5;131(1):33-45.

Communicable ulcerative colitis induced by T-bet deficiency in the innate immune 
system.

Garrett WS(1), Lord GM, Punit S, Lugo-Villarino G, Mazmanian SK, Ito S, Glickman 
JN, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 Oct 5;131(1):15-7.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) has been attributed to overexuberant host
immunity or the emergence of harmful intestinal flora. The transcription factor
T-bet orchestrates inflammatory genetic programs in both adaptive and innate
immunity. We describe a profound and unexpected function for T-bet in influencing
the behavior of host inflammatory activity and commensal bacteria. T-bet
deficiency in the innate immune system results in spontaneous and communicable
ulcerative colitis in the absence of adaptive immunity and increased
susceptibility to colitis in immunologically intact hosts. T-bet controls the
response of the mucosal immune system to commensal bacteria by regulating
TNF-alpha production in colonic dendritic cells, critical for colonic epithelial 
barrier maintenance. Loss of T-bet influences bacterial populations to become
colitogenic, and this colitis is communicable to genetically intact hosts. These 
findings reveal a novel function for T-bet as a peacekeeper of host-commensal
relationships and provide new perspectives on the pathophysiology of IBD.

PMCID: PMC2169385
PMID: 17923086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Cell. 2007 Oct 5;131(1):15-7.

Loss of T-bet sends host-microbe mutualism awry.

Ma A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Program in Biomedical Sciences, University of
California at San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143-0451, 
USA. averil.ma@ucsf.edu

Comment on
    Cell. 2007 Oct 5;131(1):33-45.

Immune homeostasis in the intestine involves complex interactions between
microbial organisms and host cells. In this issue, Garrett et al. (2007) describe
a communicable form of colitis that is induced by deficiency of the transcription
factor T-bet in cells of the innate immune system.

PMID: 17923080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Pharmacol Sci. 2007 Sep;105(1):66-73.

Impact of systemic histamine deficiency on the crosstalk between mammary
adenocarcinoma and T cells.

Hegyesi H(1), Colombo L, Pállinger E, Tóth S, Boer K, Molnár V, Falus A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell and Immunobiology, SE Nagyvarad ter 4, Budapest, 
1089 Hungary. hegyhar@dgci.sote.hu

The purpose of the present study was to investigate the influence of lack of
histamine (HA) on tumor growth and functions of T cells in order further to
illustrate the mechanism of immunological tolerance induction by HA. We assessed 
the phenotype and cytokine production of splenic lymphocytes in syngeneic HA-free
(histidine decarboxylase knock-out) (HDC KO) and wild-type mice, inoculated
subcutaneously with the LM2 murine breast cancer cell line. Relative
quantification of target mRNA was performed with a TaqMan real-time RT-PCR assay.
The CD4(+)CD25(high+) Treg cell numbers were significantly smaller in the
tumor-bearing KO mice than in the wild type ones measured by flow-cytometry. The 
expression of forkhead box P3 (Foxp3) decreased significantly and the copies of
splenic Tbox-21 (T-bet) transcriptional factor mRNA was higher in HDC KO
tumor-bearing mice than those of normal mice. The cytokine levels showed that a
smaller number of interleukin-13-producing Th2 cells were elicited compared to
interferon-gamma-producing Th1 cells in the tumor-bearing HDC KO mice. In
conclusion, the present study demonstrates that endogenous histamine stimulates
the growth of breast adenocarcinoma tumor implants in mice by suppressing
anti-tumor immunity.

PMID: 17895589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 15;179(6):4015-26.

Critical negative regulation of type 1 T cell immunity and immunopathology by
signaling adaptor DAP12 during intracellular infection.

Divangahi M(1), Yang T, Kugathasan K, McCormick S, Takenaka S, Gaschler G, Ashkar
A, Stampfli M, Gauldie J, Bramson J, Takai T, Brown E, Yokoyama WM, Aoki N, Xing 
Z.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Division, Centre for Gene Therapeutics, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Transmembrane signaling adaptor DAP12 has increasingly been recognized for its
important role in innate responses. However, its role in the regulation of
antimicrobial T cell responses has remained unknown. In our current study, we
have examined host defense, T cell responses, and tissue immunopathology in
models of intracellular infection established in wild-type and DAP12-deficient
mice. During mycobacterial infection, lack of DAP12 leads to pronounced
proinflammatory and Th1 cytokine responses, overactivation of Ag-specific CD4 and
CD8 T cells of type 1 phenotype, and heightened immunopathology both in the lung 
and lymphoid organs. DAP12-deficient airway APC display enhanced NF-kappaB
activation and cytokine responses upon TLR stimulation or mycobacterial infection
in vitro. Of importance, adoptive transfer of Ag-loaded DAP12-deficient APC alone
could lead to overactivation of transferred transgenic or endogenous wild-type T 
cells in vivo. We have further found that the immune regulatory role by DAP12 is 
not restricted only to intracellular bacterial infection, since lack of this
molecule also leads to uncontrolled type 1 T cell activation and severe
immunopathology and tissue injury during intracellular viral infection. Our study
thus identifies DAP12 as an important novel immune regulatory molecule that acts,
via APC, to control the level of antimicrobial type 1 T cell activation and
immunopathology.

PMID: 17785840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 15;179(6):3792-803.

IFN-alpha is not sufficient to drive Th1 development due to lack of stable T-bet 
expression.

Ramos HJ(1), Davis AM, George TC, Farrar JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

During inflammatory immune responses, the innate cytokine IL-12 promotes CD4+
Th-1 development through the activation of the second messenger STAT4 and the
subsequent expression of T-bet. In addition, type I IFN (IFN-alphabeta), secreted
primarily during viral and intracellular bacterial infections, can promote STAT4 
activation in human CD4+ T cells. However, the role of IFN-alphabeta in
regulating Th1 development is controversial, and previous studies have suggested 
a species-specific pathway leading to Th1 development in human but not mouse CD4+
T cells. In this study, we found that although both IFN-alpha and IL-12 can
promote STAT4 activation, IFN-alpha failed to promote Th1 commitment in human
CD4+ T cells. The difference between these innate signaling pathways lies with
the ability of IL-12 to promote sustained STAT4 tyrosine phosphorylation, which
correlated with stable T-bet expression in committed Th1 cells. IFN-alpha did not
promote Th1 development in human CD4+ T cells because of attenuated STAT4
phosphorylation, which was insufficient to induce stable expression of T-bet.
Further, the defect in IFN-alpha-driven Th1 development was corrected by ectopic 
expression of T-bet within primary naive human CD4+ T cells. These results
indicate that IL-12 remains unique in its ability to drive Th1 development in
human CD4+ T cells and that IFN-alpha lacks this activity due to its inability to
promote sustained T-bet expression.

PMCID: PMC2927332
PMID: 17785816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Blood. 2008 Jan 15;111(2):680-7. Epub 2007 Aug 30.

Clonal regulatory T cells specific for a red blood cell autoantigen in human
autoimmune hemolytic anemia.

Ward FJ(1), Hall AM, Cairns LS, Leggat AS, Urbaniak SJ, Vickers MA, Barker RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Institute of Medical Sciences,
University of Aberdeen, UK. mmd475@abdn.ac.uk

Regulatory T (Tr) cells have the potential to treat immune-mediated disease, but 
cloning such cells for study from patients with autoimmune disease has proven
difficult. Here, we describe autoantigen-specific, interleukin-10
(IL-10)-secreting Tr cell clones recovered ex vivo from a patient with autoimmune
hemolytic anemia (AIHA) and characterize their phenotype, origin, and regulatory 
function. These IL-10+ Tr cells recognized a peptide, 72H-86L, derived from the
Rh red blood cell autoantigen and shared phenotypic characteristics with both
natural and inducible Tr cells. The clones also expressed different Tr markers
depending on activation state: high levels of CD25 and LAG-3 when expanding
nonspecifically, but FoxP3 after activation by the autoantigen they recognize.
Despite a discrete Tr phenotype, these cells stably expressed the T helper 1
(Th1) signature transcription factor T-bet, suggesting they derive from Th1 T
cells. Finally, the contribution of CTLA-4 in activating these IL-10+ Tr cells
was confirmed by analyzing responses to transgenic B7.1-like molecules that
preferentially bind either CD28 or CTLA-4. Overall, these Tr cells have a
functional phenotype different from those described in previous studies of human 
Tr populations, which have not taken account of antigen specificity, and
understanding their properties will enable them to be exploited therapeutically
in AIHA.

PMCID: PMC2575838
PMID: 17761830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Immunity. 2007 Aug;27(2):281-95.

Inflammation directs memory precursor and short-lived effector CD8(+) T cell
fates via the graded expression of T-bet transcription factor.

Joshi NS(1), Cui W, Chandele A, Lee HK, Urso DR, Hagman J, Gapin L, Kaech SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2007 Aug;27(2):180-2.

As acute infections resolve, effector CD8(+) T cells differentiate into
interleukin-7 receptor(lo) (IL-7R(lo)) short-lived effector cells (SLECs) and
IL-7R(hi) memory precursor effector cells (MPECs) capable of generating
long-lived memory CD8(+) T cells. By using another SLEC marker, KLRG1, we found
that KLRG1(hi) effector cells began appearing early during infection and were
committed to downregulating IL-7R. Unlike IL-7R(hi) MPECs, KLRG1(hi) IL-7R(lo)
SLECs relied on IL-15, but IL-15 could not sustain their long-term maintenance or
homeostatic turnover. The decision between SLEC and MPEC fates was regulated by
the amount of inflammatory cytokines (i.e., IL-12) present during T cell priming.
According to the amount of inflammation, a gradient of T-bet was created in which
high T-bet expression induced SLECs and low expression promoted MPECs. These
results elucidate a mechanism by which the innate immune system sets the relative
amounts of a lineage-determining transcription factor in activated CD8(+) T cells
and, correspondingly, regulates their memory cell potential.

PMCID: PMC2034442
PMID: 17723218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Immunity. 2007 Aug;27(2):180-2.

CD8(+) T cell differentiation: choosing a path through T-bet.

Hamilton SE(1), Jameson SC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology and Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,
University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55454, USA.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2007 Aug;27(2):281-95.

Activated CD8(+) T cells can differentiate into transient effector cells or
long-lived memory cells. In this issue of Immunity, Joshi et al. (2007) suggest
that inflammatory cytokines dictate this balance by regulating the expression of 
the transcription factor T-bet.

PMID: 17723210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Nov 15;176(10):1015-25. Epub 2007 Aug 23.

Overexpression of GATA-3 protects against the development of hypersensitivity
pneumonitis.

Matsuno Y(1), Ishii Y, Yoh K, Morishima Y, Haraguchi N, Kikuchi N, Iizuka T,
Kiwamoto T, Homma S, Nomura A, Sakamoto T, Ohtsuka M, Hizawa N, Takahashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
Japan.

RATIONALE: Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) is mediated by a Th1 immune
response. Transcription factor GATA binding protein-3 (GATA-3) is believed to be 
a key regulator of Th2 differentiation and thus might play regulatory roles in
the pathogenesis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP).
OBJECTIVES: We examined the effect of GATA-3 overexpression on the development of
HP in mice.
METHODS: Wild-type C57BL/6 mice and GATA-3-overexpressing mice of the same
background were used in this study. HP was induced by repeated exposure to
Saccharopolyspora rectivirgula, the causative antigen of farmer's lung.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Antigen exposure resulted in a marked inflammatory
response with enhanced pulmonary expression of T-bet and the Th1 cytokine
interferon (IFN)-gamma in wild-type mice. The degree of pulmonary inflammation
was much less severe in GATA-3-overexpressing mice. The induction of T-bet and
IFN-gamma genes was suppressed, but a significant induction of Th2 cytokines,
including IL-5 and IL-13, was observed in the lungs of GATA-3-overexpressing mice
after antigen exposure. Supplementation with recombinant IFN-gamma enhanced lung 
inflammatory responses in GATA-3-overexpressing mice to the level of wild-type
mice. Because antigen-induced IFN-gamma production predominantly occurred in CD4+
T cells, nude mice were transferred with CD4+ T cells from either wild-type or
GATA-3-overexpressing mice and subsequently exposed to antigen. Lung inflammatory
responses were significantly lower in nude mice transferred with CD4+ T cells
from GATA-3-overexpressing mice than in those with wild-type CD4+ T cells, with a
reduction of lung IFN-gamma level.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that overexpression of GATA-3 attenuates the 
development of HP by correcting the Th1-polarizing condition.

PMID: 17717199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Apr;45(4):284-7.

[Expression of transcription factors T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA and its effect on Tc1/Tc2 
balance in asthmatic children].

[Article in Chinese]

Tan WP(1), Mai XD, Wu BQ, Li XY, Li J, Wei J, Huang HR, Huang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Second Affiliated Hospital, SUN Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510120, China.

OBJECTIVE: In contrast to CD(4)(+) helper T-lymphocytes (T(H)), little is known
about the transcriptional regulation of CD(8)(+) cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (Tc) and
its role in the pathogenesis of asthma is unclear. This study was conducted to
investigate the effect of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA expression on profiles of type 1 
and type 2 cytotoxic T lymphocytes in asthmatic children.
METHOD: Totally 38 asthmatic children, including acute attack group composed of
20 cases (age 3 - 13 years, mean 6.2 +/- 2.9), remission group with 18 cases (age
3 - 12 years, mean 6.1 +/- 2.5) and 20 healthy control children (age 3 - 12, 6.9 
+/- 2.7) were recruited in this study from Sep. 2005 to Mar. 2006. The mRNA
expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells were
detected by using semi-quantitative PCR and Tc1, Tc2 cell numbers by flow
cytometry analysis system.
RESULT: T-bet mRNA in asthmatic children was lower than that in control group and
lower in attack stage than in remission stage (0.14 +/- 0.04, 0.21 +/- 0.03, 0.28
+/- 0.03, P < 0.05). In contrast, GATA-3 mRNA was higher in asthmatic children
than in control group and higher in attack stage than in remission stage (0.49
+/- 0.09, 0.44 +/- 0.08, 0.37 +/- 0.04, P < 0.05). It was shown that Tc1
percentage was lower in asthmatic children than those of control group and lower 
in attack stage than those of remission stage (6.6 +/- 2.4, 14.2 +/- 4.3, 31.2
+/- 3.8, P < 0.05). Tc2 percentage in asthmatic children was higher than that of 
control group and higher in attack stage than that of remission stage (10.0 +/-
4.2, 5.4 +/- 2.2, 3.5 +/- 1.1, P < 0.05). Spearman correlation analysis revealed 
that T-bet mRNA was positively correlated with Tc1 percentage (r = 0.704) and
negatively correlated with Tc2 percentage (r = -0.629). GATA3 mRNA was negatively
correlated with Tc1 percentage (r = -0.612) and positively correlated with Tc2
percentage (r = 0.673). The T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA ratio was positively correlated
with Tc1 percentage (r = 0.731) and Tc1/Tc2 (r = 0.773), while negatively
correlated with Tc2 percentage (r = -0.642).
CONCLUSION: The imbalance of T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA expression is closely correlated
with skewed Tc2 dominance in asthmatic children.

PMID: 17706066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Sep;37(9):2549-61.

Transcriptional control of human T-BET expression: the role of Sp1.

Yu J(1), Wei M, Boyd Z, Lehmann EB, Trotta R, Mao H, Liu S, Becknell B, Jaung MS,
Jarjoura D, Marcucci G, Wu LC, Caligiuri MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Jianhua.yu@osumc.edu

Murine T-bet (T-box expressed in T cells) is a master regulator of IFN-gamma gene
expression in NK and T cells. T-bet also plays a critical role in autoimmunity,
asthma and other diseases. However, cis elements or trans factors responsible for
regulating T-bet expression remain largely unknown. Here, we report on our
discovery of six Sp1-binding sites within the proximal human T-BET promoter that 
are highly conserved among mammalian species. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays demonstrate a physical association between Sp1 and the proximal T-BET
promoter with a direct dose response between Sp1 expression and T-BET promoter
activity. Ectopic overexpression of Sp1 also enhanced T-BET expression and
cytokine-induced IFN-gamma secretion in NK cells and T cells. Mithramycin A,
which blocks the binding of Sp1 to the T-BET promoter, diminished both T-BET
expression and IFN-gamma protein production in monokine-stimulated primary human 
NK cells. Collectively, our results suggest that Sp1 is a positive
transcriptional regulator of T-BET. As T-BET and IFN-gamma are critically
important in inflammation, infection, and cancer, targeting Sp1, possibly with
mithramycin A, may be useful for preventing and/or treating diseases associated
with aberrant T-BET or IFN-gamma expression.

PMID: 17705132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Exp Med. 2007 Sep 3;204(9):2015-21. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

Requirement for T-bet in the aberrant differentiation of unhelped memory CD8+ T
cells.

Intlekofer AM(1), Takemoto N, Kao C, Banerjee A, Schambach F, Northrop JK, Shen
H, Wherry EJ, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Department of Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Immunity to intracellular pathogens requires dynamic balance between terminal
differentiation of short-lived, cytotoxic effector CD8+ T cells and self-renewal 
of central-memory CD8+ T cells. We now show that T-bet represses transcription of
IL-7Ralpha and drives differentiation of effector and effector-memory CD8+ T
cells at the expense of central-memory cells. We also found T-bet to be
overexpressed in CD8+ T cells that differentiated in the absence of CD4+ T cell
help, a condition that is associated with defective central-memory formation.
Finally, deletion of T-bet corrected the abnormal phenotypic and functional
properties of "unhelped" memory CD8+ T cells. T-bet, thus, appears to function as
a molecular switch between central- and effector-memory cell differentiation.
Antagonism of T-bet may, therefore, represent a novel strategy to offset
dysfunctional programming of memory CD8+ T cells.

PMCID: PMC2118697
PMID: 17698591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Allergy. 2007 Sep;62(9):1007-13.

Effects of pollen and nasal glucocorticoid on FOXP3+, GATA-3+ and T-bet+ cells in
allergic rhinitis.

Malmhäll C(1), Bossios A, Pullerits T, Lötvall J.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Pharmacology Group, Department of Internal Medicine/Respiratory Medicine 
and Allergology, The Sahlgrenska Academy, Göteborg University, Gothenburg,
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: T-regulatory cells (Treg) affect the balance of T(H)2 and T(H)1
cells. Treg, T(H)2 and T(H)1 cells are regulated by the FOXP3, GATA-3 and T-bet
transcription factors respectively. Our aim was to determine the number of
FOXP3(+), GATA-3(+) and T-bet(+) cells in nasal mucosa in symptom-free allergic
rhinitis (AR) patients vs healthy controls, as well as the effects of natural
pollen exposure and concomitant nasal glucocorticoid treatment on these cells.
METHODS: Nasal biopsies were taken from healthy controls and patients with
grass-pollen AR preseason. The AR patients were randomized to receive treatment
with either fluticasone propionate (FP) or a placebo, and additional biopsies
were taken during the pollen season. FOXP3(+), GATA-3(+) and T-bet(+) cells in
nasal mucosa were quantified by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The number of FOXP3(+) and GATA-3(+) cells, but not T-bet(+) cells, was 
significantly higher in AR patients vs controls preseason. The number of FOXP3(+)
cells remained unchanged in the former group after the pollen season but
decreased significantly in the nasal mucosa as a result of FP treatment. The
pollen season substantially increased the number of GATA-3(+) cells, which was
inhibited by FP. The number of T-bet(+) cells was not affected by pollen or FP.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that nasal glucocorticoids attenuate the allergic 
inflammation partly by reducing the number of T(H)2 cells, but not by means of
local upregulation of Treg cells. The local relationship between T(H)1 and T(H)2 
cells as well as between Treg and T(H)2 is maintained by nasal glucocorticoid
treatment.

PMID: 17686103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2007;143 Suppl 1:68-70. Epub 2007 May 1.

IL-4 gene transcription in human T cells is suppressed by T-bet.

Kitamura N(1), Kitamura F, Kaminuma O, Miyatake S, Tatsumi H, Nemoto S, Mori A.

Author information: 
(1)Cytokine Project, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

T-bet is crucially implicated in Th1 differentiation due to its strong promoting 
activity for IFN-gamma gene transcription. However, the regulatory role of T-bet 
in Th2 cytokines is not fully delineated.METHODS: The effect of T-bet on mRNA
expression as well as the promoter activity of IL-4 in human T cells was
investigated by employing quantitative RT-PCR and fluorescence-based promoter
reporter assay procedures.
RESULTS: IL-4 mRNA expression as well as the transcriptional activity of
5'-flanking region in the IL-4 gene encompassing -1105 to +4 in Jurkat cells was 
clearly upregulated upon stimulation. The inducible mRNA expression and the
promoter activity of IL-4 were significantly diminished by ectopic expression of 
T-bet.
CONCLUSION: IL-4 gene transcription is inhibited by T-bet via the suppression of 
its promoter activity, independently of IFN-gamma. T-bet facilitates Th1
differentiation through not only upregulation of IFN-gamma, but also
downregulation of IL-4 gene transcription.

PMID: 17541280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Am J Surg Pathol. 2007 Aug;31(8):1181-5.

T-bet transcription factor detection facilitates the diagnosis of minimal hairy
cell leukemia infiltrates in bone marrow trephines.

Jöhrens K(1), Stein H, Anagnostopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Consultation and Reference Center for Hematopathology at the Institute of
Pathology, Charité Campus Benjamin Franklin, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.
korinna.joehrens@charite.de

Diagnosis of minimal infiltration by hairy cell leukemia (HCL) cells in bone
marrow trephines is challenging as its differentiation from interstitially
distributed infiltrates of reactive B cells and small B-cell lymphomas other than
HCL is difficult or impossible. The diagnostic utility of DBA.44,
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) and of the recently propagated Annexin
A1 is limited in this diagnostic setting since DBA.44 does not always label all
HCL cells, TRAP is frequently weakly expressed whereas the numerous Annexin
A1-positive hematopoietic cells interfere with the immunohistochemical
recognition of sparse HCL cells. Therefore, we searched for antibodies suitable
for the identification of minimal HCL infiltrates in formalin-fixed bone marrow
trephines. Among the antibodies tested those directed against the T-cell
associated transcription factor T-bet showed the required specificity: (1) T-bet 
is highly expressed in all 85 cases of HCL including 31 cases showing only
minimal infiltrates, and (2) T-bet is exclusively expressed only on a subset of
reactive T cells which are rare in bone marrow. Although T-bet is also weakly
expressed in a proportion of the tumor cells of some small B-cell lymphomas
(n=32/69) other than HCL, a reliable distinction is nevertheless easily possible 
because (1) T-bet is strongly expressed by all hairy cells of all HCL cases and
(2) T-bet is not coexpressed in HCL with markers typical for other small B-cell
lymphomas/leukemias (ie, CD23, CD5, CD10, and/or BCL6). Therefore, the
immunohistochemical detection of T-bet in infiltrated bone marrow trephines
represents an important adjunct for the diagnosis of HCL.

PMID: 17667540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Clin Immunol. 2007 Sep;124(3):284-93. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

Glucocorticoid treatment reduces T-bet and pSTAT1 expression in mononuclear cells
from relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis patients.

Frisullo G(1), Nociti V, Iorio R, Katia Patanella A, Bianco A, Caggiula M,
Sancricca C, Tonali PA, Mirabella M, Batocchi AP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology, Department of Neurosciences, Catholic University,
Largo Agostino Gemelli, 8, 00168 Rome, Italy.

High dose glucocorticoid (GC) treatment has been demonstrated to have a
short-term beneficial effect on functional recovery in relapsing multiple
sclerosis (MS) patients but the exact mechanism of action of GCs in MS is
unclear. We found that high dose intravenous GCs strongly reduced T-bet and
pSTAT1 expression in CD4+, CD8+, CD14+ circulating cells in RRMS patients in
relapse. pSTAT1and T-bet reduction was associated with the decline of IFNgamma
production by PBMCs. A significant increase of AV-positive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells 
was detectable after GC treatment without any variation in the percentage of
annexin V-positive monocytes. By in vitro analysis, patients during relapse,
either before or after GC treatment, exhibited a lower proportion of apoptotic
lymphocytes than remitting patients and controls. Our study suggests that GCs can
modulate T-bet and STAT1 expression and that IFNgamma signalling inhibition
contributes to anti-inflammatory action of GCs in the treatment of relapses of MS
patients.

PMID: 17627892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Mol Histol. 2007 Dec;38(6):517-25. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

Molecular identity of olfactory bulb interneurons: transcriptional codes of
periglomerular neuron subtypes.

Allen ZJ 2nd(1), Waclaw RR, Colbert MC, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH 45229, USA.

Interneurons in the glomerular layer (GL) of the olfactory bulb represent a
diverse set of cells, which can be identified by distinct expression of different
neurotransmitters as well as calcium binding proteins. Using genetic based fate
mapping, we show here that at least three of these different interneurons
subtypes (i.e. dopaminergic, calbindin- and calretinin-expressing) derive from
cells that express the homeobox genes Dlx5/6. The transcription factors ER81,
Meis2, Pax6 and Sp8 have all been implicated in olfactory bulb interneuron
development and each of these can be observed in Dlx5/6-derived periglomerular
cells. Conversely, the T-box factors Tbr1 and Tbx21, which mark olfactory bulb
projection neurons, are not expressed in the Dlx5/6-derived periglomerular cells.
While the interneuron subtypes that are marked by Pax6 and Sp8 have been
described, little information exists as to the specific subtypes that express
ER81 or Meis2. We show here that ER81 is expressed in dopaminergic cells and in a
subset of calretinin-expressing cells in the GL. Meis2 is found in dopaminergic
and calbindin-expressing cells as well as in a subpopulation of the
calretinin-expressing interneurons of the glomerular layer. These findings
suggest that distinct transcriptional codes may underlie the differentiation of
specific olfactory bulb interneuron subtypes.

PMID: 17624499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Immunol. 2008 Jan;45(1):127-36. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

Molecular cloning and expression analysis of T-bet in ginbuna crucian carp
(Carassius auratus langsdorfii).

Takizawa F(1), Araki K, Kobayashi I, Moritomo T, Ototake M, Nakanishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Nihon University, Fujisawa, Kanagawa
252-8510, Japan.

In the adaptive immune system of mammals, naive helper T (Th) cells differentiate
into Th1 or Th2 cells. The T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) is a member of a
family of T-box transcription factors that regulates the expression of IFN-gamma 
and plays a crucial role in Th1 cell differentiation and cell-mediated immunity. 
We cloned and sequenced T-bet cDNA for the first time from non-mammalian species,
ginbuna crucian carp. Ginbuna T-bet was composed of 608 predicted amino acids and
showed 41.5% identity with human T-bet (Tbx21), and human and ginbuna T-bet share
77.3% identity in their T-box regions. Comparative genomic analysis showed
conserved synteny in these regions between zebrafish, fugu, medaka and human
T-bet. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that ginbuna T-bet is closely related to
that of mouse and human. In unstimulated fish, ginbuna T-bet mRNA was strongly
expressed in peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL), head kidney (HK) and spleen.
RT-PCR analysis in kidney cells sorted by FACS revealed that T-bet was strongly
expressed in surface-IgM-negative lymphocytes in comparison to IgM-positive
lymphocytes. These results suggest that ginbuna T-bet is involved in the immune
system, especially in T-cell function, and is an important tool to analyze
teleost cell-mediated immunity.

PMID: 17624433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2494-500. Epub 2007 Jun 15.

Identification of a distant T-bet enhancer responsive to IL-12/Stat4 and
IFNgamma/Stat1 signals.

Yang Y(1), Ochando JC, Bromberg JS, Ding Y.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Gene and Cell Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10029, USA.

T-bet plays a critical role in controlling IFNgamma expression, Th1 polarization,
and CD8 cytolytic development. Its regulation has been demonstrated to be mostly 
IFNgamma/Stat1 dependent while IL-12/Stat4 independent. Here we show that
IL-12/Stat4 binds to a distant highly conserved STAT-responsive T-bet enhancer,
and induces IFNgamma/Stat1-independent T-bet expression in CD8 T cells.
Luciferase reporter assay showed that both Stat4 and Stat1 activate reporter gene
expression from constructs containing a wild-type but not mutated T-bet enhancer.
Studies in virus-infected mice demonstrated that the IL-12/Stat4/T-bet cascade
operates in vivo and regulates IFNgamma in CD8 T cells. Together, we provide a
novel mechanism for T-bet regulation, and suggest that IL-12/Stat4/T-bet play an 
important role in CD8 effector responses.

PMCID: PMC1988915
PMID: 17575072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 15;178(12):7694-702.

OX40-mediated differentiation to effector function requires IL-2 receptor
signaling but not CD28, CD40, IL-12Rbeta2, or T-bet.

Williams CA(1), Murray SE, Weinberg AD, Parker DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health and Science
University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Ag-specific CD4 T cells transferred into unirradiated Ag-bearing recipients
proliferate, but survival and accumulation of proliferating cells is not
extensive and the donor cells do not acquire effector functions. We previously
showed that a single costimulatory signal delivered by an agonist Ab to OX40
(CD134) promotes accumulation of proliferating cells and promotes differentiation
to effector CD4 T cells capable of secreting IFN-gamma. In this study, we
determined whether OX40 costimulation requires supporting costimulatory or
differentiation signals to drive acquisition of effector T cell function. We
report that OX40 engagement drives effector T cell differentiation in the absence
of CD28 and CD40 signals. Two important regulators of Th1 differentiation, IL-12R
and T-bet, also are not required for acquisition of effector function in CD4 T
cells responsive to OX40 stimulation. Finally, we show that CD25-deficient CD4 T 
cells produce little IFN-gamma in the presence of OX40 costimulation compared
with wild type, suggesting that IL-2R signaling is required for efficient
OX40-mediated differentiation to IFN-gamma secretion.

PMID: 17548606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 15;178(12):7525-9.

Cutting edge: Human Th17 cells are identified as bearing CCR2+CCR5- phenotype.

Sato W(1), Aranami T, Yamamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center 
of Neurology and Psychiatry, 4-1-1 Ogawahigashi, Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan.

Recent reports have shown that IL-17-producing CD4+ T cells (Th17 cells) belong
to a distinct helper T cell lineage and are critically involved in the
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases and allergies. However, the chemokine
receptor profile of Th17 cells remains to be clarified. In this study, we report 
that human Th17 cells are identified as CCR2+CCR5- memory CD4+ T cells. Analysis 
of PBMC from healthy donors showed that CCR2+ cells produce much larger amounts
of IL-17 than CCR2- cells, indicating the preferential expression of CCR2 on Th17
cells. Notably, CCR2+CCR5- memory CD4+ T cells produced a large amount of IL-17
and little IFN-gamma, whereas CCR2+CCR5+ cells reciprocally produced an enormous 
amount of IFN-gamma but little IL-17. Moreover, a higher expression of T-bet was 
seen in the CCR5+ memory T cells. These results indicate that absence of CCR5
distinguishes human Th17 cells from Th1 cells.

PMID: 17548586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Int Immunol. 2007 Jun;19(6):713-8. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

CD27-CD70 interactions sensitise naive CD4+ T cells for IL-12-induced Th1 cell
development.

van Oosterwijk MF(1), Juwana H, Arens R, Tesselaar K, van Oers MH, Eldering E,
van Lier RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Stimulation of CD27, a member of the tumour necrosis factor receptor family, by
its ligand CD70 induces expansion of IFNgamma secreting CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in 
vivo. We here analysed the mechanisms through which CD27 mediates this effect.
CD27 co-stimulation induced cell division but did not directly instruct naive
CD4+ T cells to differentiate into IFNgamma-producing Th1 cells. Rather, in
concert with signals delivered through the TCR-CD3 complex, CD27 co-stimulation
enhanced the Th1-specific transcription factor T-bet and caused up-regulation of 
the IL-12Rbeta2 chain. Consequently, CD27-costimulated T cells yielded vast
numbers of IFNgamma-secreting cells in response to IL-12. Additionally, CD27
ligation induced a strong up-regulation of Bcl-xL, but not of related
anti-apoptotic molecules. Thus, CD27-CD70 interactions may promote Th1 formation 
by permitting naive T cells to respond to differentiation signals and by
promoting survival of activated effector T cells.

PMID: 17548342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 1;178(11):6984-93.

Cytopiloyne, a polyacetylenic glucoside, prevents type 1 diabetes in nonobese
diabetic mice.

Chang CL(1), Chang SL, Lee YM, Chiang YM, Chuang DY, Kuo HK, Yang WC.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taiwan, Republic 
of China.

Some polyacetylenes from the plant Bidens pilosa have been reported to treat
diabetes. In this study, we report that the cytopiloyne from B. pilosa, which is 
structurally different from the above-mentioned polyacetylenes and inhibits
CD4(+) T cell proliferation, effectively prevents the development of diabetes in 
nonobese diabetic mice as evidenced by a normal level of blood glucose and
insulin and normal pancreatic islet architecture. Cytopiloyne also suppresses the
differentiation of type 1 Th cells but promotes that of type 2 Th cells, which is
consistent with it enhancing GATA-3 transcription. Also, long-term application of
cytopiloyne significantly decreases the level of CD4(+) T cells inside pancreatic
lymph nodes and spleens but does not compromise total Ab responses mediated by T 
cells. Coculture assays imply that this decrease in CD4(+) T cells involves the
Fas ligand/Fas pathway. Overall, our results suggest that cytopiloyne prevents
type 1 diabetes mainly via T cell regulation.

PMID: 17513748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Jun;37(6):1663-77.

Lung CD11c+ cells from mice deficient in Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene 3
(EBI-3) prevent airway hyper-responsiveness in experimental asthma.

Hausding M(1), Karwot R, Scholtes P, Lehr HA, Wegmann M, Renz H, Galle PR,
Birkenbach M, Neurath MF, Blumberg RS, Finotto S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Lung Immunology, I Medical Clinic,
University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, and Institut Universitaire de Pathologie
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene (EBI)-3 codes for a soluble type 1 cytokine
receptor homologous to the p40 subunit of IL-12 that is expressed by
antigen-presenting cells following activation. Here, we analyzed the functional
role of EBI-3 in a murine model of asthma associated with airway
hyper-responsiveness (AHR) in ovalbumin-sensitized mice. Upon allergen challenge,
EBI-3-/- mice showed less severe AHR, decreased numbers and degranulation of
eosinophils and a significantly reduced number of VCAM-1+ cells in the lungs as
compared to wild-type littermates. We thus analyzed lung CD11c+ cells before and 
after allergen challenge in these mice and found that before allergen challenge, 
lung CD11c+ cells isolated from EBI-3-/- mice express markers of a more
plasmacytoid phenotype without releasing IFN-alpha as compared to those from
wild-type littermates. Moreover, allergen challenge induced the development of
myeloid CD11c+ cells in the lungs of EBI-3-/- mice, which released increased
amounts of IL-10 and IL-12 while not expressing IFN-alpha. Finally, inhibition of
EBI-3 expression in lung DC could prevent AHR in adoptive transfer studies by
suppressing mediator release of effector cells into the airways. These results
indicate a novel role for EBI-3 in controlling local immune responses in the
lungs in experimental asthma.

PMID: 17506035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Immunology. 2007 Oct;122(2):210-21. Epub 2007 May 9.

Instruction of naive CD4+ T-cell fate to T-bet expression and T helper 1
development: roles of T-cell receptor-mediated signals.

Ariga H(1), Shimohakamada Y, Nakada M, Tokunaga T, Kikuchi T, Kariyone A, Tamura 
T, Takatsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute
of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. arigah-in@tokyo-hosp.jp

Erratum in
    Immunology. 2007 Nov;122(3):454.

Using T-cell receptor (TCR) transgenic mice, we demonstrate that TCR stimulation 
of naive CD4(+) T cells induces transient T-bet expression, interleukin (IL)-12
receptor beta2 up-regulation, and GATA-3 down-regulation, which leads to T helper
(Th)1 differentiation even when the cells are stimulated with peptide-loaded
I-A(b)-transfected Chinese hamster ovary cells in the absence of interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) and IL-12. Sustained IFN-gamma and IL-12 stimulation augments naive
T-cell differentiation into Th1 cells. Intriguingly, a significant Th1 response
is observed even when T-bet(-/-) naive CD4(+) T cells are stimulated through TCR 
in the absence of IFN-gamma or IL-12. Stimulation of naive CD4(+) T cells in the 
absence of IFN-gamma or IL-12 with altered peptide ligand, whose avidity to the
TCR is lower than that of original peptide, fails to up-regulate transient T-bet 
expression, sustains GATA-3 expression, and induces differentiation into Th2
cells. These results support the notion that direct interaction between TCR and
peptide-loaded antigen-presenting cells, even in the absence of T-bet expression 
and costimulatory signals, primarily determine the fate of naive CD4(+) T cells
to Th1 cells.

PMCID: PMC2266005
PMID: 17490433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Immunol Cell Biol. 2007 Jun;85(4):300-5. Epub 2007 May 1.

Decision-making by the immune response.

Callard RE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London, 30
Guilford Street, London, UK. rcallard@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Decisions by uncommitted cells to differentiate down one lineage pathway or
another is fundamental to developmental biology. In the immune system, lymphocyte
precursors commit to T- or B-cell lineages and T-cell precursors to CD4 or CD8
independently of foreign antigen. T and B cells must also decide whether or not
to respond to antigen and when a response is initiated, what sort of response to 
make such as the type of antibody, CD4 or CD8, and CD4 Th1 or Th2. The two basic 
mechanisms for these decision-making processes are selection and instruction.
Selection depends on prior stochastic production of precommitted cells, which are
then selected to respond by an appropriate signal; for example, CD8 and CD4
responses selected by peptide presented in association with major
histocompatibility complex class I or II. In contrast, instruction occurs when an
uncommitted precursor embarks upon a differentiation pathway in response to a
particular set of signals; for example, Th1 and Th2 lineage commitment. In this
paper, the signals that determine Th1 and Th2 differentiation are examined with a
mathematical model and shown to act as a bistable switch permitting either Tbet
or Gata3 to be expressed in an individual cell but not both. The model is used to
show how the Tbet Gata3 network within an individual cell interacts with cytokine
signals between cells and suggests how Th1 and Th2 lineage commitment can become 
irreversible. These considerations provide an example of how mathematical models 
can be used to gain a better understanding of lymphocyte differentiation in an
immune response.

PMID: 17471303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Laryngoscope. 2007 Jun;117(6):960-4.

Inverse association between T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain-1 and T-bet in
a mouse model of allergic rhinitis.

Xu G(1), Cheng L, Wen W, Oh Y, Mou Z, Shi J, Xu R, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Otorhinolaryngology Hospital of The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University and the Otorhinolaryngology Institute of Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that human hepatitis A virus cellular receptor,
also known as T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain-1 (TIM-1), plays an
important role in the development of allergic diseases on the basis of
epidemiologic data, but the molecular mechanism has been unclear. In a murine
model of ovalbumin (OVA)-sensitized allergic rhinitis (AR), we examined the
expression of TIM-1 and its correlation with T helper1-associated transcription
factor, T-bet, as a potential mediator of T-cell immunoglobulin expression.
METHODS: Mice were challenged intranasally with OVA to elicit AR. The expression 
of TIM-1 in nasal tissues was examined by real-time reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and the surface expression of TIM-1 in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells was evaluated by means of flow cytometry. In
addition, the expression of TIM-1 as well as T-bet in splenic lymphocytes was
examined by Western blotting.
RESULTS: TIM-1 mRNA was increased significantly in nasal tissues (P < .05) as
seen by real-time RT-PCR. Flow cytometry indicated a differential TIM-1
expression of 135.5 +/- 34.2 in the AR group versus 51.1 +/- 10.9 in the control 
group (P < .05). The mean values of normalized TIM-1 were 0.43 +/- 0.18 and 0.21 
+/- 0.10 in AR and control groups, respectively, whereas the mean values of
normalized T-bet were 0.22 +/- 0.13 and 0.67 +/- 0.17 in the AR and control
groups, respectively. There was a significant difference in the production of
TIM-1 as well as T-bet in AR mice versus control mice (P < .05). The increased
production of TIM-1 correlated significantly with the decreased T-bet in spleen
tissue of AR mice (r = -0.52, P < .05).
CONCLUSION: Our experimental model recapitulates an increase in lymphocyte TIM-1 
expression seen in AR both locally and systemically. Our results also demonstrate
an inverse relationship between lymphocyte TIM-1 and T-bet expression, suggesting
a possible mechanism that TIM-1 influences the development of AR.

PMID: 17460580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2007 Feb;30(2):116-20.

[Effect of rosiglitazone on the expression of T-bet/GATA-3 in T lymphocytes in
patients with acute asthma].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang L(1), Xiang XD, Wang WJ, Deng JW, Chen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, 2nd Hospital of Xiangya, Central South
University, Changsha 410011, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of rosiglitazone on the expression of
T-bet/GATA-3 in peripheral blood T lymphocytes and cytokine derived from Th1/Th2 
in patients with acute asthma and to compare its mechanism with that of
dexamethasone (DXM).
METHODS: Peripheral blood T lymphocytes from 10 patients with acute asthma (A
group, A) and 10 healthy volunteers (B group, B) were isolated, purificated and
cultured, and were divided into 2 groups (3 h and 24 h) based on the treatment
time, and each group was further divided, on the basis of the treatment given,
into 3 sub-groups respectively: control group (A(1) and B(1)), rosiglitazone
treated group (A(2) and B(2)) and DXM treated group (A(3) and B(3)). The levels
of IFN-gamma and IL-4 in the culture supernatant were detected by Enzyme-linked
immunoadsorbent assay (ELISA) and the expression levels of T-bet mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA
in T lymphocytes was detected by Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction 
(RT-PCR).
RESULTS: The levels of INF-gamma and INF-gamma/IL-4 in the culture supernatant of
T lymphocytes and T-bet mRNA and T-bet mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA in T lymphocytes from the
A at 3 h and 24 h were 357 +/- 31, 783 +/- 47, 5.5 +/- 1.0, 8.4 +/- 1.5, 18.7 +/-
3.7, 11.9 +/- 2.9, 1.20 +/- 0.11, 0.290 +/- 0.020, and those from the B at 3 h
and 24 h were 659 +/- 41, 1394 +/- 120, 11.5 +/- 3.0, 17.4 +/- 4.0, 29.0 +/- 4.0,
18.9 +/- 4.0, 3.82 +/- 0.81, 0.870 +/- 0.090, the differences were significant
between these groups (t = 18.59, 5.95, 14.87, 6.25, 6.06, 4.63, 10.23, 18.67, all
P < 0.05, respectively). The levels of IL-4 in the culture supernatant of T
lymphocytes and GATA-3 mRNA in T lymphocytes from the A at 3 h and 24 h were 65
+/- 6, 96 +/- 9, 16.4 +/- 4.2, 41 +/- 6, and those from the B at 3 h and 24 h
were 57 +/- 5, 83 +/- 7, 7.8 +/- 2.2, 23 +/- 4, the differences were significant 
between these groups (t = 3.19, 3.90, 5.77, 7.76, all P < 0.05, respectively).
The levels of IFN-gamma, IL-4 and IFN-gamma/IL-4 in the culture supernatant of T 
lymphocytes from the A and B at 3 h were 357 +/- 31, 65 +/- 6, 5.5 +/- 1.0, 659
+/- 41, 57 +/- 5, 11.5 +/- 3.0, and those from the A and B at 24 h were 783 +/-
47, 96 +/- 9, 8.4 +/- 1.5, 1394 +/- 120, 83 +/- 7, 17.4 +/- 4.0, The differences 
were significant between these groups (t = 23.8, 9.48, 5.03, 18.21, 9.01, 3.53,
all P < 0.05, respectively). The levels of T-bet mRNA and T-bet mRNA/GATA-3 mRNA 
in T lymphocytes from the A and B at 3 h were 18.7 +/- 3.7, 1.20 +/- 0.11, 29.0
+/- 4.0, 3.82 +/- 0.81, and those from the A and B at 24 h were 11.9 +/- 2.9,
0.290 +/- 0.020, 18.9 +/- 4.0, 0.870 +/- 0.090, the differences were significant 
between these groups (t = 4.62, 5.66, 29.67, 11.5, all P < 0.05, respectively).
The levels of GATA-3 mRNA in T lymphocytes from the A and B at 3 h were 16.4 +/- 
4.2, 7.8 +/- 2.2, it was lower than those from the A and B at 24 h (41 +/- 6, 23 
+/- 4, t = 10.70, 10.11, all P < 0.05, respectively). The levels of T-bet mRNA
from the A showed a positive correlation with the level of IFN-gamma (r = 0.581, 
P < 0.05), and a negative correlation with the level of IL-4 (r = -0.493, P <
0.05); The levels of GATA-3 mRNA from the A showed a negative correlation with
the level of IFN-gamma (r = -0.501, P < 0.05), and a positive correlation with
the level of IL-4 (r = 0.579, P < 0.05); The ratio of T-bet mRNA to GATA-3 mRNA
from the A showed a positive correlation with the ratio of IFN-gamma to IL-4 (r =
0.696, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Rosiglitazone could regulate the balance of IFN-gamma and IL-4
through effect on the expression of T-bet mRNA and GATA-3 mRNA.

PMID: 17445473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2007 Feb;30(2):112-5.

[Expression of T-bet, GATA-3 and FOXP3 mRNA in asthmatic peripheral blood
mononuclear cells stimulated by Dermatophagoides farinae antigen].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo YS(1), Xu YP, Xu YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200127, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of T-bet, GATA-3 and FOXP3 mRNA in asthmatic
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) before and after stimulation by
Dermatophagoides farinae antigen (Df), and the relationship among the three
transcription factors.
METHODS: Twenty-five patients of asthma and 15 healthy controls were included.
The mRNA levels of T-bet, GATA-3, and FOXP3 in PBMC before and after Df
stimulation were detected by semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase
chair reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: There was no statistical difference (t = 0.78, 0.38 respectively, all P 
> 0.05) in the levels of T-bet and FOXP3 mRNA between the patients (0.3 +/- 0.4, 
0.42 +/- 0.24 respectively) and the healthy controls (0.4 +/- 0.3, 0.39 +/- 0.37 
respectively). However, GATA-3 mRNA was statistically different (t = 2.27, P <
0.05) between the patients (1.0 +/- 0.3) and the healthy controls (0.8 +/- 0.3). 
After the stimulation of PBMC by Df, the levels of T-bet, GATA-3 and FOXP3 mRNA
showed statistical difference (t = 2.30, 3.79, 2.08 respectively, P < 0.05, <
0.01, < 0.05 respectively) between the patients (0.33 +/- 0.39, 1.58 +/- 1.44,
0.11 +/- 0.32 respectively) and the healthy controls (0.03 +/- 0.40, 0.11 +/-
0.53, 0.43 +/- 0.66 respectively). The FOXP3 mRNA level in the asthmatics was
negatively correlated with T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA (r = -0.46, P < 0.05, r = -0.62,
P < 0.01 respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: There are a predominant expression of GATA-3 and T-bet, but a
decreased expression of FOXP3 in Df-stimulated PBMCs from patients with asthma.

PMID: 17445472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Neuroimmunol. 2007 May;186(1-2):94-103. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

COX-2 inhibitors ameliorate experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis through
modulating IFN-gamma and IL-10 production by inhibiting T-bet expression.

Ni J(1), Shu YY, Zhu YN, Fu YF, Tang W, Zhong XG, Wang H, Yang YF, Ren J, Wang
MW, Zuo JP.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 201203, People's Republic of China.

The COX-2 inhibitors Rofecoxib (Rof) and Lumiracoxib (Lum) were evaluated in
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), the model of multiple sclerosis 
(MS). Administration of Rof and Lum significantly reduced the incidence and
severity of EAE, which was associated with the inhibition of MOG 35-55 lymphocyte
recall response, anti-MOG 35-55 T cell responses, and modulation of cytokines
production. In vitro Rof and Lum inhibited primary T cells proliferation and
modulated cytokine production. These findings highlight the fact that Rof and Lum
likely prevents EAE by modulating Th1/Th2 response, and suggest its utility in
the treatment of MS and other autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 17442406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Nat Immunol. 2007 May;8(5):448-50.

Trawling for treasure: tales of T-bet.

Glimcher LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. lglimche@hsph.harvard.edu

Discovering the transcription factors that direct lineage commitment in the T
helper cell was a formidable task. Laurie Glimcher describes how she and Susanne 
Szabo hunted down T-bet, a transcription factor that is a 'master regulator' of
commitment to the T helper type 1 lineage.

PMID: 17440449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(7-8):1523-38. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

DNA methylation profiling of transcription factor genes in normal lymphocyte
development and lymphomas.

Ivascu C(1), Wasserkort R, Lesche R, Dong J, Stein H, Thiel A, Eckhardt F.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenomics AG, Kleine Präsidentenstrasse 1, 10178 Berlin, Germany.

Transcription factors play a crucial role during hematopoiesis by orchestrating
lineage commitment and determining cellular fate. Although tight regulation of
transcription factor expression appears to be essential, little is known about
the epigenetic mechanisms involved in transcription factor gene regulation. We
have analyzed DNA methylation profiles of 13 key transcription factor genes in
primary cells of the hematopoietic cascade, lymphoma cell lines and lymph node
biopsies of diffuse large B-cell- and T-cell-non-Hodgkin lymphoma patients.
Several of the transcription factor genes (SPI1, GATA3, TCF-7, Etv5, c-maf and
TBX21) are differentially methylated in specific cell lineages and stages of the 
hematopoietic cascade. For some genes, such as SPI1, Etv5 and Eomes, we found an 
inverse correlation between the methylation of the 5' untranslated region and
expression of the associated gene suggesting that these genes are regulated by
DNA methylation. Differential methylation is not limited to cells of the healthy 
hematopoietic cascade, as we observed aberrant methylation of c-maf, TCF7, Eomes 
and SPI1 in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Our results suggest that epigenetic
remodelling of transcription factor genes is a frequent mechanism during
hematopoietic development. Aberrant methylation of transcription factor genes is 
frequently observed in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and might have a functional
role during tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17433759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Eur J Immunol. 2007 May;37(5):1386-96.

NF-kappaB-regulated suppression of T-bet in T cells represses Th1 immune
responses in pregnancy.

McCracken SA(1), Hadfield K, Rahimi Z, Gallery ED, Morris JM.

Author information: 
(1)Perinatal Research Group, Kolling Institute of Medical Research, University of
Sydney, St Leonards, Australia. smccrack@med.usyd.edu.au

The molecular mechanisms that suppress Th1 immune responses in pregnancy are
unknown. We assessed the expression of the Th1 cytokine transcription factor
T-bet. We isolated PBMC and T cells from non-pregnant and pregnant women and
demonstrated that T-bet is specifically down-regulated in pregnancy under basal
and stimulated conditions. Low levels of T-bet protein were detected in the
nuclear fraction of unstimulated PBMC from non-pregnant, but not pregnant women. 
Nuclear levels of T-bet increased in response to PMA/ionomycin in PBMC from
non-pregnant, but not pregnant women. T-bet expression was greater in whole cell 
lysates of stimulated CD3(+) T cells from non-pregnant relative to pregnant
women. NF-kappaB is specifically down-regulated in T cells in pregnant women,
resulting in suppressed expression of Th1 cytokines IL-2, IFN-gamma and
TNF-alpha. In this study, down-regulation of NF-kappaB also resulted in
diminished expression of T-bet. PMA induces NF-kappaB translocation, T-bet
expression and IL-2, IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha production. Conversely,
pre-incubation with SN50, and NF-kappaB oligodeoxyribonucleotide decoys
suppressed PMA-induced NF-kappaB translocation and gene transcription,
respectively, resulting in diminished T-bet expression and Th1 cytokine
production. Therefore, maintenance of the cytokine environment for pregnancy
success is mediated via strict regulation of Th1 immune responses, more
specifically through control of NF-kappaB and T-bet transcription.

PMID: 17407192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Arb Paul Ehrlich Inst Bundesamt Sera Impfstoffe Frankf A M. 2006;(95):211-4;
discussion 215-6.

Understanding the immunological basis of asthma; immunotherapy and regulatory T
cells.

Umetsu DT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Karp Lab, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We believe that immunotherapy with HKL as an adjuvant induces Thl-like TReg cells
that can inhibit AHR and airway inflammation. These antigen-specific TReg cells
are induced with CD8alpha+ DCs producing IL-12 and IL-10, produce IFN-gamma and
IL-10, and also express T-bet and Foxp3. These Th1Reg cells are distinct from
antigen-specific TReg cells induced with respiratory tolerance, which can also
inhibit AHR and airway inflammation. These Th2-like TReg cells are induced with
CD8alpha- DCs producing IL-10, they express IL-10, GATA3 and Foxp3. So allergen
immunotherapy is effective in large part because it induces regulatory T cells.
With HKL you get Th1Reg cells, and with other forms of immunotherapy you may get 
Th2Reg cells. We believe that with further refinements, allergen immunotherapy
that rapidly induces allergen specific TReg cells will indeed be the magic
bullets for allergy and asthma.

PMID: 17393742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2007;45(3):333-8.

Association analysis of hepatitis virus B infection with haplotypes of the TBX21 
gene promoter region in the Chinese population.

Cao B(1), Yang H, Ding H, Qi S, Gao L, Cui H, Dai Y, Xu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anti-infection and Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Peking
University First Hospital, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The T-box21 (TBX21) gene encodes the transcription factor T-bet
(T-box expressed in T-cells), which influences naive T-lymphocyte development and
has been implicated in the pathogenesis of many diseases.
METHODS: We selected 208 hepatitis B patients and 213 healthy volunteers to
examine whether polymorphisms or haplotypes of the TBX21 gene promoter were
associated with hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection in the Chinese population. Two 
polymorphisms at -1499 and -1514 located in the TBX21 promoter region were
identified by the PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method.
RESULTS: Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at -1499 was significantly
different between HBV patients and healthy controls [p=0.003; odds ratio (OR)
3.65, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.58-8.45]. Similarly, our results showed a
significantly higher level of haplotype D (--/AC) in HBV patients compared to
control subjects (p=0.005; OR 4.82, 95% CI 1.59-14.61).
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our findings, it seems that genetic variations of allele
-1499 and haplotype D (--/AC) within the TBX21 promoter region contribute to
susceptibility to HBV infection in the Chinese population.

PMID: 17378728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Chin J Integr Med. 2006 Dec;12(4):262-7.

Effects of Astragalus membranaceus in promoting T-helper cell type 1 polarization
and interferon-gamma production by up-regulating T-bet expression in patients
with asthma.

Wang G(1), Liu CT, Wang ZL, Yan CL, Luo FM, Wang L, Li TQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu (610041).

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect of Astragalus membranaceus (AM) on T-helper cell
type 1 (Thl) specific transcription factor T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet)
expression and Thl/Th2 equilibrium.
METHODS: The levels of T-bet mRNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
from 15 patients with asthma and 15 healthy subjects were determined by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). PBMCs in asthma patients were
incubated with AM and then the concentration of interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) and 
interleukin-4 (IL-4) in the supernate before and after AM intervention were
determined by ELISA. The numbers of CD4 + CCR3 + and CD4 + CCR5 + cells were
counted by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: The expression of T-bet mRNA and the level of IFN-gamma were lower, but 
level of serum IL-4 was higher in asthma patients when compared with those in
healthy subjects respectively. After AM (60 microg/ml) intervention, the former
two parameters raised and showed a positive correlation between them, while the
level of IL-4 was decreased. The mean percentage of CD4 + CCR3 + cells in asthma 
patients was significantly higher but that of CD4 + CCR5 + cells was lower when
compared with those in healthy subjects respectively. After AM intervention, the 
abnormal change in the two indexes was improved to certain extent, showing a
reversing status of Th2 polarization.
CONCLUSION: AM could increase the expression of T-bet mRNA and Thl cytokines such
as IFN-Y, and might reverse the Th2 predominant status in asthma patients.

PMID: 17361521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2007 Feb;27(2):120-2.

[Effect of Chinese herbs for tonifying Shen on balance of Th1 /Th2 in children
with asthma in remission stage].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu B(1), Yu J, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the molecular mechanism of Chinese herbs for tonifying Shen
on asthma by adjusting the imbalance of Th1/Th2.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) separated from anticoagulated 
venous blood of 20 children with asthma in remission stage (3 ml from each) were 
equally divided into three groups, the blank group and the Chuankezhi (CKZ)
groups cultured with media without or with CKZ of different concentrations
respectively, for 48 h in vitro. The mRNA expressions of T-bet, GATA-3, IFN-gamma
and IL-4 in the sediment collected from the cultures were measured by real-time
fluorescence quantitative polymerase chain reaction technology.
RESULTS: As compared with those in the blank group, in the CKZ groups, T-bet mRNA
expression and IFN-gamma mRNA expression were significantly higher, especially in
CKZ II group (P < 0.01 and P < 0.05 resepectively); GATA-3 mRNA expression was
insignificantly different (P > 0.05); IL-4 mRNA expression was significantly
lower (P < 0.01). Moreover, the ratios of T-bet/GATA-3 and IFN-gamma/IL-4 were
higher in the CKZ groups than those in the blank group, respectively, though
showing insignificant difference in the former (P > 0.05), the difference in the 
latter was certainly significant (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Chinese herbs for tonifying Shen can adjust the imbalance of Th1/Th2 
in multiple layers by enhancing the function of Th1 cells and attenuating the
function of Th2 cells, which may be realized through various links as regulating 
the expression of transcription factors and cytokines.

PMID: 17342997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Immunol. 2007 Mar 15;178(6):3457-65.

Temporal dissection of T-bet functions.

Matsuda JL(1), George TC, Hagman J, Gapin L.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, National Jewish Medical and Research
Center, University of Colorado Health Science Center, 1400 Jackson Street,
Denver, CO 80206, USA.

T-bet is a transcription factor of the T-box family that regulates the expression
of numerous immune system-associated genes. T-bet directs the acquisition of the 
Th1-associated genetic program in differentiating CD4(+) lymphocytes. It also
influences the development of NK and NKT cells through its regulation of the
IL-2/IL-15Rbeta-chain (CD122) and the trafficking of these lymphocytes through
CxCR3. The temporal requirements of T-bet activity for the production of
IFN-gamma and the regulation of CD122 and CxCR3 expression remain undefined. We
produced an ectopically controllable form of T-bet by fusing its C-terminal
domain with a mutated ligand-binding domain of human estrogen receptor alpha. By 
temporally controlling the expression of T-bet-estrogen receptor alpha by the
addition or removal of 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-HT), we show that IFN-gamma, CD122, 
and CxCR3 are direct gene targets of T-bet whose expression are acutely regulated
by T-bet activity.

PMID: 17339440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007 Mar;119(3):662-70.

T-bet inhibits both TH2 cell-mediated eosinophil recruitment and TH17
cell-mediated neutrophil recruitment into the airways.

Fujiwara M(1), Hirose K, Kagami S, Takatori H, Wakashin H, Tamachi T, Watanabe N,
Saito Y, Iwamoto I, Nakajima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Clinical Cell Biology, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that mice lacking T-bet, a critical
transcription factor for T(H)1 cell differentiation, spontaneously develop airway
inflammation with intense eosinophil infiltrates. However, the mechanism
underlying T-bet-mediated inhibition of allergic airway inflammation is still
unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the regulatory role of T-bet in antigen-induced allergic 
airway inflammation.
METHODS: We examined the role of T-bet in antigen-induced allergic airway
inflammation using T-bet(-/-) mice on a BALB/c background that did not develop
spontaneous airway inflammation. We also examined the role of T-bet expression of
CD4(+) T cells in airway inflammation by adoptive transfer experiments.
RESULTS: We found that antigen-induced eosinophil recruitment, goblet cell
hyperplasia, and T(H)2 cytokine production in the airways were enhanced in
T-bet(-/-) mice. However, in the absence of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 6 (STAT6), T-bet deficiency could not induce the antigen-induced
eosinophilic airway inflammation. Adoptive transfer of T-bet(-/-) or T-bet(+/+)
CD4(+) T cells to T-bet(-/-)Rag-2(-/-) mice revealed that the expression of T-bet
in CD4(+) T cells was vital for the inhibition of antigen-induced eosinophilic
airway inflammation. Interestingly, antigen-induced neutrophil recruitment in the
airways was also enhanced in T-bet(-/-) mice. Moreover, T-bet(-/-) CD4(+) T cells
preferentially differentiated into IL-17-producing cells that mediated
neutrophilic airway inflammation.
CONCLUSION: T-bet inhibits both T(H)2 cell-mediated eosinophilic inflammation and
T(H)17 cell-mediated neutrophilic inflammation in the airways.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: The dysfunction of T-bet may be involved in the
pathogenesis of severe asthma, in which accumulation of neutrophils as well as
eosinophils in the airways is a hallmark of disease.

PMID: 17336616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Leuk Lymphoma. 2007 Jan;48(1):168-73.

Amplification and specific expression of T-bet gene in nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma.

Ye Y(1), Li T, Zhang B, Guo Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Hospital of Peking University Beijing, PR
China.

To define the specific genetic alterations in nasal natural killer/T-cell
lymphoma (N-NK/T-L), the assay of restriction landmark genomic scanning (RLGS), a
genome-wide method, was used to investigate a pair of genomic DNA from N-NK/T-L
cells and peripheral blood leukocytes of the same patient. The intensified spots 
in displayed N-NK/T-L gel of RLGS were subjected to bioinformatic analysis by
virtual genome scan (VGS) and one of candidate spots proved to be T-bet gene
(T-box expressed in T-cell). The pair of samples was consequently analysed by
Southern hybridization, revealing genomic amplification of T-bet but not
different status of DNA methylation. The amplification of T-bet was also
discovered in other cases of N-NK/T-L by dot blotting. The expression of T-bet
was investigated by in situ hybridization (ISH) and immunohistochemistry (IHC).
The results showed that T-bet predominantly expressed in N-NK/T-L (ISH: 90.0%,
18/20; IHC: 80%, 16/20), while few cases of B-cell lymphoma (ISH: 11.8%, 2/17;
IHC: 17.6%, 3/17) or T-cell lymphoma (ISH: 33.3%, 2/6; IHC: 16.7%, 1/6) were
positive. The difference of T-bet expression in either ISH or IHC between
N-NK/T-L and B-cell lymphoma or T-cell lymphoma was statistically significant (P 
< 0.05). Moreover, the expression of T-bet was not detected in normal spleen
tissue and chronic inflammatory nasal mucosa. The results suggested that the
amplification of T-bet gene or resulting its over-expression of T-bet gene might 
be involved in the development of N-NK/T-L and thus it should be worth confirming
whether the over-expression of T-bet be helpful to the diagnosis of N-NK/T-L in
further study.

PMID: 17325860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Ann Rheum Dis. 2007 Jul;66(7):886-92. Epub 2007 Feb 26.

Intrarenal cytokine gene expression in lupus nephritis.

Chan RW(1), Lai FM, Li EK, Tam LS, Chow KM, Lai KB, Li PK, Szeto CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine & Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong, China.

BACKGROUND: Lupus nephritis is characterised by intrarenal inflammation and
lymphocyte activation.
AIM: To examine the profile of cytokine gene expression in glomerulus and
tubulointerstitium in patients with lupus nephritis.
METHODS: 36 consecutive patients with systemic lupus erythematosus having active 
renal disease were recruited, and they were required to undergo kidney biopsy.
Glomerular and tubulointestitial cytokine expression of interleukin (IL)2, 4, 10,
12, 18, interferon gamma (IFN)gamma, T-bet (the Th1 transcription factor), GATA-3
(the Th2 transcription factor), transforming growth factor beta and monocyte
chemoattractant protein (MCP)1 were studied by laser microdissection of the renal
biopsy specimen, followed by real-time quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: There were 13 patients with World Health Organization class III
nephritis, 14 patients with class IV nephritis and 9 patients with class V
nephritis. There was a significant correlation between serum C3, C4 and
anti-double strand DNA antibody level with glomerular expression of T-bet,
IFNgamma and IL2. There was a significant correlation between histological
activity index and glomerular expression of IL12, IL18, IL10 and MCP1. In
addition, the degree of glomerular leucocyte infiltration significantly
correlated with glomerular expression of IFNgamma, IL10, IL12 and IL18. By
contrast, histological chronicity index correlated with the tubulointerstitial
expression of IL2, MCP1 and GATA-3.
CONCLUSIONS: Intraglomerular expression of certain target genes correlate with
the severity of systemic as well as histological activity, whereas the
tubulointerstitial expression of other target genes correlate with the degree of 
chronic kidney scarring. This result may shed light on the immunopathogenesis of 
lupus nephritis.

PMCID: PMC1955122
PMID: 17324967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Pathobiology. 2006;73(5):224-37.

Increased bleomycin-induced skin fibrosis in mice lacking the Th1-specific
transcription factor T-bet.

Lakos G(1), Melichian D, Wu M, Varga J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL 60611-2909, USA.

Fibrosis, the pathological hallmark of scleroderma and related conditions, is due
to sustained activation of tissue fibroblasts. Accumulating evidence implicates
cytokine networks in initiating, and propagating or terminating fibroblast
activation, and the specific cytokine phenotype dictates evolution of the
fibrotic response toward either resolution or scarring. In particular, cytokines 
that promote fibroblast proliferation and myofibroblast differentiation and
extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulation functionally define a type 2 (Th2) immune
response, whereas interferon-gamma, which suppresses diverse fibroblast
activities, defines a type 1 (Th1) immune response. It remains unclear what role 
the balance between Th1 and Th2 cytokines plays in the pathogenesis of fibrosis. 
Here we used bleomycin-induced skin fibrosis as a murine model for human
scleroderma in order to study the fibrotic response in mice lacking T-bet, a
transcription factor that is essential for initiating Th1 lineage development of 
CD4+ T lymphocytes. Spleen cells from T-bet null (T-bet(-/-)) mice exhibited a
typical Th2 cytokine profile ex vivo, with elevated production of interleukin-4
(IL-4), IL-5 and IL-13, and diminished production of interferon-gamma.
Bleomycin-induced early mast cells and eosinophil accumulation, and eosinophil
degranulation, in the lesional tissue were greater in T-bet(-/-) mice than in
wild-type control mice. At a later time point, T-bet(-/-) mice developed
significantly more extensive dermal and especially hypodermal fibrosis. Elevated 
TGF-beta expression and intracellular Smad activation were prominent in lesional 
skin. Infiltrating eosinophils appeared to be an important cellular source of
TGF-beta. These results demonstrate that in mice lacking T-bet bleomycin induced 
exaggerated skin fibrosis, suggesting that T-bet has an important physiologic
role in regulation of tissue repair by promoting Th1 immune responses that
prevent excessive ECM accumulation.

Copyright 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17314493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007 Feb;6(2):723-31.

Interleukin-18 directly activates T-bet expression and function via p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase and nuclear factor-kappaB in acute myeloid
leukemia-derived predendritic KG-1 cells.

Bachmann M(1), Dragoi C, Poleganov MA, Pfeilschifter J, Mühl H.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmazentrum Frankfurt, Klinikum der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

The leukemic cell line KG-1 was isolated from a patient with acute myeloid
leukemia and is regarded a cellular model of human dendritic cell progenitors.
The T helper type 1 cytokine interleukin (IL)-18 has been shown to induce the
maturation of these cells towards a dendritic phenotype and, moreover, is able to
mediate IFNgamma production in this model. Because T-box expressed in T cells
(T-bet) is considered to be of paramount importance for dendritic cell function, 
the effects of IL-18 on this transcription factor have been investigated in the
current study. Here, we show that activation of KG-1 cells by IL-18 induces T-bet
mRNA and protein within 4 to 6 h of incubation. This hitherto unrecognized
function of IL-18 was suppressed by the inhibition of p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase activity and nuclear factor-kappaB function. Blockage of
translation by cycloheximide, usage of neutralizing antibodies, and the inability
of IFNgamma to mediate significant p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
activation in KG-1 cells clearly revealed that activation of T-bet was not via
autocrine IFNgamma. T-bet function was evaluated by short interfering RNA
technology. Notably, specific suppression of T-bet induction impaired secretion
of IFNgamma by KG-1 cells under the influence of IL-18. Therapeutic application
of IL-18 has the potential to profoundly affect the biology of acute myeloid
leukemia predendritic cells such as KG-1 cells. Under these conditions,
activation of T-bet may play a key role in processes that have the potential to
correct the T helper type 1 deficiency associated with leukemia-mediated
immunosuppression.

PMID: 17308068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 20;104(8):2827-30. Epub 2007 Feb 16.

Transcription factor T-bet regulates skin sclerosis through its function in
innate immunity and via IL-13.

Aliprantis AO(1), Wang J, Fathman JW, Lemaire R, Dorfman DM, Lafyatis R, Glimcher
LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Harvard School of Public
Health, 651 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Tissue remodeling with fibrosis is a predominant pathophysiological mechanism of 
many human diseases. Systemic sclerosis is a rare, often lethal, disorder of
unknown etiology manifested by dermal fibrosis (scleroderma) and excessive
connective tissue deposition in internal organs. Currently, there are no
available antifibrotic therapeutics, a reflection of our lack of understanding of
this process. Animal models of scleroderma are useful tools to dissect the
transcription factors and cytokines that govern fibrosis. A disproportionate
increase of type 2 cytokines, like TGF-beta and IL-4, more than type 1 cytokines,
like IFN-gamma, is thought to underlie the pathogenesis of scleroderma. In this
study, we show that mice deficient in the transcription factor T-box expressed in
T cells (T-bet), a master regulator of type 1 immunity, display increased
sensitivity to bleomycin-induced dermal sclerosis. Despite the well-established
role of T-bet in adaptive immunity, we also show that RAG2(-/-) mice, which lack 
T and B cells, are vulnerable to bleomycin-induced scleroderma and that
RAG2/T-bet double-deficient mice maintain the increased sensitivity to bleomycin 
observed in T-bet(-/-) mice. Furthermore, overexpression of T-bet in T cells does
not affect the induction of skin sclerosis in this model. Lastly, we show that
IL-13 is the profibrotic cytokine regulated by T-bet in this model. Together, we 
conclude that T-bet serves as a repressor of dermal sclerosis through an
IL-13-dependent pathway in innate immune cells. T-bet, and its transcriptional
network, represent an attractive target for the treatment of systemic sclerosis
and other fibrosing disorders.

PMCID: PMC1815266
PMID: 17307869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Clin Exp Immunol. 2007 Mar;147(3):526-32.

Decreased T-bet expression and changes in chemokine levels in adults with asthma.

Ko FW(1), Lun SW, Wong CK, Szeto CC, Lam CW, Leung TF, Hui DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong. 
fannyko@cuhk.edu.hk

T-bet is a novel transcription factor regulating lineage commitment of T helper
(Th) lymphocytes to a predominant Th1 phenotype. Previous studies on T-bet and
asthma focused mainly on bronchial biopsy specimens. This study assessed the
relationship between T-bet expression and levels of selected chemokines in the
peripheral blood of asthmatics. Blood was collected from 24 steroid-naive
asthmatics, 39 asthmatics on inhaled corticosteroid and 32 age- and sex-matched
controls for assay of T-bet expression, specific IgE and chemokines
(interferon-gamma inducible protein-10 (IP-10/CXCL10), monokines induced by
interferon-gamma (MIG/CXCL9), monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1/CCL2),
regulated upon activation normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES/CCL5) and 
interleukin-8 (IL-8/CXCL8) levels. T-bet mRNA expression was assessed by
real-time quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
Chemokine levels were assessed by immunofluorescence flow cytometry. The mean
(s.d.) age and forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1))% predicted of the
asthmatics were 43 x 6 (14 x 6) years and 85 x 9 (20.0)%, respectively. The
median (IQR) T-bet expression after normalization with beta-actin was suppressed 
in asthmatics versus controls [asthmatics 0 x 71 (0 x 59) versus controls 1 x 07 
(1 x 14), P=0 x 03].The median (IQR) of plasma RANTES was elevated, whereas IP-10
was suppressed in asthmatics versus controls (RANTES: 13658 x 0 (13673 x 3)
versus 6299 x 5 (19407 x 8) pg/ml, P=0 x 03; IP-10: 1047 x 6 (589 x 8) versus
1306 x 4 (759 x 9) pg/ml, P=0 x 001). There was a weak and negative correlation
between T-bet expression and RANTES level in the asthmatics (r=-0 x 29, P=0 x
032). T-bet could be measured in peripheral blood and its expression was
suppressed in asthmatics. This is in keeping with asthma being a predominantly
Th2 disease and T-bet probably plays a role in the pathogenesis of asthma.
Further studies are needed to explore the potential application of peripheral
blood monitoring of T-bet.

PMCID: PMC1810483
PMID: 17302903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Exp Med. 2007 Feb 19;204(2):431-9. Epub 2007 Feb 12.

Dendritic cell expression of the transcription factor T-bet regulates mast cell
progenitor homing to mucosal tissue.

Alcaide P(1), Jones TG, Lord GM, Glimcher LH, Hallgren J, Arinobu Y, Akashi K,
Paterson AM, Gurish MA, Luscinskas FW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Excellence in Vascular Biology, Department of Pathology, Brigham
and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor T-bet was identified in CD4(+) T cells, and it controls 
interferon gamma production and T helper type 1 cell differentiation. T-bet is
expressed in certain other leukocytes, and we recently showed (Lord, G.M., R.M.
Rao, H. Choe, B.M. Sullivan, A.H. Lichtman, F.W. Luscinskas, and L.H. Glimcher.
2005. Blood. 106:3432-3439) that it regulates T cell trafficking. We examined
whether T-bet influences homing of mast cell progenitors (MCp) to peripheral
tissues. Surprisingly, we found that MCp homing to the lung or small intestine in
T-bet(-/-) mice is reduced. This is reproduced in adhesion studies using bone
marrow-derived MCs (BMMCs) from T-bet(-/-) mice, which showed diminished adhesion
to mucosal addresin cellular adhesion molecule-1 (MAdCAM-1) and vascular cell
adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), endothelial ligands required for MCp intestinal
homing. MCp, their precursors, and BMMCs do not express T-bet, suggesting that
T-bet plays an indirect role in homing. However, adoptive transfer experiments
revealed that T-bet expression by BM cells is required for MCp homing to the
intestine. Furthermore, transfer of WT BM-derived dendritic cells (DCs) to
T-bet(-/-) mice restores normal MCp intestinal homing in vivo and MCp adhesion to
MAdCAM-1 and VCAM-1 in vitro. Nonetheless, T-bet(-/-) mice respond vigorously to 
intestinal infection with Trichinella spiralis, eliminating a role for T-bet in
MC recruitment to sites of infection and their activation and function.
Therefore, remarkably, T-bet expression by DCs indirectly controls MCp homing to 
mucosal tissues.

PMCID: PMC2118716
PMID: 17296784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Gastroenterology. 2007 Jan;132(1):358-71. Epub 2006 Oct 21.

IL-28A is a key regulator of T-cell-mediated liver injury via the T-box
transcription factor T-bet.

Siebler J(1), Wirtz S, Weigmann B, Atreya I, Schmitt E, Kreft A, Galle PR,
Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, I. Medical Clinic, University of Mainz,
Lasngenbeckstrasse 1, 55131 Mainz, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: T-cell-mediated fulminant hepatitis is a potentially
life-threatening event for which the underlying pathogenic mechanisms are not
fully understood. Here, we demonstrate a key regulatory role of IL-28A in
T-cell-mediated hepatitis.
METHODS: We cloned the murine IL-28A gene by reverse-transcription polymerase
chain reaction, assessed the effects of recombinant IL-28A, and generated
IL-28A-transgenic mice.
RESULTS: IL-28A induced TH1 cytokine production by CD4+ T lymphocytes in a
T-bet-dependent manner and was up-regulated in a murine model of T-cell-mediated 
hepatitis upon Con A administration. In vivo, CD4+ T cells from newly created
IL-28A-transgenic animals revealed an increased proliferation and proinflammatory
TH1 cytokine production, as compared with wild-type mice. In addition,
IL-28A-transgenic mice showed markedly augmented Con A-induced hepatitis with
up-regulated interferon-gamma cytokine production, as compared with wild-type
mice. Transgenic mice exhibited an up-regulation of the interferon-gamma-T-bet
signaling pathway in Con A hepatitis, and augmented hepatitis in these mice was
suppressed by crossing them with T-bet-deficient mice. In addition, in vivo
blockade of interferon-gamma but not IL-4 suppressed augmented liver inflammation
in transgenic mice, suggesting that IL-28A induces the T-bet signaling pathway in
T-cell-induced hepatitis. Finally, IL-28A-specific antisense phosphorothioate
oligonucleotides suppressed liver pathology in Con A-treated wild-type mice, as
compared with the case of control oligonucleotides.
CONCLUSIONS: IL-28A emerges as a key regulatory cytokine with pathogenic function
in T-cell-mediated liver injury. Thus, targeting of IL-28A represents a potential
novel approach for therapy of Th1-mediated inflammatory diseases such as
T-cell-mediated hepatitis.

PMID: 17241885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Immunol. 2007 Feb 1;178(3):1341-8.

T-bet regulates the fate of Th1 and Th17 lymphocytes in autoimmunity.

Gocke AR(1), Cravens PD, Ben LH, Hussain RZ, Northrop SC, Racke MK, Lovett-Racke 
AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

IL-17-producing T cells (Th17) have recently been implicated in the pathogenesis 
of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model for the human
disease multiple sclerosis. However, little is known about the transcription
factors that regulate these cells. Although it is clear that the transcription
factor T-bet plays an essential role in the differentiation of
IFN-gamma-producing CD4(+) Th1 lymphocytes, the potential role of T-bet in the
differentiation of Th17 cells is not completely understood. In this study,
therapeutic administration of a small interfering RNA specific for T-bet
significantly improved the clinical course of established EAE. The improved
clinical course was associated with suppression of newly differentiated T cells
that express IL-17 in the CNS as well as suppression of myelin basic
protein-specific Th1 autoreactive T cells. Moreover, T-bet was found to directly 
regulate transcription of the IL-23R, and, in doing so, influenced the fate of
Th17 cells, which depend on optimal IL-23 production for survival. We now show
for the first time that suppression of T-bet ameliorates EAE by limiting the
differentiation of autoreactive Th1 cells, as well as inhibiting pathogenic Th17 
cells via regulation of IL-23R.

PMID: 17237380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Infect Immun. 2007 Apr;75(4):1738-44. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Interleukin-12 drives the Th1 signaling pathway in Helicobacter pylori-infected
human gastric mucosa.

Pellicanò A(1), Sebkova L, Monteleone G, Guarnieri G, Imeneo M, Pallone F, Luzza 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica, Università di Catanzaro Magna
Graecia, Campus Universitario di Germaneto, Viale Europa, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy.

In this study we examined mechanisms that regulate T-helper lymphocyte 1 (Th1)
commitment in Helicobacter pylori-infected human gastric mucosa. The levels of
gamma interferon (IFN-gamma), interleukin-4 (IL-4), and IL-12 in total extracts
of gastric biopsies taken from H. pylori-infected and uninfected patients were
determined by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The levels of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4), STAT6, and T-box expressed
in T cells (T-bet) in total proteins extracted from gastric biopsies were
determined by Western blotting. Finally, the effect of a neutralizing IL-12
antibody on expression of Th1 transcription factors and the levels of IFN-gamma
in organ cultures of H. pylori-infected biopsies was examined. Increased levels
of IFN-gamma and IL-12 were found in gastric biopsy samples of H. pylori-infected
patients compared to the levels in uninfected patients. In addition, H.
pylori-infected biopsies exhibited high levels of expression of phosphorylated
STAT4 and T-bet. Higher levels of IFN-gamma and expression of Th1 transcription
factors were associated with greater infiltration of mononuclear cells in the
gastric mucosa. By contrast, production of IL-4 and expression of phosphorylated 
STAT6 were not associated with the intensity of mononuclear cell infiltration. In
ex vivo organ cultures of H. pylori-infected biopsies, neutralization of
endogenous IL-12 down-regulated the expression of phosphorylated STAT4 and T-bet 
and reduced IFN-gamma production. Our data indicated that IL-12 contributes to
the Th1 cell commitment in H. pylori-infected human gastric mucosa.

PMCID: PMC1865692
PMID: 17220306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. FASEB J. 2007 Apr;21(4):1177-88. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

The activated glucocorticoid receptor inhibits the transcription factor T-bet by 
direct protein-protein interaction.

Liberman AC(1), Refojo D, Druker J, Toscano M, Rein T, Holsboer F, Arzt E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Fisiología y Biología Molecular, Departamento de Fisiología y
Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires and IFIBYNE-CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Glucocorticoids (GCs) immunosuppression acts via regulation of several
transcription factors (TF), including activating protein (AP)-1, NF-kappaB, and
NFAT. GCs inhibit Th1 cytokines and promote a shift toward Th2 differentiation.
Th1 phenotype depends on TF T-bet. In this study, we examined GC regulation of
T-bet. We found that GCs inhibit T-bet transcriptional activity. We show that
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) physically interacts with T-bet both in transfected 
cell lines and in primary splenocyte cultures with endogenous GR and T-bet. This 
interaction also blocks GR-dependent transcription. We show both in vitro and in 
vivo at endogenous binding sites that the mechanism underlying T-bet inhibition
further involves reduction of T-bet binding to DNA. Using specific mutations of
GR, we demonstrate that the first zinc finger region of GR is required for T-bet 
inhibition. GCs additionally inhibit T-bet both at mRNA and protein expression
levels, revealing another layer of GR action on T-bet. Finally, we examined the
functional consequences of GR/T-bet interaction on IFN-gamma, showing that GCs
inhibit transcriptional activity of T-bet on its promoter. In view of the crucial
role of T-bet in T cell differentiation and inflammation, we propose that GR
inhibitory interaction with T-bet may be an important mechanism underlying the
immunosuppressive properties of GCs.

PMID: 17215482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Nat Immunol. 2007 Feb;8(2):145-53. Epub 2006 Dec 31.

Transcription factors T-bet and Runx3 cooperate to activate Ifng and silence Il4 
in T helper type 1 cells.

Djuretic IM(1), Levanon D, Negreanu V, Groner Y, Rao A, Ansel KM.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School and the CBR Institute for Biomedical Research, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2007 Feb;8(2):119-20.

Cell differentiation involves activation and silencing of lineage-specific genes.
Here we show that the transcription factor Runx3 is induced in T helper type 1
(T(H)1) cells in a T-bet-dependent manner, and that both transcription factors
T-bet and Runx3 are required for maximal production of interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) and silencing of the gene encoding interleukin 4 (Il4) in T(H)1
cells. T-bet does not repress Il4 in Runx3-deficient T(H)2 cells, but
coexpression of Runx3 and T-bet induces potent repression in those cells. Both
T-bet and Runx3 bind to the Ifng promoter and the Il4 silencer, and deletion of
the silencer decreases the sensitivity of Il4 to repression by either factor. Our
data indicate that cytokine gene expression in T(H)1 cells may be controlled by a
feed-forward regulatory circuit in which T-bet induces Runx3 and then 'partners' 
with Runx3 to direct lineage-specific gene activation and silencing.

PMID: 17195845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. PLoS One. 2006 Dec 20;1:e50.

Human natural killer T cells are heterogeneous in their capacity to reprogram
their effector functions.

Eger KA(1), Sundrud MS, Motsinger AA, Tseng M, Van Kaer L, Unutmaz D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a subset of T cells that help
potentiate and regulate immune responses. Although human NKT cell subsets with
distinct effector functions have been identified, it is unclear whether the
effector functions of these subsets are imprinted during development or can be
selectively reprogrammed in the periphery.
RESULTS: We found that neonatal NKT cells are predominantly CD4+ and express
higher levels of CCR7 and CD62L and lower levels of CD94 and CD161 than adult
CD4+ or CD4- NKT cell subsets. Accordingly, neonatal NKT cells were more flexible
than adult CD4+ NKT cells in their capacity to acquire Th1- or Th2-like functions
upon either cytokine-mediated polarization or ectopic expression of the Th1 or
Th2 transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3, respectively. Consistent with their
more differentiated phenotype, CD4- NKT cells were predominantly resistant to
functional reprogramming and displayed higher cytotoxic function. In contrast to 
conventional T cells, neither the expression of CXCR3 nor the cytotoxic capacity 
of neonatal NKT cells could be reprogrammed.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: Together, these results suggest that neonatal CD4+,
adult CD4+, and adult CD4- NKT may represent unique states of maturation and that
some functions of human NKT cells may be developmentally imprinted, while others 
are acquired similar to conventional T cell subsets during peripheral maturation 
and differentiation. Given the potent immuno-regulatory functions of NKT cells,
these findings have important implications for the development of novel NKT
cell-based therapeutics and vaccines.

PMCID: PMC1762372
PMID: 17183680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 1;178(1):605-12.

Th1 and type 1 cytotoxic T cells dominate responses in T-bet overexpression
transgenic mice that develop contact dermatitis.

Ishizaki K(1), Yamada A, Yoh K, Nakano T, Shimohata H, Maeda A, Fujioka Y, Morito
N, Kawachi Y, Shibuya K, Otsuka F, Shibuya A, Takahashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. satoruta@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

Contact dermatitis in humans and contact hypersensitivity (CHS) in animal models 
are delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions mediated by hapten-specific T cells. 
Recently, it has become clear that both CD4(+) Th1 and CD8(+) type 1 cytotoxic T 
(Tc1) cells can act as effectors in CHS reactions. T-bet has been demonstrated to
play an important role in Th1 and Tc1 cell differentiation, but little is known
about its contribution to CHS. In the present study, we used C57BL/6 mice
transgenic (Tg) for T-bet to address this issue. These Tg mice, which
overexpressed T-bet in their T lymphocytes, developed dermatitis characterized by
swollen, flaky, and scaly skin in regions without body hair. Skin histology
showed epidermal hyperkeratosis, neutrophil, and lymphocyte infiltration similar 
to that seen in contact dermatitis. T-bet overexpression in Tg mice led to
elevated Th1 Ig (IgG2a) and decreased Th2 Ig (IgG1) production. Intracellular
cytokine analyses demonstrated that IFN-gamma was increased in both Th1 and Tc1
cells. Furthermore, Tg mice had hypersensitive responses to
2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene, which is used for CHS induction. These results suggest 
that the level of expression of T-bet might play an important role in the
development of contact dermatitis and that these Tg mice should be a useful model
for contact dermatitis.

PMID: 17182601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Virology. 2007 Apr 25;361(1):161-73. Epub 2006 Dec 18.

Hepatitis C virus infects T cells and affects interferon-gamma signaling in T
cell lines.

Kondo Y(1), Sung VM, Machida K, Liu M, Lai MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Southern
California Keck School of Medicine, 2011 Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033,
USA. yasuteru@ebony.plala.or.jp

It has been reported that hepatitis C virus (HCV) may infect and replicate in
human T cells, particularly in perihepatic lymph nodes, but the extent and
consequence of T-cell infection in patients is unclear. This study is conducted
to characterize the parameters and functional consequences of HCV infection in T 
lymphocytes. By using a lymphotropic HCV strain, we showed that HCV could infect 
T cell lines (Molt-4 and Jurkat cells) in vitro. Both positive- and
negative-strand HCV RNA were detected for several weeks after infection. Viral
proteins could also be detected by immunofluorescence studies. Moreover,
infectious HCV particles were produced from Molt-4 cell cultures, and could be
used to infect naïve T cell lines. HCV could also infect human primary CD4+ T
cells, particularly naïve (CD45RA+CD45RO-) CD4+ cells, in culture. The amounts of
STAT-1 and phosphorylated STAT-1 proteins in the infected Molt-4 cells were
significantly less than those in uninfected cultures, suggesting the possibility 
of defect in interferon-gamma signaling. Indeed, T-bet and STAT-1 mRNA levels
after interferon-gamma stimulation in infected Molt-4 were suppressed. In
conclusion, HCV could infect and transiently replicate in T cells and that HCV
replication suppressed the IFN-gamma/STAT-1/T-bet signaling due to the reduction 
of STAT-1 and inhibition of its activation (phosphorylation).

PMID: 17175001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. FEBS Lett. 2007 Jan 9;581(1):57-64. Epub 2006 Dec 11.

D-pinitol regulates Th1/Th2 balance via suppressing Th2 immune response in
ovalbumin-induced asthma.

Lee JS(1), Lee CM, Jeong YI, Jung ID, Kim BH, Seong EY, Kim JI, Choi IW, Chung
HY, Park YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Pusan National University College of Pharmacy,
Busan, Republic of Korea.

D-pinitol has been demonstrated to exert insulin-like and anti-inflammatory
activities. However, its anti-allergic effect in the Th1/Th2 immune response is
poorly understood. Recently, it was shown that T-bet and GATA-3 are master Th1
and Th2 regulatory transcription factors. In this study, we have attempted to
determine whether D-pinitol regulates Th1/Th2 cytokine production, T-bet and
GATA-3 gene expression in OVA-induced asthma model mice. We also examined to
ascertain whether D-pinitol could influence eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) activity.
After being sensitized and challenged with ovalbumin (OVA) showed typical
asthmatic reactions. These reactions included an increase in the number of
eosinophils in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid, an increase in inflammatory
cell infiltration into the lung tissue around blood vessels and airways, airway
luminal narrowing, and the development of airway hyper-responsiveness (AHR). The 
administration of D-pinitol before the last airway OVA challenge resulted in a
significant inhibition of all asthmatic reactions. Accordingly, this study may
provide evidence that D-pinitol plays a critical role in the amelioration of the 
pathogenetic process of asthma in mice. These findings provide new insight into
the immunopharmacological role of D-pinitol in terms of its effects in a murine
model of asthma, and also broaden current perspectives in our understanding of
the immunopharmacological functions of D-pinitol.

PMID: 17174308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Clin Pathol. 2007 Oct;60(10):1092-7. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

Hodgkin's lymphoma associated T-cells exhibit a transcription factor profile
consistent with distinct lymphoid compartments.

Atayar C(1), van den Berg A, Blokzijl T, Boot M, Gascoyne RD, Visser L, Poppema
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of Groningen and
University Medical Centre Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL) is characterised by an ineffective immune
response that is predominantly mediated by CD4+ T-cells.
AIMS: To analyse the expression of the key regulatory T-cell transcription
factors (TFs) in the T-cells of HL involved tissues in order to assess the nature
of the T(H) immune response in HL.
METHODS AND RESULTS: By immunohistochemistry, GATA3 was strongly and T-bet
exclusively expressed in a subset of interfollicular lymphocytes in the reactive 
lymphoid tissues. In classical HL (CHL), which is generally located in the
interfollicular zones, a predominance of T-bet+ T-cells and lesser amounts of
GATA3+ and c-Maf+ T-cells was found, concordant with the pattern of the normal
interfollicular compartment. In reactive lymphoid tissues, c-Maf was observed
mostly in T-lymphocytes within the germinal centres (GCs). Nodular lymphocyte
predominance type of Hodgkin's lymphoma (NLPHL) and progressively transformed
germinal centres cases, showed a majority of c-Maf+ T-cells, consistent with the 
pattern in normal GCs. NLPHL cases uniformly showed c-Maf+/CD57+ T-cell rosettes 
around the neoplastic cells; these rosettes were absent in "paragranuloma-type"
T-cell/histiocyte rich B-cell lymphoma.
CONCLUSIONS: T-cell TF expression profiles of the reactive T-cells in both
subtypes of HL are in accordance with the expression profile observed in the
distinct lymphoid compartments.

PMCID: PMC2014845
PMID: 17158640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Exp Med. 2006 Dec 25;203(13):2785-91. Epub 2006 Nov 27.

Role of IL-17 and regulatory T lymphocytes in a systemic autoimmune disease.

Lohr J(1), Knoechel B, Wang JJ, Villarino AV, Abbas AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco School of
Medicine, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

To explore the interactions between regulatory T cells and pathogenic effector
cytokines, we have developed a model of a T cell-mediated systemic autoimmune
disorder resembling graft-versus-host disease. The cytokine responsible for
tissue inflammation in this disorder is interleukin (IL)-17, whereas interferon
(IFN)-gamma produced by Th1 cells has a protective effect in this setting.
Because of the interest in potential therapeutic approaches utilizing transfer of
regulatory T cells and inhibition of the IL-2 pathway, we have explored the roles
of these in the systemic disease. We demonstrate that the production of IL-17 and
tissue infiltration by IL-17-producing cells occur and are even enhanced in the
absence of IL-2. Regulatory T cells favor IL-17 production but prevent the
disease when administered early in the course by suppressing expansion of T
cells. Thus, the pathogenic or protective effects of cytokines and the
therapeutic capacity of regulatory T cells are crucially dependent on the timing 
and the nature of the disease.

PMCID: PMC2118184
PMID: 17130300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Respir Med. 2007 Jun;101(6):1321-30. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

IL-12-induced T-bet expression and IFNgamma release in lymphocytes from
asthmatics--role of MAPkinases ERK-1/-2, p38(MAPK) and effect of dexamethasone.

Koch A(1), Raidl M, Lux M, Müller K, Büning H, Humme S, Erdmann E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology, University of Cologne, Medical Clinic III,
Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 9, 50924 Köln (Cologne), Germany.
andrea.koch@uni-koeln.de

The transcription factor T-box-expressed-in-T-cells (T-bet) is required for T(H)1
lymphocyte differentiation, regulates the IL-12-induced expression of the
T(H)1-specific cytokine IFNgamma and may be dysregulated in asthmatics. The
modulatory role of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-1/-2,
p38mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and dexamethasone on IL-12 induced
T-bet and IFNgamma expression was assessed in peripheral blood lymphocytes of 10 
atopic asthmatics and 10 nonatopic normals. IFNgamma production was dependent on 
phosphorylation of ERK-1/-2 and p38MAPK, as examined by PD098059, an inhibitor of
the upstream activator of MAPKkinase (MKK-1), and SB203580, an inhibitor of
p38MAPK. The inhibitory effect of PD098059 on IFNgamma release was decreased in
asthmatic T-cells compared with normals. The IL-12-induced T-bet expression and
the inhibitory effect of SB203580 were increased in asthmatic T-cells compared
with normals. Dexamethasone blocked the IL-12-induced T-bet expression in
asthmatic T-cells completely and decreased IL-12-induced IFNgamma release by
approximately 50%, which occurred to the same extent in asthmatic and normal
T-cells. In conclusion, (1) p38MAPK-pathway rather than ERK-pathway may play a
more basic role in the regulation of the increased T-bet expression in asthma,
and (2) ERK- and p38MAPK-activation modulate IFNgamma expression independently of
T-bet and this regulatory role of ERK-1/-2 on IFNgamma release is impaired in
asthma. The therapeutic benefit of dexamethasone on T-bet and IFNgamma production
seems to be critical.

PMID: 17127048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Rheumatol. 2007 Jan;34(1):89-96. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Elevated gene expression of Th1/Th2 associated transcription factors is
correlated with disease activity in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Lit LC(1), Wong CK, Li EK, Tam LS, Lam CW, Lo YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince 
of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong. lcwlit@cuhk.edu.hk

OBJECTIVE: T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) and GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3)
are transcriptional factors that play a crucial role in Th1 and Th2 development. 
We investigated the immunomodulatory roles of T-bet and GATA-3 and Th1/Th2
related cytokines in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and
their association with disease activity.
METHODS: Gene expressions of T-bet, GATA-3, interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), and
interleukin 4 (IL-4) in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and plasma
concentrations of the Th1/Th2 cytokines IFN-gamma, IL-18, and IL-4, were assayed 
in 80 patients with SLE and 40 sex and age matched healthy subjects by real-time 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction and ELISA.
RESULTS: The mRNA levels of T-bet and IFN-gamma and the relative expression
levels of T-bet/GATA-3 and IFN-gamma/IL-4 were significantly higher, in contrast 
to the lower expressions of GATA-3 and IL-4, in SLE patients than controls (all p
< 0.05). In all SLE patients, there were significant correlations in mRNA
expression of T-bet with IFN-gamma (r = 0.590, p < 0.0001), and of GATA-3 with
IL-4 (r = 0.245, p = 0.029). The relative expressions of T-bet/GATA-3 and
IFN-gamma/IL-4 correlated with lupus disease activity (r = 0.229, p = 0.042; r = 
0.231, p = 0.040, respectively). Plasma IL-18 concentration was increased
significantly in all SLE patients (p < 0.05). The elevated plasma Th1/Th2
cytokine ratio IL-18/IL-4 correlated positively with disease activity in all SLE 
patients (r = 0.250, p = 0.025).
CONCLUSION: There is an association between expression of Th1/Th2 transcription
factors and cytokines in SLE. The elevated gene expressions of Th1/Th2
transcription factors and cytokines should provide a useful tool for assessing
the functional status of T-helper lymphocytes in SLE disease development.

PMID: 17117487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Immunol. 2006 Dec 1;177(11):7579-87.

IL-27 induces Th1 differentiation via p38 MAPK/T-bet- and intercellular adhesion 
molecule-1/LFA-1/ERK1/2-dependent pathways.

Owaki T(1), Asakawa M, Fukai F, Mizuguchi J, Yoshimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Intractable Immune System Disease Research Center, Tokyo Medical University,
6-1-1 Shinjuku, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8402, Japan.

IL-27, a novel member of the IL-6/IL-12 family, activates both STAT1 and STAT3
through its receptor, which consists of WSX-1 and gp130 subunits, resulting in
positive and negative regulations of immune responses. We recently demonstrated
that IL-27 induces Th1 differentiation through ICAM-1/LFA-1 interaction in a
STAT1-dependent, but T-bet-independent mechanism. In this study, we further
investigated the molecular mechanisms by focusing on p38 MAPK and ERK1/2.
IL-27-induced Th1 differentiation was partially inhibited by lack of T-bet
expression or by blocking ICAM-1/LFA-1 interaction with anti-ICAM-1 and/or
anti-LFA-1, and further inhibited by both. Similarly, the p38 MAPK inhibitor,
SB203580, or the inhibitor of ERK1/2 phosphorylation, PD98059, partially
suppressed IL-27-induced Th1 differentiation and the combined treatment
completely suppressed it. p38 MAPK was then revealed to be located upstream of
T-bet, and SB203580, but not PD98059, inhibited T-bet-dependent Th1
differentiation. In contrast, ERK1/2 was shown to be located downstream of
ICAM-1/LFA-1, and PD98059, but not SB203580, inhibited ICAM-1/LFA-1-dependent Th1
differentiation. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that STAT1 is important for
IL-27-induced activation of ERK1/2, but not p38 MAPK, and that IL-27 directly
induces mRNA expression of growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible 45gamma, which 
is known to mediate activation of p38 MAPK. Finally, IL-12Rbeta2 expression was
shown to be up-regulated by IL-27 in both T-bet- and ICAM-1/LFA-1-dependent
mechanisms. Taken together, these results suggest that IL-27 induces Th1
differentiation via two distinct pathways, p38 MAPK/T-bet- and
ICAM-1/LFA-1/ERK1/2-dependent pathways. This is in contrast to IL-12, which
induces it via only p38 MAPK/T-bet-dependent pathway.

PMID: 17114427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Immunol. 2006 Dec 1;177(11):7515-9.

Cutting Edge: IL-12 inversely regulates T-bet and eomesodermin expression during 
pathogen-induced CD8+ T cell differentiation.

Takemoto N(1), Intlekofer AM, Northrup JT, Wherry EJ, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, 421 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Cytokines are critical determinants for specification of lineage-defining
transcription factors of CD4+ T cell subsets. Little is known, however, about how
cytokines regulate expression of T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes) in effector and
memory CD8+ T cells. We now report that IL-12, a signature of cell-mediated
immunity, represses Eomes while positively regulating T-bet in effector CD8+ T
cells during infection with Listeria monocytogenes. After resolution of infection
and abatement of IL-12 signaling, Eomes expression rises whereas T-bet expression
declines in memory CD8+ T cells. Eomes becomes derepressed in effector cells by
ablation of IL-12 signaling. In the absence of IL-12, the dynamics of clonal
expansion and contraction are also perturbed. Together, these results reveal how 
a pathogen-associated signal, such as IL-12, could act as a switch, regulating
appropriate clonal growth and decline while, in parallel, shaping a unique
pattern of fate-determining transcription factors.

PMID: 17114419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Pneumologie. 2006 Nov;60(11):711-5.

[Ca2+-signaling in smooth muscles cells of the airways in T-bet knock-out mice].

[Article in German]

Bergner A(1), Kellner J, Gamarra F, Huber RM.

Author information: 
(1)Pneumologie, Medizinische Klinik-Innenstadt der Ludwig-Maximilians Universität
München, Germany. albrecht.bergner@med.uni-muenchen.de

BACKGROUND: Airway smooth muscle cells (ASMC) play a key role in bronchial
hyperresponsiveness (BHR). A major component of the signalling cascade leading to
ASMC contraction is calcium. T-bet knock-out (KO) mice show the key features of
allergic asthma such as a shift towards T (H2)-lymphocytes and display a broad
spectrum of asthma-like histological and functional characteristics. In this
study, we aimed at investigating whether Ca (2+)-homeostasis of ASMC is altered
in T-bet KO-mice as an experimental model of asthma.
METHODS: Lung slices of 100 to 200 microm thickness were obtained from T-bet KO- 
and wild-type mice. Airway contractions in response to acetylcholine (ACH) were
measured by video-microscopy and Ca (2+)-signaling in single ASMC of lung slices 
was assessed using two-photon microscopy.
RESULTS: Airways from T-bet KO-mice showed increased baseline airway tone (BAT)
and BHR compared to those of wild-type mice. The increased BAT was correlated
with an increased incidence of spontaneous changes in intracellular Ca
(2+)-concentrations, whereas BHR correlated with higher ACH-induced Ca
(2+)-transients and an increased proportion of ASMC showing Ca (2+)-oscillations.
Emptying intracellular Ca (2+)-stores using caffeine or cyclopiazonic acid
induced higher Ca (2+)-elevations in ASMC from T-bet KO compared to wild-type
mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Altered Ca (2+)-homeostasis of ASMC contributes to increased BAT and
BHR in lung slices from T-bet KO mice as a murine asthma model. We propose that a
higher Ca (2+)-content of the intracellular Ca (2+)-stores is involved in the
pathophysiology of these changes.

PMID: 17109269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 15;177(10):7451-61.

Defective Th1 cytokine gene transcription in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome patients.

Trifari S(1), Sitia G, Aiuti A, Scaramuzza S, Marangoni F, Guidotti LG, Martino
S, Saracco P, Notarangelo LD, Roncarolo MG, Dupré L.

Author information: 
(1)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy, Milan, Italy.

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) protein (WASP) plays a key role in TCR-mediated
activation and immunological synapse formation. However, the effects of WASP
deficiency on effector functions of human CD4+ and CD8+ T cells remain to be
determined. In this study, we report that TCR/CD28-driven proliferation and
secretion of IL-2, IFN-gamma, and TNF-alpha are strongly reduced in CD8+ T cells 
from WAS patients, compared with healthy donor CD8+ T cells. Furthermore, WAS
CD4+ T cells secrete low levels of IL-2 and fail to produce IFN-gamma and
TNF-alpha, while the production of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10 is only minimally
affected. Defective IL-2 and IFN-gamma production persists after culture of naive
WAS CD4+ T cells in Th1-polarizing conditions. The defect in Th1 cytokine
production by WAS CD4+ and CD8+ T cells is also present at the transcriptional
level, as shown by reduced IL-2 and IFN-gamma mRNA transcripts after TCR/CD28
triggering. The reduced transcription of Th1 cytokine genes in WAS CD4+ T cells
is associated with a defective induction of T-bet mRNA and a reduction in the
early nuclear recruitment of NFAT-1, while the defective activation of WAS CD8+ T
cells correlates with reduced nuclear recruitment of both NFAT-1 and NFAT-2.
Together, our data indicate that WASP regulates the transcriptional activation of
T cells and is required specifically for Th1 cytokine production.

PMID: 17082665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Nov 7;103(45):16894-9. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Interaction of GATA-3/T-bet transcription factors regulates expression of sialyl 
Lewis X homing receptors on Th1/Th2 lymphocytes.

Chen GY(1), Osada H, Santamaria-Babi LF, Kannagi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center, 1-1 Kanokoden,
Chikusaku, Nagoya 464-8681, Japan.

Selectin-dependent cell adhesion mediates inflammatory extravasation and routine 
homing of lymphocytes. Most resting peripheral T lymphocytes lack expression of
sialyl Lewis X, the carbohydrate ligand for selectins, and are induced to
strongly express it upon activation. T helper 1 (Th1) cells are known to more
preferentially express sialyl Lewis X as compared with T helper 2 (Th2) cells
upon activation. The molecular basis for this preferential expression, however,
has not been elucidated to date. Here we show that the gene for
fucosyltransferase VII (FUT7), the rate-limiting enzyme for sialyl Lewis X
synthesis, is a unique example of the human genes with binding sites for both
GATA-3 and T-bet, two opposing factors for Th1 and Th2 development, and is
regulated transcriptionally by a balance of the two interacting transcription
factors. T-bet promotes and GATA-3 represses FUT7 transcription. Our results
indicated that T-bet interferes with the binding of GATA-3 to its target DNA, and
also that GATA-3 significantly interferes with the binding of T-bet to the FUT7
promoter. T-bet has a binding ability to GATA-3, CBP/P300, and Sp1 to form a
transcription factor complex, and GATA-3 regulates FUT7 transcription by
phosphorylation-dependently recruiting histone deacetylase (HDAC)-3/HDAC-5 and by
competing with CBP/P300 in binding to the N terminus of T-bet. Suppression of
GATA-3 activity by dominant-negative GATA-3 or repressor of GATA (ROG) was
necessary to attain a maximum expression of FUT7 and sialyl Lewis X in human T
lymphoid cells. These results indicate that the GATA-3/T-bet transcription factor
complex regulates the cell-lineage-specific expression of the lymphocyte homing
receptors.

PMCID: PMC1629005
PMID: 17075044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Zhonghua Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Aug;41(8):494-7.

[Expression of T cell-specific transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in
recurrent aphthous ulcerations].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu JX(1), Shan LY, Li LH, Huang ZH, Liu AG, Yao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Wuxi No. 4 Hospital Affiliated to Suzhou
University, Wuxi Jiangsu 214062, China. dentzhu@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of the T cell-specific transcription
factors T-bet/GATA-3 in recurrent aphthous ulcerations (RAU).
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated by density
gradient centrifugation from RAU patients and healthy controls. Expressions of
T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA and protein in the PBMCs were detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot respectively.
The concentrations of gamma-interferon (gamma-IFN) and interleukin-4 (IL-4) in
the serum were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: The expressions of T-bet mRNA were 0.73 +/- 0.14 in the control group
and 0.12 +/- 0.04 in the recurrent aphthous ulcerations group, the levels of
T-bet protein expressions were 0.73 +/- 0.18 in the control group and 0.24 +/-
0.09 in the recurrent aphthous ulcerations group, there was a significant
difference between the two groups (P < 0.01). The levels of GATA-3 mRNA
expressions were 0.89 +/- 0.11 in the control group and 1.30 +/- 0.13 in the
recurrent aphthous ulcerations group; GATA-3 protein expressions were 1.09 +/-
0.16 in the control group and 1.80 +/- 0.16 in the recurrent aphthous ulcerations
group, there was a significant difference between the two groups (P < 0.01). In
the control group, the concentration of gamma-interferon in the serum was (22.15 
+/- 1.52) ng/L, which was significantly elevated compared with that in the
recurrent aphthous ulcerations group (16.32 +/- 0.22) ng/L (P < 0.01), in the
control group, the concentration of IL-4 in the serum was (25.58 +/- 2.59) ng/L, 
which was significantly lower than that of the recurrent aphthous ulcerations
group (43.60 +/- 3.15) ng/L (P < 0.01). The ratio of gamma-IFN and IL-4 was
positively correlated with the ratio of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA and protein
expression (r = 0.96, 0.94, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Imbalance of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 may be one of
the key factors in immune dysregulation of recurrent aphthous ulcerations.

PMID: 17074191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Immunity. 2006 Nov;25(5):717-29. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

A distal conserved sequence element controls Ifng gene expression by T cells and 
NK cells.

Hatton RD(1), Harrington LE, Luther RJ, Wakefield T, Janowski KM, Oliver JR,
Lallone RL, Murphy KM, Weaver CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Chromatin dynamics that regulate Ifng gene expression are incompletely
understood. By using cross-species comparative sequence analyses, we have
identified conserved noncoding sequences (CNSs) upstream of the Ifng gene, one of
which, located -22 kb from the transcriptional start site, contains clustered
consensus binding sequences of transcription factors that function in T cell
differentiation. CNS-22 was uniquely associated with histone modifications
typical of accessible chromatin in both T helper 1 (Th1) and Th2 cells and
demonstrated significant and selective T-bet (T-box transcription factor
expressed in T cells, Tbx21)-dependent binding and enhancer activity in Th1
cells. Deletion of CNS-22 in the context of an Ifng reporter transgene ablated T 
cell receptor-dependent and -independent Ifng expression in Th1 effectors and
similarly blocked expression by cytotoxic T lymphocytes and natural killer cells.
Thus, a single distal element may be essential for Ifng gene expression by both
innate and adaptive immune effector cell lineages.

PMID: 17070076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 1;177(9):5890-901.

T-bet controls pathogenicity of CTLs in the heart by separable effects on
migration and effector activity.

Taqueti VR(1), Grabie N, Colvin R, Pang H, Jarolim P, Luster AD, Glimcher LH,
Lichtman AH.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Research Division, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

CD8+ CTL contribute to the pathogenesis of myocarditis and cardiac allograft
rejection. Using a transgenic model of myocarditis, we examined the role of the
transcription factor T-bet in the differentiation of pathogenic cardiac
Ag-specific CTL. We demonstrate that T-bet-deficient CTL are significantly
impaired in their ability to cause disease, despite intact proliferation and
activation phenotypes. In the absence of T-bet, there is markedly reduced
expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR3, and CXCR3-gene knockout CTL are
significantly less pathogenic than control CTL. Retroviral-mediated CXCR3
expression in T-bet-deficient CD8+ T cells reconstitutes their ability to
infiltrate but not to damage the heart, establishing that CD8+ T cell
pathogenicity is related to T-bet-dependent CXCR3 expression, reduced
cytotoxicity, and enhanced regulation. These findings highlight the potential
therapeutic benefit of targeting T-bet-regulated gene expression and
CXCR3-dependent migration in immune-mediated heart disease.

PMID: 17056513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Eur J Immunol. 2006 Nov;36(11):2971-80.

The negative regulators Foxj1 and Foxo3a are up-regulated by a peptide that
inhibits systemic lupus erythematosus-associated T cell responses.

Sela U(1), Dayan M, Hershkoviz R, Cahalon L, Lider O, Mozes E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

A peptide (hCDR1) based on the complementarity determining region-1 of an
anti-DNA antibody ameliorates systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in induced and
spontaneous lupus models. Our objectives were to determine the effects of hCDR1
on TCR signaling and on its negative regulators, Foxj1 and Foxo3a. BALB/c mice
were immunized with the SLE-inducing anti-DNA antibody, designated 16/6Id, and
treated with hCDR1. hCDR1 treatment specifically inhibited IFN-gamma secretion by
T cells in association with down-regulated T-bet expression and NF-kappaB
activation; however, GATA-3 expression was not affected. Furthermore, TCR
signaling (ZAP-70 phosphorylation) was inhibited, and the mRNA expression of the 
two modulators of Th1 activation, Foxj1 and Foxo3a, was significantly
up-regulated. The latter were also elevated in SLE-afflicted (NZBxNZW)F1 mice
that were treated with hCDR1. Addition of TGF-beta, which was elevated following 
treatment with hCDR1, to T cells from 16/6Id immunized mice, up-regulated Foxj1
and Foxo3a mRNA expression, similarly to hCDR1. In contrast, anti-TGF-beta
antibodies added to hCDR1-treated T cells abrogated its effect. Thus, hCDR1
elevates TGF-beta, which contributes to the up-regulation of T cell Foxj1 and
Foxo3a expression, leading to inhibition of NF-kappaB activation and IFN-gamma
secretion, which is required for the maintenance of SLE.

PMID: 17051618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mol Immunol. 2007 Mar;44(7):1808-14. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

IFN-gamma-inducing transcription factor, T-bet is upregulated by estrogen in
murine splenocytes: role of IL-27 but not IL-12.

Karpuzoglu E(1), Phillips RA, Gogal RM Jr, Ansar Ahmed S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Department of
Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland Regional College of
Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.

Estrogen is believed to be involved in regulation of the differentiation,
survival, or function of diverse immune cells as well as in many autoimmune and
inflammatory diseases. However, the mechanisms behind the immunomodulatory
effects of estrogen are poorly understood. Previously, we have shown that natural
estrogen can upregulate IFN-gamma and IFN-gamma-mediated-inflammatory events
(iNOS, nitric oxide, COX-2). Since IFN-gamma is regulated by T-bet, in this
study, we investigated whether estrogen induces T-bet expression in primary
murine splenocytes. We found that in vivo estrogen treatment primes splenocytes
for early upregulation of T-bet upon activation by T cell stimulants,
Concanavalin-A (Con-A) or anti-CD3 antibodies. The expression of T-bet protein
was not altered by IL-12 while IFN-gamma had partial effects on T-bet in
splenocytes from estrogen-treated mice. Notably, T-bet expression increased in
Con-A-activated splenocytes from estrogen-treated mice in the presence of IL-27. 
Together, our studies show that in vivo estrogen exposure primes lymphocytes
towards Th1 type development by promoting/upregulating T-bet expression, which is
upregulated in part by IFN-gamma and IL-27. Given that T-bet is a potent inducer 
of IFN-gamma, these studies may lead to new lines of investigation in relation to
many female-predominant autoimmune diseases and inflammatory disorders.

PMCID: PMC3097111
PMID: 17046061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Leukoc Biol. 2006 Dec;80(6):1251-61. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

Effects of LPS-mediated bystander activation in the innate immune system.

Yadav R(1), Zammit DJ, Lefrancois L, Vella AT.

Author information: 
(1)University of Connecticut Health Center, 263 Farmington Ave., MC1319,
Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

LPS induces dendritic cell (DC) activation, but the precise in vivo mechanism is 
unclear since DCs express low levels of TLR4. Here, it is shown that DCs can be
activated in response to LPS through a bystander mechanism. This result was
obtained using chimeric mice reconstituted with LPS-responsive and nonresponsive 
bone marrow cells. Thus, after indirect in vivo conditioning by LPS,
bystander-activated DCs (LPS nonresponsive) up-regulated CD86. This up-regulation
occurred even when LPS-responsive cells were MyD88 deficient. Functional analysis
demonstrated that in vivo LPS conditioning endowed both the LPS-responsive and
bystander cells with the ability to produce IFN-gamma in response to TLR9
stimulation in vitro. IFN-gamma production was also shown to be important for
enhanced T-bet gene expression but not important for up-regulation of CD86. To
investigate aspects of the mechanism, we used intracellular cytokine staining and
found that NKDCs were responsible for at least some of the IFN-gamma production. 
Thus, our in vivo results demonstrated that bacterial LPS can bridge activation
of various cellular populations of the innate immune system through a bystander
mechanism.

PMID: 16973890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Ai Zheng. 2006 Sep;25(9):1069-75.

[Effect of T-bet on biological functions of mouse macrophage Raw264.7].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiao L(1), Tan WP, Xiao X, Liang ZH, Wu JX, Li HL, Liu RY, Huang BJ, Huang WL.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510060,
P. R. China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: T-bet (T box expressed in T cells), a Th1-specific T box 
transcription factor, controls many kinds of immune cells, such as Th1, NK, CD8+,
dendritic cells, and B cells. This study was to explore potential effects of
T-bet gene on biological functions of mouse macrophage Raw264.7 cells in vitro.
METHODS: The eukaryotic expression vector carrying mouse T-bet (pcDNA3.0-mT-bet) 
was constructed and identified by consequence analysis, double restrictive
endonucleases digestion and polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The gene expression 
in Raw264.7 cells was detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and Western blot. PBS, pcDNA3.0, and pcDNA3.0-mT-bet were transiently
transfected into Raw264.7 cells respectively; cell cycle, MHC I/II expression
levels, phagocytic activity of FITC-dextran, nitric oxide (NO) secretion level,
and the cytotoxicity of Raw264.7 cells to mouse leukemia cell line L1210 were
evaluated 48 hours after transfection.
RESULTS: Eukaryotic expression vector which could express T-bet protein in
Raw264.7 cells was successfully constructed. There was no difference in cell
cycle between pcDNA3.0 group and pcDNA3.0-mT-bet group. There was significant
difference in MHC I expression level between pcDNA3.0 group (20.8+/-0.7) and
pcDNA3.0-mT-bet group (24.8+/-0.6, P<0.05), but not in MHC II expression level;
there was also difference in mean fluorescence intensity of phagocytized dextran 
between pcDNA3.0 group (28.2+/-0.4) and pcDNA3.0-mT-bet group (32.8+/-0.8,
P<0.05); there was also significant difference in NO secretion level between
pcDNA3 group (0 pmol) and pcDNA3.0-mT-bet group [(1.7+/-0.6) pmol, P<0.05]
without lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation; meanwhile, significant difference
was also observed between pcDNA3.0 group [(10.5 +/-1.3) pmol] and pcDNA3.0-mT-bet
group [(15.6+/-1.6) pmol, P<0.05] under the stimulation of LPS (10 microg/ml) for
20 h; there was also difference in cytotoxicity of Raw264.7 cells to L1210 cells 
in vitro between pcDNA3 group [(35.6+/-2.1)%] and pcDNA3.0-mT-bet group
[(51.9+/-3.5)%, P<0.05].
CONCLUSION: T-bet up-regulates MHC I expression and NO secretion level in
Raw264.7 cells, increases their cytotoxicity to L1210 cells, but has no
influences on the cell cycle and MHC II expression.

PMID: 16965644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Immunol. 2006 Sep 15;177(6):3721-7.

IL-21 inhibits IFN-gamma production in developing Th1 cells through the
repression of Eomesodermin expression.

Suto A(1), Wurster AL, Reiner SL, Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Exposure of naive Th cell precursors (Thp) to IL-21 inhibits IFN-gamma production
from developing Th1 cells. The inhibition of IFN-gamma seen in IL-21-treated Thp 
cells is specific as the expression of other Th1 cytokines is unaffected.
Recently, it has been reported that Eomesodermin (Eomes), a member of the T-box
gene family, is expressed in developing CD8+ T cells and plays an important role 
in regulating IFN-gamma production and cytolytic effector function. In this
study, we show that Eomes mRNA and protein are also expressed in developing Th1
cells, and exposure of naive Thp cells to IL-21 results in a decrease in Eomes
expression. Moreover, the repression of Eomes expression by IL-21 is not due to
an indirect effect of IL-21 on the expression of IFN-gamma or STAT4 and is
independent of STAT1 and T-bet expression. Finally, we show that ectopic
expression of Eomes prevents the inhibition of IFN-gamma production from
IL-21-treated Thp cells. Taken together, these results demonstrate that Eomes
plays a role in regulating IFN-gamma production in CD4+ T cells and IL-21
inhibits IFN-gamma production in developing Th1 cells through the repression of
Eomes expression.

PMID: 16951332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Immunol. 2006 Sep 15;177(6):3554-63.

IFN-gamma and T-bet expression in human dendritic cells from normal donors and
cancer patients is controlled through mechanisms involving ERK-1/2-dependent and 
IL-12-independent pathways.

Li H(1), Wojciechowski W, Dell'Agnola C, Lopez NE, Espinoza-Delgado I.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology-Oncology, Gerontology Research Center, National
Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Dendritic cells (DC) play a major role in priming naive T cells and modulating
the immune response. We have previously reported that bryostatin-1, a potent
immune modulator with antitumor activity, activates monocytes and lymphocytes to 
produce cytokines. Studies have shown that tumor-bearing hosts have a Th1/Th2
cytokine pattern that is associated with decreased production of IFN-gamma. We
investigated the expression of IFN-gamma in bryostatin-1-treated human DC.
Bryostatin-1 induced both IFN-gamma and T-bet mRNA expression in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. As little as 1 ng/ml bryostatin-1 induced IFN-gamma and
T-bet transcripts within 3 h and protein at 12 h. Treatment of DC with
cycloheximide revealed that bryostatin-1-induced T-bet expression requires de
novo protein synthesis, but bryostatin-1-induced IFN-gamma expression is
independent of protein synthesis. Furthermore, dexamethasone inhibits
bryostatin-1-induced IFN-gamma mRNA expression but increases bryostatin-1-induced
T-bet mRNA expression. Experiments with ERK-1/2 inhibitors demonstrated that
bryostatin-1 induction of IFN- gamma and T-bet was ERK-dependent and
IL-12-independent. Similar results were obtained from both normal donors and
cancer patients. In summary, our results suggest that bryostatin-1-induced
IFN-gamma expression is T-bet independent. They also suggest for the first time
that IFN- gamma and T-bet can be induced in human DC through an ERK-dependent
pathway. Bryostatin-1-induced IFN- gamma may play a crucial role in the
initiation of the immune response, before specific recognition by T cells that
could be beneficial in the treatment of cancer.

PMID: 16951314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Chin Med J (Engl). 2006 Aug 20;119(16):1396-9.

T-bet/GATA-3 ratio is a surrogate measure of Th1/Th2 cytokine profiles and may be
novel targets for CpG ODN treatment in asthma patients.

Dong L(1), Chen M, Zhang Q, Li LZ, Xu XQ, Xiao W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Disease, Qilu Hospital, School of Medicine, Shandong
University, Jinan 250012, China. dl5506@yahoo.com.cn

PMID: 16934187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Immunol. 2006 Sep 1;177(5):2948-58.

CD4+ T cell expressed CD80 regulates central nervous system effector function and
survival during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Podojil JR(1), Kohm AP, Miller SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology and Interdepartmental Immunobiology
Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA.

CD80 expressed on the surface of APCs provides a positive costimulatory signal to
naive CD4+ T cells during activation. Therefore, it was hypothesized that
treatment of SJL mice with various forms of anti-CD80 mAb during remission from
the acute phase of relapsing experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (R-EAE)
would ameliorate disease progression. We previously reported that treatment of
SJL mice with anti-CD80 Fab during R-EAE remission blocked activation of T cells 
specific for endogenous myelin epitopes, inhibiting epitope spreading and
clinical disease progression; however, treatment with the native form of the same
anti-CD80 mAb exacerbated disease progression. The current data show that intact 
anti-CD80 mAb binds both CNS-infiltrating CD4+ T cells and CD11c+ dendritic cells
and that exacerbation of R-EAE directly correlates with increased survival and
activity of myelin-specific CD4+ T cells, while the percentage of CD11c+
dendritic cells in the CNS and their APC activity was not altered. In vitro data 
show that cross-linking CD80 on the surface of CD4+ T cells activated in the
presence of Th1-promoting cytokines increases the level of T cell activation,
effector function, and survival by directly up-regulating the expression levels
of transcripts for T-bet, IFN-gamma, and Bcl-xL. These findings indicate a novel 
regulatory role for CD80-mediated intracellular signals in CD4+ T cells and have 
important implications for using anti-costimulatory molecule mAb therapy in
established autoimmune disease.

PMID: 16920930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Aug 15;12(16):4812-21.

Th1 response and cytotoxicity genes are down-regulated in cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma.

Hahtola S(1), Tuomela S, Elo L, Häkkinen T, Karenko L, Nedoszytko B, Heikkilä H, 
Saarialho-Kere U, Roszkiewicz J, Aittokallio T, Lahesmaa R, Ranki A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland.

PURPOSE: Increased production of Th2 cytokines characterizes Sezary syndrome, the
leukemic form of cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCL). To identify the molecular
background and to study whether shared by the most common CTCL subtype, mycosis
fungoides, we analyzed the gene expression profiles in both subtypes.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Freshly isolated cells from 30 samples, representing skin,
blood, and enriched CD4(+) cell populations of mycosis fungoides and Sezary
syndrome, were analyzed with Affymetrix (Santa Clara, CA) oligonucleotide
microarrays, quantitative PCR, or immunohistochemistry. The gene expression
profiles were combined with findings of comparative genomic hybridization of the 
same samples to identify chromosomal changes affecting the aberrant gene
expression.
RESULTS: We identified a set of Th1-specific genes [e.g., TBX21 (T-bet), NKG7,
and SCYA5 (RANTES)] to be down-regulated in Sezary syndrome as well as in a
proportion of mycosis fungoides samples. In both Sezary syndrome and mycosis
fungoides blood samples, the S100P and LIR9 gene expression was up-regulated. In 
lesional skin, IL7R and CD52 were up-regulated. Integration of comparative
genomic hybridization and transcriptomic data identified chromosome arms 1q, 3p, 
3q, 4q, 12q, 16p, and 16q as likely targets for new CTCL-associated gene
aberrations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings revealed several new genes involved in CTCL
pathogenesis and potential therapeutic targets. Down-regulation of a set of genes
involved in Th1 polarization, including the major Th1-polarizing factor, TBX21,
was for the first time associated with CTCL. In addition, a plausible explanation
for the proliferative response of CTCL cells to locally produced interleukin-7
was revealed.

PMID: 16914566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2007 Mar;245(3):407-13. Epub 2006 Aug 4.

T-bet expression in the iris and spleen parallels disease expression during
endotoxin-induced uveitis.

Li B(1), Yang P, Chu L, Zhou H, Huang X, Zhu L, Kijlstra A.

Author information: 
(1)Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510060,
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: T lymphocytes have been implicated in the development of
endotoxin-induced uveitis (EIU). T-bet is a Th1 cell-specific transcription
factor that is involved in differentiation and effector functions. The aim of
this study was to investigate kinetics of T-bet expression at the mRNA and
protein levels during EIU using real-time PCR and whole-mount
immunohistochemistry.
METHODS: A single footpad injection of 200 mug of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was
administered to male Wistar rats in order to induce EIU. Clinical changes were
followed by slit-lamp examination. The expression of T-bet mRNA in the spleen was
evaluated 0, 8, 16, 24, 48, and 96 h after LPS injection using real-time PCR.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on the iris whole-mounts as well as on frozen 
sections of the spleen to evaluate T-bet protein expression. Terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) was performed on the 
iris whole-mounts to assay apoptotic cells.
RESULTS: Uveitis was observed in all rats that received LPS. T-bet(+) cells and
TUNEL(+) cells in the iris whole-mounts showed a similar pattern in cell number
and distribution and both types of cells were observed at 8 h, significantly
increased 24 h, and decreased 48 h after LPS injection. T-bet expression at both 
the mRNA and protein levels in spleen also paralleled ocular inflammation. It was
weakly detectable after 0 h, increased after 8 h (index 1.3, T-bet(+) cells OD
17.43+/-2.15), reached its peak after 24 h (index 4.00, OD 53.52+/-4.00), and
decreased 48 h following LPS injection (index 1.38, OD 25.75+/-2.45).
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that T-bet expression in both the iris and the
spleen, and in apoptotic cells in the iris parallel the severity of intraocular
inflammation after systemic LPS administration. These results suggest that T-bet 
may play a significant role in the dynamics of EIU.

PMID: 16896914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Exp Med. 2006 Aug 7;203(8):2009-19. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

T-bet negatively regulates autoimmune myocarditis by suppressing local production
of interleukin 17.

Rangachari M(1), Mauermann N, Marty RR, Dirnhofer S, Kurrer MO, Komnenovic V,
Penninger JM, Eriksson U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences,
A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Experimental autoimmune myocarditis (EAM) appears after infectious heart disease,
the most common cause of dilated cardiomyopathy in humans. Here we report that
mice lacking T-bet, a T-box transcription factor required for T helper (Th)1 cell
differentiation and interferon (IFN)-gamma production, develop severe autoimmune 
heart disease compared to T-bet+/+ control mice. Experiments in T-bet-/- IL-4-/- 
and T-bet-/- IL-4Ralpha-/- mice, as well as transfer of heart-specific Th1 and
Th2 cell lines, showed that autoimmune heart disease develops independently of
Th1 or Th2 polarization. Analysis of T-bet-/- IL-12Rbeta1-/- and T-bet-/-
IL-12p35-/- mice then identified interleukin (IL)-23 as critical for EAM
pathogenesis. In addition, T-bet-/- mice showed a marked increase in production
of the IL-23-dependent cytokine IL-17 by heart-infiltrating lymphocytes, and in
vivo IL-17 depletion markedly reduced EAM severity in T-bet-/- mice.
Heart-infiltrating T-bet-/- CD8+ but not CD8- T cells secrete IFN-gamma, which
inhibits IL-17 production and protects against severe EAM. In contrast, T-bet-/- 
CD8+ lymphocytes completely lost their capacity to release IFN-gamma within the
heart. Collectively, these data show that severe IL-17-mediated EAM can develop
in the absence of T-bet, and that T-bet can regulate autoimmunity via the control
of nonspecific CD8+ T cell bystander functions in the inflamed target organ.

PMCID: PMC2118365
PMID: 16880257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2005 Dec;40(12):908-11.

[Expression of T-bet and its relation with IgE and eosinophil cationic protein in
patients with allergic rhinitis].

[Article in Chinese]

Qu SH(1), Li TY, Ou ZY, Lin ZB, Chen YQ, Xu G.

Author information: 
(1)Otorhinolaryngologic Hospital, First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China. qsh_ent@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of T-bet mRNA in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) as well as its relations with total IgE (TIgE),
eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) in serum and nasal allergic symptoms in
patients with allergic rhinitis (AR).
METHODS: The allergen, TIgE and ECP in serum of patients with AR were detected by
Unicap CAP system. Blood sample was taken from 8 healthy individuals and 22
patients with allergic rhinitis. PBMC was isolated by density gradient
centrifugation and one part of them was cultured with 50 microg/ml mite allergen.
PBMC was subjected to analysis of T-bet mRNA expression using semiquantitative
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: The ratio of T-bet to beta-actin mRNA levels was 0.381 +/- 0.099 in
patients and 0.750 +/- 0.067 in normal individuals, the difference was
significantly (P <0.01). The expression intensity of T-bet mRNA had no relation
to varying severity of allergic symptoms and concentration of ECP and the
correlation coefficient was 0.187 and -0.165 (all P > 0.05). However, there was
an inverse correlation between expression intensity of T-bet mRNA and TIgE
concentration (r = -0.525, P < 0.05). Mean mRNA level (x +/- s) of T-bet
expression before and after being stimulated by allergen was 0.381 +/- 0.099 and 
0.365 +/- 0.104 respectively, which indicated no significant differences (P >
0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Among allergic patients whose allergen was mite, there was a
down-regulated expression of T-bet mRNA, which had no relation to ECP
concentration and allergic symptoms, but was one of important links in mechanisms
of imbalance of Th1/Th2 in AR. There was no effect of specific allergen on T-bet 
mRNA in patients with AR T-bet was one of indirect factors that affected the
level of IgE.

PMID: 16874959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Neuroimmunol. 2006 Sep;178(1-2):130-9. Epub 2006 Jul 25.

Immunomodulatory effects of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme-A reductase
inhibitors, potential therapy for relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis.

Peng X(1), Jin J, Giri S, Montes M, Sujkowski D, Tang Y, Smrtka J, Vollmer T,
Singh I, Markovic-Plese S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Yale University, 40 Temple St., New Haven, CT 06510, 
USA.

This study characterized immunomodulatory targets of statins in humans and their 
potential for treatment of relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (RR MS).
Statins inhibited the proliferative response of mononuclear cells. Simvastatin,
the statin with the strongest antiproliferative effect, inhibited
IFN-gamma-induced expression of MHC class II DR on monocytes and decreased their 
antigen presenting capacity. As for T lymphocytes, it inhibited their activation 
and expression of the Th1 lineage differentiation markers. Simvastatin inhibited 
IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha, and IL-2 secretion, as well as the expression of T-bet, a
transcription factor that regulates Th1 cell differentiation.

PMID: 16870268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. World J Gastroenterol. 2006 Jul 21;12(27):4310-7.

Mechanism of T cell hyporesponsiveness to HBcAg is associated with regulatory T
cells in chronic hepatitis B.

Kondo Y(1), Kobayashi K, Ueno Y, Shiina M, Niitsuma H, Kanno N, Kobayashi T,
Shimosegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku,
Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

AIM: To study the mechanisms of hyporesponsiveness of HBV-specific CD4+ T cells
by testing TH1 and TH2 commitment and regulatory T cells.
METHODS: Nine patients with chronic hepatitis B were enrolled. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells were stimulated with HBcAg or HBsAg to evaluate their potential
to commit to TH1 and TH2 differentiation. HBcAg-specific activity of regulatory T
cells was evaluated by staining with antibodies to CD4, CD25, CTLA-4 and
interleukin-10. The role of regulatory T cells was further assessed by treatment 
with anti-interleukin-10 antibody and depletion of CD4+CD25+ cells.
RESULTS: Level of mRNAs for T-bet, IL-12R beta2 and IL-4 was significantly lower 
in the patients than in healthy subjects with HBcAg stimulation. Although
populations of CD4+CD25highCTLA-4+ T cells were not different between the
patients and healthy subjects, IL-10 secreting cells were found in CD4+ cells and
CD4+CD25+ cells in the patients in response to HBcAg, and they were not found in 
cells which were stimulated with HBsAg. Addition of anti-IL-10 antibody recovered
the amount of HBcAg-specific TH1 antibody compared with control antibody (P <
0.01, 0.34% +/- 0.12% vs 0.15% +/- 0.04%). Deletion of CD4+CD25+ T cells
increased the amount of HBcAg-specific TH1 antibody when compared with
lymphocytes reconstituted using regulatory T cells (P < 0.01, 0.03% +/- 0.02% vs 
0.18% +/- 0.05%).
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that the mechanism of T cell hyporesponsiveness 
to HBcAg includes activation of HBcAg-induced regulatory T cells in contrast to
an increase in TH2-committed cells in response to HBsAg.

PMCID: PMC4087740
PMID: 16865771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Neurosci Res. 2006 Oct;84(5):1027-36.

pSTAT1, pSTAT3, and T-bet expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis patients correlates with disease activity.

Frisullo G(1), Angelucci F, Caggiula M, Nociti V, Iorio R, Patanella AK,
Sancricca C, Mirabella M, Tonali PA, Batocchi AP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology, Department of Neuroscience, Catholic University, Rome,
Italy.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disease of the
central nervous system, and it is considered to be a T helper 1 (Th1)
cell-mediated autoimmune disease. T-bet has been identified as a key
transcription factor for the development of Th1 cells and the induction of
interferon (IFN)-gamma production. T-bet is induced during T-cell activation by
the IFN-gamma signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-1
signalling pathway. In this study we found an up-regulation of T-bet and pSTAT1
in peripheral blood CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and monocytes from relapsing-remitting 
MS patients in relapse compared with patients in remission and with healthy
subjects. The increased expression of pSTAT1 strongly correlated with T-bet
expression in CD4+ and CD8+ cells and monocytes from patients in relapse and was 
associated with an increased production of IFN-gamma by peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs). pSTAT3 was also up-regulated in CD4+ and CD8+ cells
and monocytes from patients in relapse and was associated with an increased
production of interleukin (IL)-10 but not of IL-6. pSTAT1, pSTAT3, and T-bet
expression strongly correlated with Gd-DTPA-enhanced lesions on brain and spinal 
cord magnetic resonance imaging. Our data show for the first time that there is
an up-regulation of type 1 immunity-correlated transcription factors such as
STAT1 and T-bet in peripheral blood subpopulations of MS patients in the active
phase of disease. The evaluation of T-bet and pSTAT1 expression in peripheral
blood CD4+, CD8+ T cells and monocytes could be used as a marker of disease
activity in relapsing-remitting MS.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16865709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Infect Immun. 2006 Aug;74(8):4673-84.

Role of transcription factor T-bet expression by CD4+ cells in gastritis due to
Helicobacter pylori in mice.

Eaton KA(1), Benson LH, Haeger J, Gray BM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. kateaton@umich.edu

Gastritis due to Helicobacter pylori is induced by a Th1-mediated response that
is CD4 cell and gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) dependent. T-bet is a transcription 
factor that directs differentiation of and IFN-gamma secretion by CD4+ Th1 T
cells. The goal of this study was to use two mouse models to elucidate the role
of T-bet in gastritis due to H. pylori. C57BL/6J mice, congenic T-bet knockout
(KO) mutants, or congenic SCID (severe, combined immunodeficient) mutants were
given live H. pylori by oral inoculation. SCID mice were given CD4+ splenocytes
from C57BL/6J or T-bet KO mice by intraperitoneal injection. Twelve or 24 weeks
after bacterial inoculation, C57BL/6J mice developed moderate gastritis but T-bet
KO mice and SCID mice did not. In contrast, SCID recipients of either C57BL/6J T 
cells or T-bet KO T cells developed gastritis 4 or 8 weeks after adoptive
transfer. In recipients of C57BL/6J CD4+ cells but not recipients of T-bet KO
cells, gastritis was associated with a delayed-type hypersensitivity response to 
H. pylori antigen and elevated gastric and serum IFN-gamma, interleukin 6, and
tumor necrosis factor alpha. In spite of the absence of IFN-gamma expression,
indicating failure of Th1 differentiation, CD4+ T cells from T-bet KO mice induce
gastritis in H. pylori-infected recipient SCID mice. This indicates that
Th1-independent mechanisms can cause gastric inflammation and disease due to H.
pylori.

PMCID: PMC1539619
PMID: 16861655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Immunol. 2006 Aug 1;177(3):1886-93.

PKC-theta-deficient mice are protected from Th1-dependent antigen-induced
arthritis.

Healy AM(1), Izmailova E, Fitzgerald M, Walker R, Hattersley M, Silva M, Siebert 
E, Terkelsen J, Picarella D, Pickard MD, LeClair B, Chandra S, Jaffee B.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammation Department, Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
ahealy@momentapharma.com

T cell effector functions contribute to the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis.
PKC-theta transduces the signal from the TCR through activation of transcription 
factors NF-kappaB, AP-1, and NFAT. We examined the effects of PKC-theta
deficiency on two Th1-dependent models of Ag-induced arthritis and found that
PKC-theta-deficient mice develop disease, but at a significantly diminished
severity compared with wild-type mice. In the methylated BSA model, cellular
infiltrates and articular cartilage damage were mild in the PKC-theta-deficient
mice as compared with wild-type mice. Quantitation of histopathology reveals 63
and 77% reduction in overall joint destruction in two independent experiments. In
the type II collagen-induced arthritis model, we observed a significant reduction
in clinical scores (p < 0.01) in three independent experiments and diminished
joint pathology (p < 0.005) in PKC-theta-deficient compared with wild-type
littermates. Microcomputerized tomographic imaging revealed that PKC-theta
deficiency also protects from bone destruction. PKC-theta-deficient CD4(+) T
cells show an impaired proliferative response, decreased intracellular levels of 
the cytokines IFN-gamma, IL-2, and IL-4, and significantly diminished cell
surface expression of the activation markers CD25, CD69, and CD134/OX40 on memory
T cells. We demonstrate decreased T-bet expression and significantly reduced IgG1
and IgG2a anti-collagen II Ab levels in PKC-theta-deficient mice. Collectively,
our results demonstrate that PKC-theta deficiency results in an attenuated
response to Ag-induced arthritis, which is likely mediated by the reduced T cell 
proliferation, Th1/Th2 cell differentiation and T cell activation before and
during disease peak.

PMID: 16849501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Immunol. 2006 Aug 1;177(3):1786-95.

T-bet deficiency facilitates airway colonization by Mycoplasma pulmonis in a
murine model of asthma.

Bakshi CS(1), Malik M, Carrico PM, Sellati TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology and Microbial Disease, Albany Medical College, Albany,
NY 12208, USA.

Epidemiological and clinical evidence suggest a correlation between asthma and
infection with atypical bacterial respiratory pathogens. However, the cellular
and molecular underpinnings of this correlation remain unclear. Using the
T-bet-deficient (T-bet(-/-)) murine model of asthma and the natural murine
pathogen Mycoplasma pulmonis, we provide a mechanistic explanation for this
correlation. In this study, we demonstrate the capacity of asthmatic airways to
facilitate colonization by M. pulmonis and the capacity of M. pulmonis to
exacerbate symptoms associated with acute and chronic asthma. This mutual
synergism results from an inability of T-bet(-/-) mice to mount an effective
immune defense against respiratory infection through release of IFN-gamma and the
ability of M. pulmonis to trigger the production of Th2-type cytokines (e.g.,
IL-4 and IL-5), and Abs (e.g., IgG1, IgE, and IgA), eosinophilia, airway
remodeling, and hyperresponsiveness; all pathophysiological hallmarks of asthma. 
The capacity of respiratory pathogens such as Mycoplasma spp. to dramatically
augment the pathological changes associated with asthma likely explains their
association with acute asthmatic episodes in juvenile patients and with adult
chronic asthmatics, >50% of whom are found to be PCR positive for M. pneumoniae. 
In conclusion, our study demonstrates that in mice genetically predisposed to
asthma, M. pulmonis infection elicits an inflammatory milieu in the lungs that
skews the immune response toward the Th2-type, thus exacerbating the
pathophysiological changes associated with asthma. For its part, airways
exhibiting an asthmatic phenotype provide a fertile environment that promotes
colonization by Mycoplasma spp. and one which is ill-equipped to kill and clear
respiratory pathogens.

PMID: 16849489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2006 Jun;44(6):415-9.

[Bifidobacterium DNA upregulates Th1 type response of umbilical cord blood
mononuclear cell].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao H(1), Wang XC, Wang JY, Yu YH, Wang CQ, Yang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Children's Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of bifidobacterium genomic DNA on umbilical cord
blood mononuclear cell (CBMC), and investigate the immunoregulation of
bifidobacterium DNA and explore possible mechanisms by which bifidobacterium acts
against allergic reaction.
METHODS: Bifidobacterium genomic DNA (bDNA) and human DNA (hDNA) were extracted
with phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol and stored at -20 degrees C for later use.
Parts of bDNA were completely digested with DNaseI (d-bDNA) at 37 degrees C.
CBMCs were isolated with Ficoll from umbilical cord blood and incubated at 37
degrees C in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator. These cells were divided into four
groups, control group: without any stimulant; bDNA group: stimulated with 25
microg/ml bDNA; d-bDNA group: stimulated with 25 microg/ml d-bDNA; hDNA group:
stimulated with 25 microg/ml hDNA. The cells were stimulated with different
stimulants in vitro, at the end of incubation culture supernatant and cells were 
collected. IL-12 and IL-10 levels in the culture supernatant were measured by
enzyme linked immuno sorbent assay (ELISA); cells secreting IL-4 and IFN-gamma
were counted by enzyme linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assay; and total RNA was
isolated from the cells to assay T-bet and GATA3 mRNA expression levels by
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Six hours after stimulation there was no significant difference in IL-12
level in supernatant among the four groups; 12 hours after stimulation, IL-12
level in supernatant of bDNA treated group was significantly higher than that of 
each of the other groups, so were the results obtained at 24 hours and 48 hours
after stimulation (P < 0.05). No significant difference could be detected in
IL-12 level in supernatant among the other 3 groups. On the other hand, 6 hours
after stimulation there was no significant difference in IL-10 level in
supernatant among the four groups. But 12 and 24 hours after stimulation IL-10
level in supernatant of bDNA treated group was lower than that of each of the
other groups, but the difference was not statistically significant. The count of 
IFN-gamma secreting cells of bDNA treated group was higher than that of the other
groups, while IL-4 secteting cells of bDNA treated group were lower than that of 
the other groups. After bDNA stimulation, nuclear factor T-box expressed in T
cells (T-bet) mRNA expression was conspicuously enhanced as compared to the other
three groups (P < 0.05). GATA3 mRNA transcription in CBMC had no significant
change after bDNA stimulation.
CONCLUSION: bDNA could promote secretion of Th1 type cytokine IL-12, while Th2
type cytokine IL-10 level of cell supernatant was decreased. bDNA could stimulate
secretion of IFN-gamma by CBMC and inhibit secretion of IL-4. T-bet mRNA
expression was highly enhanced after bDNA stimulation. bDNA could upregulate Th1 
type response, which may be one of important mechanisms by which bifidobacterium 
inhibit allergic response.

PMID: 16836847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Immunology. 2006 Jul;118(3):384-91.

T-bet is essential for the progression of experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis.

Nath N(1), Prasad R, Giri S, Singh AK, Singh I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC
29425, USA.

Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is mediated by myelin-specific
CD4+ T helper 1 (Th1) cells, while recovery from the disease is associated with
the presence of Th2 cells. Here we used animals with targeted deletion of the
T-bet gene to determine its role in the progression of EAE. T-bet regulates the
production of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) in CD4+ and natural killer cells, and 
CD4+ T cells from T-bet-deficient mice were unable to differentiate into a Th1
phenotype. Moreover BALB/c mice deficient in T-bet were resistant to the
induction of EAE disease, with minimal inflammatory infiltrates in the central
nervous system. These mice were resistant to EAE induction even when PLP(180-199)
peptide specific effector T cells from BALB/c wild type were transferred to
BALB/c T-bet-deficient mice. This resistance to EAE is may be caused by the
production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-10 (IL-10) from the
spleen cells upon ex vivo stimulation with PLP(180-199) peptide and in vivo
presence in the central nervous system. There was no difference in the recall
responses in spleen cells from T-bet-deficient and wild type mice; however, less 
secretion of IFN-gamma was observed from primed splenocytes. The expression of
IFN-gamma was less in the central nervous system of T-bet-deficient mice whereas 
IL-10 was significantly higher in T-bet-deficient as compared to wild type mice. 
These data indicate that T-bet genes play a critical role in maintaining the
encephalitogenic nature of CD4+ T cells in autoimmune responses during EAE
disease progression.

PMCID: PMC1782298
PMID: 16827899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Infect Dis. 2006 Aug 1;194(3):294-301. Epub 2006 Jun 22.

Leishmania donovani infection of human myeloid dendritic cells leads to a Th1
response in CD4+ T cells from healthy donors and patients with kala-azar.

Ghosh M(1), Mandal L, Maitra S, Rakshit S, Paul K, Bagchi J, Ganguly D, Pal C,
Bandyopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata,
India.

The role played by dendritic cells (DCs) in Leishmania donovani infection is
poorly understood. Here, we report that L. donovani amastigotes efficiently
infect human peripheral-blood monocyte-derived DCs. Opsonization with normal
human serum enhanced the infectivity of amastigotes and promastigotes only
marginally. Surface attachment versus internalization was distinguished by
incubation of DCs with live, fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled parasites,
followed by quenching with crystal violet. Infection with amastigotes was
accompanied by DC maturation, as was evident from the up-regulation of
maturation-associated cell-surface markers, the nuclear translocation of RelB,
and the release of cytokines. Amastigote-primed DCs produced inflammatory
cytokines in response to subsequent treatment with interferon- gamma or anti-CD40
monoclonal antibody. When cocultured, amastigote-infected DCs induced T helper
cell type 1 (Th1) responses both in naive allogeneic CD4(+) T cells and in
autologous CD4(+) T cells from patients with kala-azar and up-regulated the
expression of T-bet. Our data reveal that infection with L. donovani amastigotes 
induces a Th1 cytokine milieu in both DCs and T cells.

PMID: 16826476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Retrovirology. 2006 Jun 26;3:37.

Distinct expression profiles of TGF-beta1 signaling mediators in pathogenic
SIVmac and non-pathogenic SIVagm infections.

Ploquin MJ(1), Desoutter JF, Santos PR, Pandrea I, Diop OM, Hosmalin A, Butor C, 
Barre-Sinoussi F, Müller-Trutwin MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Régulation des Infections Rétrovirales, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France. mploquin@pasteur.fr

BACKGROUND: The generalized T-cell activation characterizing HIV-1 and SIVmac
infections in humans and macaques (MACs) is not found in the non-pathogenic
SIVagm infection in African green monkeys (AGMs). We have previously shown that
TGF-beta1, Foxp3 and IL-10 are induced very early after SIVagm infection. In
SIVmac-infected MACs, plasma TGF-beta1 induction persists during primary
infection 1. We raised the hypothesis that MACs are unable to respond to
TGF-beta1 and thus cannot resorb virus-driven inflammation. We therefore compared
the very early expression dynamics of pro- and anti-inflammatory markers as well 
as of factors involved in the TGF-beta1 signaling pathway in SIV-infected AGMs
and MACs.
METHODS: Levels of transcripts encoding for pro- and anti-inflammatory markers
(tnf-alpha, ifn-gamma, il-10, t-bet, gata-3) as well as for TGF-beta1 signaling
mediators (smad3, smad4, smad7) were followed by real time PCR in a prospective
study enrolling 6 AGMs and 6 MACs.
RESULTS: During primary SIVmac infection, up-regulations of tnf-alpha, ifn-gamma 
and t-bet responses (days 1-16 p.i.) were stronger whereas il-10 response was
delayed (4th week p.i.) compared to SIVagm infection. Up-regulation of smad7
(days 3-8 p.i.), a cellular mediator inhibiting the TGF-beta1 signaling cascade, 
characterized SIV-infected MACs. In AGMs, we found increases of gata-3 but not
t-bet, a longer lasting up-regulation of smad4 (days 1-21 p.i), a mediator
enhancing TGF-beta1 signaling, and no smad7 up-regulations.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that the inability to resorb virus-driven
inflammation and activation during the pathogenic HIV-1/SIVmac infections is
associated with an unresponsiveness to TGF-beta1.

PMCID: PMC1533859
PMID: 16800882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Hepatology. 2006 Jul;44(1):216-27.

Favored T helper 1 response in a mouse model of hepatosteatosis is associated
with enhanced T cell-mediated hepatitis.

Kremer M(1), Hines IN, Milton RJ, Wheeler MD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Alcohol Studies, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
NC 27599, USA. mkremer@med.unc.edu

Steatohepatitis enhances the severity of liver injury caused by acute
inflammation. The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that fatty
liver due to chronic choline-deficient diet exacerbates concanavalin A
(ConA)-induced liver hepatitis, which is predominantly facilitated by T cells.
Male C57BL/6 mice were fed either control choline-sufficient diet (CSD) or
choline-deficient diet (CDD) for 6 weeks before ConA administration. Mice were
sacrificed 3, 9, and 24 hours after ConA injection. Liver injury measured by
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), pathology, and 
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated nick-end labeling (TUNEL) staining
was minimal in mice fed either diet before ConA exposure. However, ConA-induced
liver injury was significantly greater in CDD-fed mice compared with control-fed 
mice. Liver cytokines were assessed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). The expression of T helper (Th) 1 cytokines tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin 12 (IL-12), and interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) were 
dramatically elevated after ConA in CDD-fed mice compared with control-fed mice. 
CDD also enhanced ConA-induced STAT4 activation, but not STAT6. Notably,
regulators of T-cell differentiation were strongly shifted toward a predominant
Th1 profile. T-bet, regulator of the Th1 response, was up-regulated in CDD-fed
mice, whereas Th2 regulator GATA-3 was significantly suppressed in CDD-fed mice
after ConA. Moreover, the expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling
(SOCS)-1, SOCS-3, and repressor of GATA-3 (ROG) favored a predominant Th1
cytokine response in CDD-fed mice. In conclusion, these data support the
hypothesis that hepatosteatosis caused by CDD is associated with more severe
ConA-induced hepatitis due to a predominant shift toward Th1 response.

PMID: 16799967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Immunol. 2006 Jul 1;177(1):22-5.

Cutting edge: STAT1 and T-bet play distinct roles in determining outcome of
visceral leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania donovani.

Rosas LE(1), Snider HM, Barbi J, Satoskar AA, Lugo-Villarino G, Keiser T,
Papenfuss T, Durbin JE, Radzioch D, Glimcher LH, Satoskar AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ohio State University, 484 West 12th Avenue,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

T-bet and STAT1 regulate IFN-gamma gene transcription in CD4+ T cells, which
mediate protection against Leishmania. Here we show that T-bet and STAT1 are
required for the induction of an efficient Th1 response during Leishmania
donovani infection, but they play distinct roles in determining disease outcome. 
Both STAT1(-/-) and T-bet(-/-) mice failed to mount a Th1 response, but
STAT1(-/-) mice were highly resistant to L. donovani and developed less
immunopathology, whereas T-bet(-/-) mice were highly susceptible and eventually
developed liver inflammation. Adoptive cell transfer studies showed that
RAG2(-/-) recipients receiving STAT1(+/+) or STAT1(-/-) T cells developed
comparable liver pathology, but those receiving STAT1(-/-) T cells were
significantly more susceptible to infection. These unexpected findings reveal
distinct roles for T-bet and STAT1 in mediating host immunity and liver pathology
during visceral leishmaniasis.

PMID: 16785492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2006 May;44(5):377-8.

[The function of Th1/Th2 cells in children with acute Kawasaki disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Chang J, Lu JR, Liang D.

PMID: 16780718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Clin Invest. 2006 Jul;116(7):2022-32. Epub 2006 Jun 8.

Heat shock protein 60 enhances CD4+ CD25+ regulatory T cell function via innate
TLR2 signaling.

Zanin-Zhorov A(1), Cahalon L, Tal G, Margalit R, Lider O, Cohen IR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

CD4+CD25+ Tregs regulate immunity, but little is known about their own
regulation. We now report that the human 60-kDa heat shock protein (HSP60) acts
as a costimulator of human Tregs, both CD4+CD25int and CD4+CD25hi. Treatment of
Tregs with HSP60, or its peptide p277, before anti-CD3 activation significantly
enhanced the ability of relatively low concentrations of the Tregs to
downregulate CD4+CD25- or CD8+ target T cells, detected as inhibition of target T
cell proliferation and IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha secretion. The enhancing effects
of HSP60 costimulation on Tregs involved innate signaling via TLR2, led to
activation of PKC, PI3K, and p38, and were further enhanced by inhibition of ERK.
HSP60-treated Tregs suppressed target T cells both by cell-to-cell contact and by
secretion of TGF-beta and IL-10. In addition, the expression of ERK, NF-kappaB,
and T-bet by downregulated target T cells was inhibited. Thus, HSP60, a
self-molecule, can downregulate adaptive immune responses by upregulating Tregs
innately through TLR2 signaling.

PMCID: PMC1474819
PMID: 16767222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Apr 4;86(13):881-5.

[Amplification and specific expression of T-bet gene in nasal NK/T cell
lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Ye YH(1), Li T, Qi WX, Guo ZQ, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Hospital, Peking University, Beijing 100034,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the specific genetic alterations in nasal NK/T cell
lymphoma (N-NK/T-L) and the significance thereof.
METHODS: Restriction landmark genomic scanning (RLGS) was performed on the
specimen of a case of N-NK/T-L and the peripheral blood leukocytes of the same
case. The RLGS image was analyzed with the Virtual genome scan (VGS) software so 
as to discover abnormality of T-bet gene. The discovered abnormal gene underwent 
cloning and preparation of probes. Southern blotting and dot blotting were
performed on 3 cases of fresh N-NK/T-L tumor tissues and the genome of the case
of peripheral blood lymphocytes. The expression of the T-bet (T-box expressed in 
T cell) gene in the tissue sections of 20 cases of N-NK/T-L, 17 cases of B cell
lymphoma (BCL), 3 cases of normal spleen, and 5 cases of chronic nasopharyngitis 
was detected by in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: RLGS combined with VGS revealed a genomic alteration in the T-bet gene
and consequent Southern and dot blotting confirmed this genomic alteration in the
N-NK/T-L cells. In situ hybridization showed that the T-bet mRNA expression rate 
of the N-NK/T-L cells was 90.0% (18/20), significantly higher than that of the
BCL (11.8%, 2/17, P < 0.01). T-bet mRNA expression was not detected in the normal
spleen and chronic nasopharyngitis tissues.
CONCLUSION: The amplification and over-expression of the T-bet gene may play a
role in the development of N-NK/T-L. The potential value of over-expression of
T-bet gene in diagnosis of N-NK/T-L is worth further investigating.

PMID: 16759512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2007 Jan;46(1):44-8. Epub 2006 Jun 4.

Expression of T-bet, a type 1 T-helper cell transcription factor, in the urinary 
sediment of lupus patients predicts disease flare.

Chan RW(1), Lai FM, Li EK, Tam LS, Chow KM, Li PK, Szeto CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong, China.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is characterized by the aberrant
activation of T-lymphocytes. Since T-bet is the principal transcription factor
for the differentiation of type-1 helper T-lymphocyte, we study the impact of
urinary T-bet mRNA expression in clinically quiescent SLE patients on the risk of
subsequent disease flare.
METHODS: We studied 60 quiescent SLE patients. Urinary mRNA expression of T-bet
was studied by the real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Patients
were followed for 4 yrs for disease flare.
RESULTS: We studied 60 patients; 57 were female. The mean age was 38.8 +/- 11.2
yrs. Their baseline SLE disease activity index score was 1.63 +/- 1.64. During
the follow-up, 28 patients (46.6%) developed lupus flare, of which 17 (28.3%) had
severe flare. Receiver operating characteristic curves showed that urinary T-bet 
expression three times above the average level of healthy control had 64.3%
sensitivity and 84.4% specificity of predicting all lupus flare. Using this
cut-off, patients with a high urinary T-bet expression had a significantly higher
risk of all lupus flare and severe flare than the patients with a low T-bet
expression (log-rank test, P < 0.001 for both). With multivariate Cox
proportional hazard model to adjust for potential confounding variables, urinary 
T-bet expression and patient's sex were the only independent predictors of all
lupus flare and severe flare. It could be estimated that 1-fold increase in
urinary T-bet expression would result in 8.4% excess risk of all lupus flare [95%
confidence interval (CI), 4.1-13.0%, P < 0.001] and 12.9% excess risk of severe
flare (95% CI 7.4-18.7%, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: A high urinary T-bet expression was an independent predictor of
lupus flare. Measurement of urinary T-bet may provide valuable information for
the risk stratification of SLE patients.

PMID: 16754628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Nephron Exp Nephrol. 2006;104(1):e48-56. Epub 2006 May 6.

Influence of TH1/TH2 switched immune response on renal ischemia-reperfusion
injury.

Marques VP(1), Gonçalves GM, Feitoza CQ, Cenedeze MA, Fernandes Bertocchi AP,
Damião MJ, Pinheiro HS, Antunes Teixeira VP, dos Reis MA, Pacheco-Silva A,
Saraiva Câmara NO.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Imunologia Clínica e Experimental, Division of Nephrology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Escola Paulista de Medicina, São Paulo,
Brazil.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Recent evidence shows a critical role of the CD4+ T cell with
the Th1/Th2 paradigm as a possible effector mechanism in ischemia and reperfusion
injury. We hypothesize that a polarized Th1 activation response may negatively
influence the renal IRI through its relationship with chemokine production
(MCP-1) and with a protective tissue response (HO-1).
METHODS: We subjected mice to renal ischemia for 45 min using IL-4 and IL-12
knockout C57BL/6. We then measured serum urea levels, performed histomorphometric
analysis for tubular necrosis and regeneration, and evaluated the mRNA expression
of HO-1, t-bet, Gata-3 and MCP-1 by real-time PCR at 24, 48 and 120 h after
surgery.
RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: The IL-4 knockout mice had a statistically significant rise 
in serum urea levels post IRI compared with control animals. The IL-12-deficient 
mice were not affected. The IL-4-deficient mice had a statistically significant
increase in tubular injury and impairment in cell regeneration. The IRI in
IL-4-deficient mice was accompanied by higher levels of HO-1, t-bet and later
up-regulation of MCP-1. These findings suggest that the deleterious effects of
the Th1 cell involve increased production of chemokines such as MCP-1.

Copyright 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16741373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Gene. 2006 Aug 1;377:130-9. Epub 2006 Jun 5.

T-box proteins differentially activate the expression of the endogenous
interferon gamma gene versus transfected reporter genes in non-immune cells.

Butz NV(1), Gronostajski RM, Campbell CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, State 
University of New York at Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

The T-box transcription factor T-bet is expressed in a number of hematopoetic
cell types and plays an essential role in the lineage determination of Th1
T-helper cells. In the absence of T-bet, CD4(+) T-cells fail to induce IFNgamma, 
the cytokine whose expression characterizes Th1 cells. Here we show that,
surprisingly, T-bet induces the expression of endogenous IFNgamma in non-immune
human cells, including 293 and other cell lines. Thus T-bet can induce IFNgamma
expression independently of its role in T-cell lineage determination. In
addition, mutations in T-bet, and chimeras of T-bet with other transcription
factors including the T-box transcription factor, TBX2, differentially affect the
ability of T-bet to activate expression of endogenous IFNgamma versus a T-site
regulated reporter gene. A truncated T-betVp16 fusion protein strongly activates 
the T-site reporter but fails to activate endogenous IFNgamma. Conversely, native
T-bet strongly activates endogenous IFNgamma expression but only weakly activates
the reporter gene. Fusion of the Vp16 activation domain to full-length T-bet
greatly increases its activation of both endogenous IFNgamma and transfected
T-site reporter gene expression. In contrast, TBX2Vp16 potently activates the
T-site reporter but has a negligible effect on endogenous IFNgamma expression.
Butyrate treatment of T-bet expressing cells potentiates the expression of
endogenous IFNgamma but weakly represses expression of the T-site reporter gene. 
These data indicate that induction of endogenous IFNgamma can be uncoupled from
differentiation into the Th1 lineage and that the expression of endogenous
IFNgamma versus a T-site reporter gene is differentially regulated by T-bet and
other T-box proteins.

PMID: 16737784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Immunity. 2006 May;24(5):575-90.

Pro- and antiinflammatory cytokine signaling: reciprocal antagonism regulates
interferon-gamma production by human natural killer cells.

Yu J(1), Wei M, Becknell B, Trotta R, Liu S, Boyd Z, Jaung MS, Blaser BW, Sun J, 
Benson DM Jr, Mao H, Yokohama A, Bhatt D, Shen L, Davuluri R, Weinstein M,
Marcucci G, Caligiuri MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, The Ohio
State University College of Medicine and School of Public Health, Columbus, Ohio 
43210, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2006 May;24(5):506-7.

Activated monocytes produce proinflammatory cytokines (monokines) such as
interleukin (IL)-12, IL-15, and IL-18 for induction of interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) by natural killer (NK) cells. NK cells provide the antiinflammatory
cytokine transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta, an autocrine/negative regulator
of IFN-gamma. The ability of one signaling pathway to prevail over the other is
likely important in controlling IFN-gamma for the purposes of infection and
autoimmunity, but the molecular mechanism(s) of how this counterregulation occurs
is unknown. Here we show that in isolated human NK cells, proinflammatory
monokines antagonize antiinflammatory TGF-beta signaling by downregulating the
expression of the TGF-beta type II receptor, and its signaling intermediates
SMAD2 and SMAD3. In contrast, TGF-beta utilizes SMAD2, SMAD3, and SMAD4 to
suppress IFN-gamma and T-BET, a positive regulator of IFN-gamma. Indeed,
activated NK cells from Smad3(-/-) mice produce more IFN-gamma in vivo than NK
cells from wild-type mice. Collectively, our data suggest that pro- and
antiinflammatory cytokine signaling reciprocally antagonize each other in an
effort to prevail in the regulation of NK cell IFN-gamma production.

PMID: 16713975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Eur J Immunol. 2006 Jun;36(6):1360-3.

The hidden truth about gene expression in Tregs: is it what you don't see that
counts?

Cobbold SP(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Oxford, UK. stephen.cobbold@path.ox.ac.uk

A population of IL-10 secreting regulatory T cells (PI-Tregs) can be induced in a
mouse TCR transgenic model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) by 
intranasal administration of the N-terminal peptide of myelin basic protein. A
paper in this issue of the European Journal of Immunology identifies patterns of 
gene expression that distinguish PI-Treg from naïve T cells after activation in
vivo. PI-Tregs are anergic and the expression of egr2 may be involved in
regulation of the cell cycle. The surprising expression of the Th1 determining
gene T-bet in PI-Tregs may be functionally relevant as transfection of T-bet into
a hybridoma induced some genes associated with regulatory T cells, such as tlr2
and gzmb. In this commentary, PI-Tregs are considered in comparison to other
Tregs, such as the natural CD4(+)CD25(+) and Tr1 cells, and there seems to be
considerable overlap in gene expression between all three Treg populations, but
also with both Th1 and Th2 cells. It is suggested that regulatory activity may be
a common feature of all activated T cells and that a defining principle of a Treg
is the lack of effector functions due to a partial or incomplete differentiation 
to either Th1 or Th2.

PMID: 16708406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Eur J Immunol. 2006 Jun;36(6):1374-85.

Persistent antigenic stimulation alters the transcription program in T cells,
resulting in antigen-specific tolerance.

Anderson PO(1), Manzo BA, Sundstedt A, Minaee S, Symonds A, Khalid S,
Rodriguez-Cabezas ME, Nicolson K, Li S, Wraith DC, Wang P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and London School of Medicine, 
UK.

Repetitive antigen stimulation induces peripheral T cell tolerance in vivo. It is
not known, however, whether multiple stimulations merely suppress T cell
activation or, alternatively, change the transcriptional program to a distinct,
tolerant state. In this study, we have discovered that STAT3 and STAT5 were
activated in response to antigen stimulation in vivo, in marked contrast to the
suppression of AP-1, NF-kappaB and NFAT. In addition, a number of transcription
factors were induced in tolerant T cells following antigen challenge in vivo,
including T-bet, Irf-1 and Egr-2. The altered transcription program in tolerant
cells associates closely with the suppression of cell cycle progression and IL-2 
production, as well as with the induction of IL-10. Studies of T-bet and Egr-2
show that the function of T-bet in peptide treatment-induced regulatory T cells
is not associated with Th1 differentiation, but correlates with the suppression
of IL-2, whereas expression of Egr-2 led to an up-regulation of the cell cycle
inhibitors p21(cip1) and p27(kip). Our results demonstrate a balanced
transcription program regulated by different transcription factors for T cell
activation and/or tolerance during antigen-induced T cell responses. Persistent
antigen stimulation can induce T cell tolerance by changing the balance of
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2652694
PMID: 16708405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Cell Mol Immunol. 2006 Apr;3(2):87-95.

The T-box transcription factor T-bet in immunity and autoimmunity.

Peng SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Inflammation, Autoimmunity and Transplantation Research, Roche Palo Alto, Palo
Alto, CA 94304, USA. stanford.peng@roche.com

The T-box transcription factor T-bet (Tbx21) has emerged as a key regulator of
type 1-like immunity, playing critical roles in the establishment and/or
maintenance of effector cell fates in T and B lymphocytes, as well as dendritic
cells and natural killer cells. Several autoimmune diseases, especially those
classically considered related to T helper 1 (Th1) immunity, appear to require
T-bet, at least as judged in mouse models. This review summarizes a current
understanding of T-bet's role in immunity, as well as its importance in
autoimmunity, with implications for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 16696895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Mar 14;86(10):669-73.

[Profiles of type 1 and type 2 T cells in chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang TT(1), Zhao H, Ren H, Guo JH, Xu MQ, Yang RC, Han ZC.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology and
Blood Diseases Hospital, CAMS and PUMC, Tianjin 300020, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the profiles of type 1 and type 2 T cells in chronic
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) patients.
METHODS: Samples of peripheral blood were collected from 30 chronic ITP patients,
8 males and 22 females, aged 34, 20 being in the active stage, and 10 in the
remission stage, and 20 healthy persons, 7 males and 13 females, aged 31.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated, cultured, and activated
with PMA/ionomycin. Flow cytometry was used to measure the intracellular
cytokines interferon (IFN)-gamma and interleukin (IL)-4 in the PBMCs so as to
identify the Th1 cells (IFN-gamma(+) IL-4(+) CD4(+) cells), Th2 cells
(IFN-gamma(-) IL-4(+) CD4(+) cells), Tc1 cells (IFN-gamma+ IL-4(-) CD8(+) cells),
and Tc2 cells (IFN-gamma(-) IL-4(+) CD8(+) cells). The ratios of Th2/Tc2,
Th1/Th2, and Tc1/Tc2 were calculated. Samples of spleen tissue were collected
from 8 patients with chronic ITP, 3 males and 5 females, aged 30, and 6 patients 
with hereditary spherocytosis (HS), 3 males and 3 females, aged 35, who underwent
splenectomy. Splenocytes were isolated, cultured, and activated with
PMA/ionomycin. Real-time PCR was used to detect the mRNA expression of T-bet and 
GATA-3 in the PBMCs and splenocytes.
RESULTS: The Th1/Th2 ratio of the patients in active stage was 25.62,
significantly higher than those of the patients in remission stage (9.86) and the
control (8.29, both P < 0.01), and the Tc1/Tc2 ratio of the patients in active
stage was 30.23, significantly higher than those of the patients in remission
stage (10.10) and the controls (12.58, both P < 0.01). The Th1/Th2 ratio of the
splenocytes of the patients in active stage was 41.46, significantly higher than 
that of the controls (16.30, P < 0.01), and the Tc1/Tc2 ratio of the splenocytes 
of the active ITP patients was 35.80, not significantly higher than that of the
controls (16.30, P = 0.082). The GATA-3 mRNA expression level of the PBMCs of the
active ITP patients was one-fifth of that of the controls (P < 0.05) and the
GATA-3 mRNA expression level of the splenocytes of the ITP patients was 0.34 of
that of the HS patients (P < 0.05), however, there was no difference in the T-bet
expression among the 3 groups. The T-bet/GATA-3 ratio of the PBMCs of the active 
ITP patients was 5.85 times that of the controls and the T-bet/GATA-3 ratio of
the splenocytes of the active ITP patients was 2.68 times that of the controls
(both P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: ITP is a T1 cells (Th1 and Tc1) predominant disease. The T-bet/GATA-3
ratio may provide a surrogate marker of T1/T2 cytokine balance. Shifting the
cytokine patterns from T1 to T2 may be a potential immunotherapy for ITP.

PMID: 16681922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2006 Mar;29(3):176-80.

[Imbalanced T cell-specific transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 and
relationship to airway inflammation in asthmatic rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Bian T(1), Yin KS, Jin SX, Meng ZL, Zhou JY, Ma XQ, Hu JJ, De W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the change of the mRNA and protein expression of T-bet and
GATA-3 in lung tissues, and to investigate the association between the imbalanced
T cell-specific transcription factors T-bet/GATA-3 and the airway inflammation in
asthmatic rats.
METHODS: Twenty-four male SD rats were randomly divided into a control group and 
an asthmatic group. Airway responsiveness was measured and the change of airway
histology was observed. The concentrations of interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5, and
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were measured
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The mRNA and protein expressions of
IL-4, IL-5, IFN-gamma, T-bet and GATA-3 in the lungs were detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot respectively.
RESULTS: The expiration resistance after injection of acetylcholine chloride (20,
40, 80, 160 microg/ml) in the asthmatic group was (6.26 +/- 0.85), (11.55 +/-
3.09), (28.74 +/- 5.94), (3,710.83 +/- 197.49) cm H2O.ml(-1).s(-1) respectively; 
and that in the control group was (1.51 +/- 0.18), (2.15 +/- 0.36), (6.08 +/-
1.06), (37.17 +/- 6.12) cm H2O.ml(-1).s(-1) respectively; the difference being
significant between the two groups (all P < 0.01). In the asthmatic group, the
numbers of eosinophils and lymphocytes, the thicknesses of WA/Pi and ASM/Pi were 
(26.0 +/- 1.6)/mm(2), (45.2 +/- 3.2)/mm(2), 12.0 +/- 1.4, 6.7 +/- 0.6,
respectively; and those of the control group were (2.9 +/- 1.2)/mm(2), (8.8 +/-
1.8)/mm(2), 6.4 +/- 0.8, 2.7 +/- 0.5, respectively; all were significantly
different between the two groups (all P < 0.01). In the asthmatic group, the
concentrations of IL-4, IL-5, and IFN-gamma in BALF were (23.4 +/- 0.7) pg/ml,
(24.8 +/- 0.5) pg/ml, (21.7 +/- 1.1) pg/ml, respectively, and those of the
control group were (9.3 +/- 0.3) pg/ml, (12.5 +/- 0.3) pg/ml, (65.8 +/- 2.1)
pg/ml, respectively; all were significantly different between the two groups (all
P < 0.01). In the control group, the mRNA ratio of T-bet to GATA-3 (0.73 +/-
0.32) was significantly increased compared with the asthmatic group (0.06 +/-
0.09, P < 0.01). There was also a significant difference in the ratio of protein 
expression of T-bet to GATA-3 between the control group (0.75 +/- 0.25) and the
asthmatic group (0.09 +/- 0.04, P < 0.01). The ratio of protein expression of
T-bet and GATA-3 was correlated negatively with expiration resistance (r =
-0.959, -0.919, -0.949, all P < 0.01), the numbers of eosinophils and lymphocytes
in lung tissues (r = -0.832, -0.831, all P < 0.01), the thicknesses of WA/Pi and 
ASM/Pi (r = -0.837, -0.863, all P < 0.01) and the concentrations of IL-4, IL-5 in
BALF (r = 0.921, 0.920, all P < 0.01), the mRNA of IL-4, IL-5 in lung tissues (r 
= -0.964, -0.931, all P < 0.01), but positively with the concentrations of
IFN-gamma in BALF and the mRNA of IFN-gamma in lung tissues (r = -0.934, 0.983,
all P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Imbalance of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3, a reflection of 
the immune imbalance in asthma, may play a key role in the formation of airway
inflammation in the disease.

PMID: 16677481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Immunol. 2006 May 15;176(10):5890-7.

Differential effects of IL-27 on human B cell subsets.

Larousserie F(1), Charlot P, Bardel E, Froger J, Kastelein RA, Devergne O.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 8147,
Université Paris V, Institut Fédératif de Recherche Necker, 161 rue de Sèvres,
75-015 Paris, France.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2006 Aug 15;177(4):2729.

IL-27 is a novel heterodimeric cytokine of the IL-12 family that plays an
important role in the regulation of T cell responses. Its role on human B cells
has not been previously studied. In this study, we show that both chains of the
IL-27 receptor complex, IL-27R and gp130, are constitutively expressed at the
surface of naive and memory human tonsillar B cells, and are induced on germinal 
center B cells following CD40 stimulation. In naive B cells, IL-27 induced strong
STAT1 and STAT3 phosphorylation, whereas it induced moderate STAT1 and low STAT3 
activation in memory B cells. IL-27 induced T-bet expression in naive and memory 
B cells stimulated by CD40 or surface Ig engagement, but induced significant
IL-12Rbeta2 surface expression in anti-Ig-stimulated naive B cells only. In
anti-Ig-stimulated naive or memory B cells, IL-27 also induced CD54, CD86, and
CD95 surface expression. In addition, IL-27 increased proliferation of
anti-Ig-activated naive B cells and of anti-CD40-activated naive and germinal
center B cells, but not of CD40-activated memory B cells. These data indicate
that the B cell response to IL-27 is modulated during B cell differentiation and 
varies depending on the mode of B cell activation.

PMID: 16670296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Blood. 2006 Sep 1;108(5):1595-601. Epub 2006 May 2.

T-bet is a critical determinant in the instability of the IL-17-secreting
T-helper phenotype.

Mathur AN(1), Chang HC, Zisoulis DG, Kapur R, Belladonna ML, Kansas GS, Kaplan
MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
702 Barnhill Dr, RI 2600, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

IL-23, an IL-12-related cytokine, induces an IL-17-secreting T-helper phenotype
that is involved in autoimmune diseases and host defense against certain
pathogens. Although the transcription factors required for development of
IL-23-stimulated cells are unknown, we show that T-bet is a critical negative
regulator of the IL-23-primed T-cell phenotype, which we term Th1beta. Th1 or
Th1beta Tbx21-/- cultures secrete higher than WT levels of IL-17 in response to
T-cell receptor (TCR) or IL-23 + IL-18 stimulation. Ectopic T-bet expression in
Th1beta cells promotes IFN-gamma secretion but decreases IL-17 production.
Although antigen-receptor stimulation of Th1beta cells stimulates IL-17
production, it also induces the IFN-gamma-independent expression of T-bet and
progression to a Th1 cytokine secretion pattern. T-bet is required for the
progression to the Th1 phenotype, because Tbx21-/- Th1beta cultures maintain the 
IL-17-secreting phenotype after 2 weeks of culture. Addition of IFN-gamma to
Tbx21-/- Th1beta cultures cannot recover the progression to the Th1 phenotype,
suggesting T-bet, rather than IFN-gamma, mediates Th1beta to Th1 progression. The
transient nature of the Th1beta phenotype suggests that these cells are a
component of type I immunity and that T-bet expression is a critical determinant 
of Th1 versus Th1beta cell fate.

PMCID: PMC1895507
PMID: 16670261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2006 Oct;291(4):L658-67. Epub 2006 Apr 28.

Increased bleomycin-induced lung injury in mice deficient in the transcription
factor T-bet.

Xu J(1), Mora AL, LaVoy J, Brigham KL, Rojas M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Center for
Translational Research of the Lung, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA 30322, USA.

The reasons for variable sensitivity among and within species to lung injury and 
fibrosis caused by bleomycin (BLM) are unknown. Because T helper (Th) 1 and 2
(Th1 and Th2) polarization of CD4+ T lymphocytes is one of the factors that
affects the BLM response, we hypothesized that preventing expression of the Th1
transcription factor T-bet would render BLM-resistant BALB/c mice sensitive to
BLM. Wild-type and T-bet-deficient (T-bet-/-) BALB/c mice were treated with BLM
or saline solution intratracheally. After BLM treatment, collagen content in the 
lung increased twofold by day 14 in lungs from T-bet-/- mice but was unaffected
in lungs from wild-type BALB/c mice. These findings were confirmed by collagen
staining of histopathological sections. BLM treatment significantly increased
respiratory frequency and decreased tidal volume by day 14 in T-bet-/- mice but
had no effect in wild-type mice. Lung fibrosis in BLM-treated T-bet-/- mice was
associated with increased circulating levels of Th2 cytokines and increased
expression of the profibrotic factor transforming growth factor-beta1. Depletion 
of CD4+, but not CD8+, T cells in T-bet-/- mice diminished BLM-induced lung
fibrosis and the expression of transforming growth factor-beta1. These data
suggest that the T-bet pathway in CD4+ T lymphocytes can confer resistance to
BLM-induced lung fibrosis in BALB/c mice.

PMID: 16648243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Chin Med J (Engl). 2006 Apr 20;119(8):640-8.

Treatment of allergic airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness by imiquimod
modulating transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3.

Bian T(1), Yin KS, Jin SX, Zhang XL, Zhou JY, Ma XQ, Hu JJ, De W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

BACKGROUND: Imiquimod is an imidazoquinoline, which class of compounds are known 
to have antiviral and antitumoural properties. In recent studies, it was shown
that imiquimod modulates the T helper cell type Th1/Th2 response by inducing the 
production of Th1 cytokines like IFN-gamma, and by inhibiting the Th2 cytokines
like interleukin (IL)-4. Several investigators have shown that T-bet and GATA-3
are master Th1 and Th2 regulatory transcription factors. This study investigated 
whether imiquimod treatment inhibited airway inflammation by modulating
transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3.
METHODS: Thirty-six male SD rats were randomly divided into a control group, an
asthmatic group, and an imiquimod group, which was exposed to an aerosol of 0.15%
imiquimod. Twenty-four hours after the last ovalbumin (OVA) challenge, airway
responsiveness was measured and changes in airway histology were observed. The
concentrations of IL-4, IL-5 and IFN-gamma in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF)
and serum were measured by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The mRNA
expressions of IL-4, IL-5, IFN-gamma, T-bet and GATA-3 in lung and in CD4(+) T
cells were determined by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). The protein expressions of T-bet and GATA-3 were measured by Western
blot.
RESULTS: It was demonstrated that imiquimod 1) attenuated OVA induced airway
inflammation; 2) diminished the degree of airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR); 3)
decreased the Th2 type cytokines and increased Th1 type cytokines mRNA and
protein levels; 4) modulated the Th1/Th2 reaction by inhibiting GATA-3 production
and increasing T-bet production.
CONCLUSION: Imiquimod treatment inhibits OVA induced airway inflammation by
modulating key master switches GATA-3 and T-bet that result in committing T
helper cells to a Th1 phenotype.

PMID: 16635408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2006 May;27(5):561-7.

Antisense oligonucleotides-induced local blockade of T-bet expression leads to
airway inflammation in rats.

Wang G(1), Liu CT, Wang ZL, Jiang LL, Yan CL, Luo FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

AIM: To explore whether local blockade of T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet)
expression in the lungs could lead to airway inflammation.
METHODS: Twenty-four rats were randomly divided into 4 groups: saline group,
ovalbumin (OVA)-sensitized group, nonsense group, and the antisense group. The
OVA-sensitized rats were sensitized and challenged with OVA, and the rats in the 
nonsense and antisense groups were subjected to an aerosol delivery of the
nonsense and antisense oligonucleotides (AS-ODN) of T-bet (0.1%, w/v). The levels
of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), interleukin-4 (IL-4), and IL-5 in the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were detected by ELISA, and the mRNA and the 
protein expression of T-bet and GATA-3 genes were examined by in situ
hybridization and Western blot analysis, respectively.
RESULTS: The expression of T-bet mRNA and protein in the lungs of the rats in the
antisense group were inhibited effectively. The lungs of the rats in the
antisense and OVA-sensitized groups showed eosinophil and lymphocyte inflammatory
infiltration, and eosinophilia located predominantly around the airways. The
number of GATA-3 mRNA-positive cells and the level of GATA-3 protein in the lungs
of the rats in the antisense and the OVA-sensitized groups significantly
increased. The level of IL-4 and IL-5 in the BALF in the antisense and
OVA-sensitized groups were elevated, but the level of IFN-gamma decreased
markedly.
CONCLUSION: Antisense ODN-induced local blockade of T-bet expression leads to
airway inflammation with a selective alteration in patterns of cytokine
expression and recruitment of eosinophil cells similar to that in the
OVA-sensitized animals.

PMID: 16626511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Infect Immun. 2006 May;74(5):2787-802.

Influence of Slc11a1 on the outcome of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis
infection in mice is associated with Th polarization.

Caron J(1), Larivière L, Nacache M, Tam M, Stevenson MM, McKerly C, Gros P, Malo 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada H3G 1A4.

Genetic analyses identified Ses1 as a significant quantitative trait locus
influencing the carrier state of 129S6 mice following a sublethal challenge with 
Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis. Previous studies have determined that
Slc11a1 was an excellent candidate gene for Ses1. Kinetics of infection in 129S6 
mice and Slc11a1-deficient (129S6-Slc11a1(tm1Mcg)) mice demonstrated that the
wild-type allele of Slc11a1 contributed to the S. enterica serovar Enteritidis
carrier state as early as 7 days postinfection. Gene expression profiling
demonstrated that 129S6 mice had a significant up-regulation of proinflammatory
genes associated with macrophage activation at day 10 postinfection, followed by 
a gradual increase in immunoglobulin transcripts, whereas 129S6-Slc11a1(tm1Mcg)
mice had higher levels of immunoglobulins earlier in the infection. Quantitative 
reverse transcription-PCR revealed an increase in Th1 cytokine (Ifng and Il12)
and Th1-specific transcription factor Tbx21 expression during infection in both
the 129S6 and 129S6-Slc11a1(tm1Mcg) strains. However, the expression of Gata3, a 
transcription factor involved in Th2 polarization, Cd28, and Il4 was markedly
increased in Slc11a1-deficient mice during infection, suggesting a predominant
Th2 phenotype in 129S6-Slc11a1(tm1Mcg) animals following S. enterica serovar
Enteritidis infection. A strong immunoglobulin G2a response, reflecting Th1
activity, was observed only in 129S6 mice. All together, these results are
consistent with an impact of Slc11a1 on Th cell differentiation during chronic S.
enterica serovar Enteritidis infection. The presence of a Th2 bias in
Slc11a1-deficient mice is associated with improved bacterial clearance.

PMCID: PMC1459719
PMID: 16622216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006 Jul 15;174(2):142-51. Epub 2006 Apr 13.

Transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 regulate development of airway remodeling.

Kiwamoto T(1), Ishii Y, Morishima Y, Yoh K, Maeda A, Ishizaki K, Iizuka T, Hegab 
AE, Matsuno Y, Homma S, Nomura A, Sakamoto T, Takahashi S, Sekizawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305, Japan.

RATIONALE: Airway remodeling is an important feature of chronic asthma that
causes irreversible airflow obstruction. Although asthma is considered to be a
Th2 disease, the role of T-bet and GATA-3, the key transcription factors for
differentiation toward Th1 and Th2 cells, in the pathogenesis of airway
remodeling is poorly understood.
OBJECTIVES: We therefore examined the effects of GATA-3 or T-bet induction of
Th1/Th2 bias on the development of airway remodeling in mice.
METHODS: The development of airway remodeling after repeated allergen challenges 
was analyzed using transgenic mice overexpressing either GATA-3 or T-bet.
MAIN RESULTS: The degrees of subepithelial fibrosis and airway smooth muscle
hyperplasia after repeated allergen exposure were significantly enhanced in mice 
overexpressing GATA-3, compared with wild-type mice. Allergen-induced goblet cell
hyperplasia and mucus hypersecretion were significantly lower in mice
overexpressing T-bet than in wild-type mice. Eosinophilic airway inflammation
increased in mice overexpressing GATA-3, but decreased in mice overexpressing
T-bet after repeated allergen exposure. Cytokine analysis revealed that the
Th1/Th2 cytokine balance shifted to Th2 in lung homogenates and lung T cells of
mice overexpressing GATA-3, whereas this balance shifted to Th1 in those of mice 
overexpressing T-bet after allergen exposure. Lung transforming growth
factor-beta and eotaxin levels were associated with the degree of subepithelial
fibrosis and eosinophilic airway inflammation, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the results indicate that development of airway remodeling 
is regulated by the lung Th1/Th2 bias induced by GATA-3 and T-bet.

PMID: 16614350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Nat Immunol. 2006 May;7(5):498-506. Epub 2006 Apr 9.

Osteopontin expression is essential for interferon-alpha production by
plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Shinohara ML(1), Lu L, Bu J, Werneck MB, Kobayashi KS, Glimcher LH, Cantor H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology & AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2006 May;7(5):441-3.

The observation that the T-bet transcription factor allows tissue-specific
upregulation of intracellular osteopontin (Opn-i) in plasmacytoid dendritic cells
(pDCs) suggests that Opn might contribute to the expression of interferon-alpha
(IFN-alpha) in those cells. Here we show that Opn deficiency substantially
reduced Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9)-dependent IFN-alpha responses but spared
expression of transcription factor NF-kappaB-dependent proinflammatory cytokines.
Shortly after TLR9 engagement, colocalization of Opn-i and the adaptor molecule
MyD88 was associated with induction of transcription factor IRF7-dependent
IFN-alpha gene expression, whereas deficient expression of Opn-i was associated
with defective nuclear translocation of IRF7 in pDCs. The importance of the
Opn-IFN-alpha pathway was emphasized by its essential involvement in
cross-presentation in vitro and in anti-herpes simplex virus 1 IFN-alpha response
in vivo. The finding that Opn-i selectively coupled TLR9 signaling to expression 
of IFN-alpha but not to that of other proinflammatory cytokines provides new
molecular insight into the biology of pDCs.

PMCID: PMC3725256
PMID: 16604075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 May;12(5):301-8. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

Primary unexplained infertility is associated with reduced expression of the
T-regulatory cell transcription factor Foxp3 in endometrial tissue.

Jasper MJ(1), Tremellen KP, Robertson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Reproductive Health, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.

A receptive endometrial environment requires adequate immunological tolerance to 
protect the implanting embryo from maternal immune rejection. Studies in mice
implicate CD4+CD25+ T-regulatory (Treg) cells as essential mediators of immune
tolerance in pregnancy. The aim of this study was to evaluate the link between
Treg cells and fertility in women. Expression of Foxp3, a master regulator of
Treg cell differentiation, was quantified in endometrial tissue from women
experiencing primary unexplained infertility and normal fertile women.
Endometrial biopsies were collected during the mid-secretory phase of the
menstrual cycle from women meeting rigorously defined criteria for unexplained
infertility after experiencing repeated failed cycles of IVF treatment
(infertile, n = 10), or women classified as proven fertile (control, n = 12).
Expression of Foxp3 mRNA was reduced approximately two-fold in the tissue of
infertile women. In contrast, mRNAs encoding T cell transcription factors T-bet
and GATA3, associated with differentiation of Th1 and Th2 CD4+ T cells
respectively, were unchanged. Treg cell differentiation is controlled by TGFbeta,
but the relative abundance in endometrial tissue of TGFbeta1, TGFbeta2, TGFbeta3 
mRNAs was not changed in infertile women. Cytokines influencing Th1 and Th2 cell 
differentiation, including IFNgamma, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-10 and IL-12p40, as
well as dendritic cell-regulating cytokines IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6, LIF,
GM-CSF and TNFalpha were also expressed similarly regardless of fertility status.
The finding of reduced endometrial Foxp3 implicates impaired differentiation of
uterine T cells into the Treg phenotype as a key determinant of fertility in
women. The factors underpinning this aberration in the immune response remain to 
be identified.

PMID: 16574699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Eur J Immunol. 2006 May;36(5):1241-53.

The key regulators of adult T helper cell responses, STAT6 and T-bet, are
established in early life in mice.

Rose S(1), Guevara P, Farach S, Adkins B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Miller School of Medicine at the
University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Murine neonatal immunity is typically Th2 biased. This is characterized by
high-level IL-4 production at all phases of the immune response and poor
IFN-gamma memory responses. The differential expression of Th1/Th2 cytokines by
neonates and adults could arise if the critical regulators of Th differentiation 
and function, STAT6 and T-bet, operate differently during the neonatal period. To
test this idea, the Th cell responses of wild-type, T-bet-deficient, or
STAT6-deficient mice were compared in vitro and in vivo. The absence of these
factors had similar qualitative effects on the development of effector function
in neonates and adults, i.e., if a Th lineage was inhibited or enhanced in adult 
animals, a similar phenomenon was observed in neonates. However, there was a
striking difference observed in the in vivo Th1 memory responses of
STAT6-deficient mice initially immunized as neonates. Antigen-specific IFN-gamma 
production was increased 50-100-fold in STAT6-deficient neonates, achieving
levels similar to those of STAT6-deficient adults. These findings demonstrate
that STAT6 and T-bet signals are central in shaping Th responses in wild-type
neonates, as in adult mice, and that the master regulators of Th cell development
and function are already firmly established in early life.

PMCID: PMC2112774
PMID: 16568497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Exp Med. 2006 Mar 20;203(3):755-66. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

T-bet regulates Th1 responses through essential effects on GATA-3 function rather
than on IFNG gene acetylation and transcription.

Usui T(1), Preiss JC, Kanno Y, Yao ZJ, Bream JH, O'Shea JJ, Strober W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    J Exp Med. 2006 Apr 17;203(4):1129.

T helper type 1 (Th1) development is facilitated by interrelated changes in key
intracellular factors, particularly signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)4, T-bet, and GATA-3. Here we show that CD4+ cells from
T-bet-/- mice are skewed toward Th2 differentiation by high endogenous GATA-3
levels but exhibit virtually normal Th1 differentiation provided that GATA-3
levels are regulated at an early stage by anti-interleukin (IL)-4 blockade of
IL-4 receptor (R) signaling. In addition, under these conditions, Th1 cells from 
T-bet-/- mice manifest IFNG promotor accessibility as detected by histone
acetylation and deoxyribonuclease I hypersensitivity. In related studies, we show
that the negative effect of GATA-3 on Th1 differentiation in T-bet-/- cells
arises from its ability to suppress STAT4 levels, because if this is prevented by
a STAT4-expressing retrovirus, normal Th1 differentiation is observed. Finally,
we show that retroviral T-bet expression in developing and established Th2 cells 
leads to down-regulation of GATA-3 levels. These findings lead to a model of T
cell differentiation that holds that naive T cells tend toward Th2
differentiation through induction of GATA-3 and subsequent down-regulation of
STAT4/IL-12Rbeta2 chain unless GATA-3 levels or function is regulated by T-bet.
Thus, the principal function of T-bet in developing Th1 cells is to negatively
regulate GATA-3 rather than to positively regulate the IFNG gene.

PMCID: PMC2118252
PMID: 16520391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006 Feb;6(1):17-22.

Pathogenesis of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug-induced asthma.

Kim SH(1), Park HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy & Rheumatology, Ajou University School of Medicine,
Suwon, South Korea.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize recent findings related to the pathogenic
mechanisms of aspirin-induced asthma with emphasis on molecular genetic
mechanisms.
RECENT FINDINGS: The overproduction of cysteinyl leukotrienes with the increased 
expression of cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 (CYSLTR1) is a consistent finding 
in aspirin-induced asthma patients. Recent data have suggested a dysregulation of
cyclooxygenase-2 and prostaglandin E2, increased levels of
15-hydroxyeicosatetranoic acid, and decreased lipoxin generation as
characteristics of the condition. The HLA allele DPB10301 was documented as a
strong genetic marker for susceptibility in an Asian population. Leukotriene C4
synthase has been established as a key genetic determinant of aspirin-induced
asthma, but recent studies have demonstrated that several single nucleotide
polymorphisms in the promoters of prostaglandin E2 receptor subtype 2, CYSLTR1
and CYSLTR2 and T-box expressed in T cells (TBX21) could increase risk for the
condition. Although cyclooxygenase-2 and thromboxane A2 receptor polymorphisms
were not associated with aspirin-induced asthma phenotype, they may exert
functional effects.
SUMMARY: The identification of genetic markers for aspirin-induced asthma
susceptibility along with in-vitro functional studies would help to elucidate the
pathogenesis of the condition. Further studies of the interactions among genes
and between genes and the environment will be essential.

PMID: 16505607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Eur J Med Res. 2006 Feb 21;11(2):77-84.

Bronchial hyperreactivity is correlated with increased baseline airway tone.

Bergner A(1), Kellner J, Kemp da Silva A, Fischer R, Gamarra F, Huber RM.

Author information: 
(1)Pneumology, Medizinische Klinik-Innenstadt, Ziemssenstr. 1, D-80336 Munich,
Germany. albrecht.bergner@med.uni-muenchen.de

Physiologically, airways are not completely relaxed but maintain a baseline
airway tone (BAT). Although not fulfilling the criteria for obstructive airway
disease, increased BAT may nevertheless be important because the same amount of
airway narrowing can be well tolerated or can cause severe airway obstruction
depending on the starting point of the narrowing. In this study, we aimed at
studying if BAT is correlated with bronchial hyperreactivity (BHR). For in vitro 
studies, airways in murine lung slices were digitally recorded and the change in 
cross-sectional area with time was quantified. BAT was measured by the amount of 
relaxation induced by permeabilization of the cell membrane with beta-escin in
zero external calcium. BHR was induced by incubation of lung slices with
interleukin-13 (IL-13). T-bet knock-out mice served as an additional model for
BHR. T-bet knock-out mice show a shift towards TH2-lymphocytes and display
histological as well as functional characteristics of asthma. In vivo, the
specific airway resistance of healthy non-smoking volunteers was assessed before 
and after inhalation of formoterol and bronchial challenge was performed using
methacholin. In murine lung slices that had been cultivated without serum, only a
minimal BAT could be observed. But, after cultivation with 10 % new born calve
serum, airways showed a BAT of approximately 13 % that could be reduced by
incubation with an IL-13 receptor antagonist. Atropine, isoproterenol and
indomethacin failed to relax airways regardless of cultivation with serum.
Incubation of lung slices without serum but with IL-13 increased BAT as well as
airway responsiveness to acetylcholine and both effects were more pronounced in
small compared to large airways. In lung slices from T-bet knock-out mice,
airways were hyperreactive compared to airways in slices from wild type mice and 
BAT was found to be increased. Again, both effects were more pronounced in small 
compared to large airways. In human non-smokers without airway obstruction,
increased BAT was correlated with bronchial hyperreactivity. We therefore
conclude that although not fulfilling the criteria for obstructive airway
disease, increased airway tone may yet be relevant in asthma.

PMID: 16504965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Respir Res. 2006 Feb 23;7:33.

Ca2+-signaling in airway smooth muscle cells is altered in T-bet knock-out mice.

Bergner A(1), Kellner J, Silva AK, Gamarra F, Huber RM.

Author information: 
(1)Pneumology, Medizinische Klinik-Innenstadt, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany. albrecht.bergner@med.uni-muenchen.de

BACKGROUND: Airway smooth muscle cells (ASMC) play a key role in bronchial
hyperresponsiveness (BHR). A major component of the signaling cascade leading to 
ASMC contraction is calcium. So far, agonist-induced Ca2+-signaling in asthma has
been studied by comparing innate properties of inbred rat or mouse strains, or by
using selected mediators known to be involved in asthma. T-bet knock-out (KO)
mice show key features of allergic asthma such as a shift towards TH2-lymphocytes
and display a broad spectrum of asthma-like histological and functional
characteristics. In this study, we aimed at investigating whether
Ca2+-homeostasis of ASMC is altered in T-bet KO-mice as an experimental model of 
asthma.
METHODS: Lung slices of 100 to 200 microm thickness were obtained from T-bet KO- 
and wild-type mice. Airway contraction in response to acetylcholine (ACH) was
measured by video-microscopy and Ca2+-signaling in single ASMC of lung slices was
assessed using two-photon-microscopy.
RESULTS: Airways from T-bet KO-mice showed increased baseline airway tone (BAT)
and BHR compared to wild-type mice. This could be mimicked by incubation of lung 
slices from wild-type mice with IL-13. The increased BAT was correlated with an
increased incidence of spontaneous changes in intracellular Ca2+-concentrations, 
whereas BHR correlated with higher ACH-induced Ca2+-transients and an increased
proportion of ASMC showing Ca2+-oscillations. Emptying intracellular Ca2+-stores 
using caffeine or cyclopiazonic acid induced higher Ca2+-elevations in ASMC from 
T-bet KO- compared to wild-type mice.
CONCLUSION: Altered Ca2+-homeostasis of ASMC contributes to increased BAT and BHR
in lung slices from T-bet KO-mice as a murine asthma model. We propose that a
higher Ca2+-content of the intracellular Ca2+-stores is involved in the
pathophysiology of these changes.

PMCID: PMC1395308
PMID: 16504082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Yonsei Med J. 2006 Feb 28;47(1):15-21.

Genetic markers for differentiating aspirin-hypersensitivity.

Kim SH(1), Park HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Ajou University School of Medicine,
Youngtong-gu, Suwon 442-721, Korea.

Aspirin-induced asthma (AIA) and aspirin-induced urticaria/ angioedema (AIU) are 
two major aspirin-related allergies. We summarize recent findings related to
their molecular genetic mechanisms in order to identify genetic susceptibility
markers for differentiating AIU and AIA. The overproduction of cysteinyl
leukotriene has been suggested as a mechanism in both AIU and AIA. Increased
expression of CYSLTR1 with CYLSTR1 and CYSLTR2 polymorphisms are new findings in 
AIA, while the ALOX5 promoter polymorphism has been noted in AIU. An HLA study
suggested that DPB1*0301 is a strong genetic marker for AIA, and that HLA
DRB1*1302 and DQB1*0609 are markers for AIU susceptibility. Several single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the promoters of EP2, TBX21, COX-2, Fc epsilon
RIbeta, and TBXA2R were associated with AIA, while an Fc epsilon RIalpha promoter
polymorphism was associated with AIU. The functional studies of the key genes
involved in AIA and AIU are summarized. The identification and functional study
of genetic markers for AIA and AIU susceptibility would further elucidate the
pathogenic mechanisms and facilitate the development of early diagnostic markers 
to establish therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC2687575
PMID: 16502481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2006;139(4):306-16. Epub 2006 Feb 22.

Regulation of GATA-3, c-maf and T-bet mRNA expression in bronchoalveolar lavage
cells and bronchial biopsies after segmental allergen challenge.

Erpenbeck VJ(1), Hagenberg A, Krentel H, Discher M, Braun A, Hohlfeld JM, Krug N.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Hannover,
Germany. erpenbeck@item.fraunhofer.de

BACKGROUND: GATA-3 (GATA binding protein 3) and the proto-oncogene c-maf are
Th2-regulating transcription factors that control the expression of interleukin
(IL)-4 and IL-5, while T-bet (T-box expressed in T cells) is a Th1-specific
transcription factor that controls the expression of interferon (IFN-gamma).
Allergen provocation in asthmatics induces a Th2-dominated cytokine profile, but 
so far it is unknown whether the skewed cytokine expression is reflected by the
expression of the respective transcriptional regulators.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine the regulation of Th1- and
Th2-specific transcription factors and cytokines in 10 atopic subjects with mild 
asthma and 5 nonatopic healthy controls at baseline and after segmental sham and 
allergen challenge.
METHODS: The mRNA expression of GATA-3, c-maf and T-bet was determined by
real-time polymerase chain reaction in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells and
bronchial biopsies. The percentage of IL-4+, IL-5+ and IFN-gamma+ BAL T cells was
determined by flow cytometry, and BAL levels of these cytokines were measured by 
ELISA.
RESULTS: In BAL cells of asthmatics, the mRNA expression of all transcription
factors was increased after allergen challenge. In bronchial biopsies, the basal 
expression of GATA-3 was increased in asthmatics compared to healthy controls but
decreased after allergen challenge. Compared to sham challenge, the percentage of
IL-5+/CD4+ BAL T cells was increased after allergen challenge in asthmatics while
the percentage of IFN-gamma+/CD4+ and IFN-gamma+/CD8+ T cells was decreased.
Expression of c-maf mRNA in BAL cells correlated with IL-4+/CD4+ BAL cells and
BAL IL-5 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Segmental allergen challenge in asthmatics leads to increased
GATA-3, c-maf and T-bet expression in BAL cells but not in bronchial biopsies.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16498264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Immunol. 2006 Mar 1;176(5):3248-56.

Regulatory networks induced by live parasites impair both Th1 and Th2 pathways in
patent lymphatic filariasis: implications for parasite persistence.

Babu S(1), Blauvelt CP, Kumaraswami V, Nutman TB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
sbabu@niaid.nih.gov

Patent lymphatic filariasis is characterized by a profound down-regulation of
immune responses with both parasite Ag-specific tolerance and bystander
suppression. Although this down-regulation is confined to the Th1 arm of the
immune system in response to parasite Ag, we hypothesized a more generalized
suppression in response to live parasites. Indeed, when we examined the cytokine 
profile of a cohort of filaria-infected (n = 10) and uninfected (n = 10)
individuals in response to live infective-stage larvae or microfilariae of Brugia
malayi, we found significant impairment of both Th1 and Th2 cytokines
characterized by diminished production of IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha, IL-4, IL-5, and
IL-10 in infected patients. The molecular basis of this impaired Th1/Th2 response
was examined, and we identified three major networks of immunoregulation and
tolerance. First, impaired induction of T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA underlies the
Th1/Th2 deficiency in infected individuals. Second, regulatory networks, as
evidenced by significantly increased expression of Foxp3 (natural regulatory T
cell marker) and regulatory effectors such as TGF-beta, CTLA-4, PD-1, ICOS, and
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase play an important role in immunosuppression. Third,
the compromise of effector T cell function is mediated by the enhanced induction 
of anergy-inducing factors cbl-b, c-cbl (cbl is abbreviation for Casitas B
lymphoma), Itch, and Nedd4. Indeed, blocking CTLA-4 or neutralizing TGF-beta
restored the ability to mount Th1/Th2 responses to live parasites and reversed
the induction of anergy-inducing factors. Hence, we conclude that a profound
impairment of live parasite-specific Th1 and Th2 immune responses occurs in
lymphatic filariasis that is governed at the transcriptional level by a complex
interplay of inhibitory mediators.

PMID: 16493086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Histopathology. 2006 Mar;48(4):343-52.

Different T-bet expression patterns characterize particular reactive lymphoid
tissue lesions.

Jöhrens K(1), Anagnostopoulos I, Dürkop H, Stein H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Medical University
Berlin, Germany.

AIMS: To investigate T-bet expression profiles in various lymphoid tissue
diseases caused by intracellular pathogens and to compare them in disorders
without an infective aetiology. Murine and in vitro experiments have shown that
the expression/induction of T-bet, the master regulator of Th1 differentiation,
can be achieved by obligate intracellular pathogens and high interferon
(IFN)-gamma levels.
METHODS: Lymph node biopsies were analysed immunohistochemically employing single
and double labelling for T-bet and CD20, CD4, CD8 and CD30 detection.
RESULTS: In disorders associated with high IFN-gamma levels and intracellular
pathogens (infectious mononucleosis, HIV-associated lymphadenopathy, cat-scratch 
disease, and toxoplasmic lymphadenitis), T-bet-expressing CD4 cells were
accompanied by significant numbers of T-bet-positive CD8 and B cells. A similar
profile was also found in histiocytic necrotizing (Kikuchi) lymphadenitis, a
disease of unknown cause. In contrast, T-bet expression in disorders without an
infective aetiology was observed in only a small portion of lymphocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased T-bet expression does not only identify intracellular
infections in lymphoid tissue associated with high IFN-gamma levels, but also
implies that, under these conditions, it becomes induced in B cells, which
apparently support the Th1 response. T-bet expression in Kikuchi lymphadenitis
underscores the hypothesis that it is caused by an intracellular microorganism.

PMID: 16487356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Immunology. 2006 Mar;117(3):358-67.

Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 inhibits GATA-3 but not T-bet mRNA expression
during T helper cell differentiation.

Nasta F(1), Ubaldi V, Pace L, Doria G, Pioli C.

Author information: 
(1)ENEA, Unit of Biotechnology, Section of Toxicology and Biomedicine, Rome,
Italy.

Naive CD4+ T-cell differentiation to T helper 1 (Th1) and Th2 cells is dependent 
on T-bet and GATA-3 factors, respectively. T-bet and GATA-3, indeed, through
chromatin remodelling allow transcriptional activation of Ifngamma and Th2
cytokine (Il4, Il5, Il13) genes, respectively. We investigated the effects of the
negative costimulatory receptor cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) on
GATA-3 and T-bet mRNA expression and Th cell differentiation in mouse naive CD4+ 
T cells. Our results show that CTLA-4 inhibits GATA-3 mRNA expression and Th2
cell differentiation. At variance, CTLA-4 does not affect T-bet mRNA expression
and Th1 cell differentiation. GATA-3 mRNA expression is inhibited when CD4+ cells
are stimulated under both neutral (i.e. absence of cytokines) and Th2-polarizing 
(i.e. presence of interleukin (IL)-4) conditions, the effect being larger under
the latter condition. Hence CTLA-4 might affect the IL-4/signal transducer and
activator of transcription-6 (STAT6) pathway leading to GATA-3 mRNA
up-regulation. We found, indeed, that CTLA-4 engagement inhibits STAT6 activation
leaving unaffected the STAT6 protein level. Moreover, CTLA-4 engagement
drastically inhibits IL-4Ralpha mRNA and protein up-regulation under
Th2-polarizing conditions. Thus, CTLA-4 exerts a tight control on Th2 cell
differentiation by negatively regulating both the CD3/CD28 and the IL-4/STAT6
pathways.

PMCID: PMC1782225
PMID: 16476055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 28;281(17):11992-2000. Epub 2006 Feb 10.

T-bet binding to newly identified target gene promoters is cell type-independent 
but results in variable context-dependent functional effects.

Beima KM(1), Miazgowicz MM, Lewis MD, Yan PS, Huang TH, Weinmann AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195,
USA.

Recently developed target gene identification strategies based upon the chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay provide a powerful method to determine the localization
of transcription factor binding within mammalian genomes. However, in many cases,
it is unclear if the binding capacity of a transcription factor correlates with
an obligate role in gene regulation in diverse contexts. It is therefore
important to carefully examine the relationship between transcription factor
binding and its ability to functionally regulate gene expression. T-bet is a
T-box transcription factor expressed in several hematopoietic cell types. By
utilizing a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay coupled to genomic microarray
technology approach, we identified numerous promoters, including CXCR3, IL2Rbeta,
and CCL3, that are bound by T-bet in B cells. Most surprisingly, the ability of
T-bet to associate with the target promoters is not dependent upon the cell type 
background. Several of the promoters appear to be functionally regulated by
T-bet. However, we could not detect a functional consequence for T-bet
association with many of the identified promoters in overexpression studies or an
examination of wild type and T-bet-/- primary B, CD4+, and CD8+ T cells. Thus,
there is a high variability in the functional consequences, if any, that result
from the association of T-bet with individual target promoters.

PMID: 16473879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2006 Aug;45(8):951-7. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Imbalance of Th1/Th2 transcription factors in patients with lupus nephritis.

Chan RW(1), Lai FM, Li EK, Tam LS, Chow KM, Li PK, Szeto CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong, China.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is characterized by the aberrant
activation of T lymphocytes. Since T-bet and GATA-3 are the principal
transcription factors for the differentiation of type-1 and type-2 helper T
lymphocytes, respectively, we studied their mRNA expression in the urinary
sediment of SLE patients and compared this with their urinary and intra-renal
protein expression.
METHODS: We studied 100 SLE patients and 10 healthy subjects. Urinary mRNA
expression of T-bet and GATA-3 were studied by the real-time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction. Intra-renal and urinary expressions of T-bet and
GATA-3 were studied by immunohistochemistry and western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: The urinary mRNA and protein expressions of T-bet were significantly
higher in SLE patients with active nephritis than those with inactive disease
(mRNA: P < 0.001; protein: P = 0.004). The urinary mRNA expression of T-bet
correlated with the SLE disease activity index (SLEDAI) score (r = 0.55, P <
0.001) and the histological activity index (r = 0.48, P = 0.03). On the other
hand, the urinary mRNA and protein expressions of GATA-3 were significantly lower
in SLE patients with active nephritis (mRNA: P < 0.001; protein: P = 0.006), and 
GATA-3 mRNA expression inversely correlated with the SLEDAI score (r = 0.38, P < 
0.001). For the 22 SLE patients with kidney biopsy, tubular expressions of T-bet 
and GATA-3 significantly correlated with the histological activity index (T-bet: 
r = 0.57, P = 0.006; GATA-3: r = -0.79, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with active lupus nephritis have increased T-bet and
depressed GATA-3 expression in the urinary sediment and kidney tissue, indicating
a predominant Th1 type of T-lymphocyte activation.

PMID: 16461436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2006 Jun;21(6):1534-40. Epub 2006 Jan 31.

The effect of immunosuppressive therapy on the messenger RNA expression of target
genes in the urinary sediment of patients with active lupus nephritis.

Chan RW(1), Lai FM, Li EK, Tam LS, Chow KM, Li PK, Szeto CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, China.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of
target genes is increased in the urinary sediment of patients with active lupus. 
We study the effect of immunosuppressive therapy on the urinary gene expression
profile in patients with active lupus nephritis. Method. We recruited nine
patients with active systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and renal disease, and
required corticosteroid, with or without cytotoxic treatment. They were followed 
for 6 months, urine samples were collected at 0, 4, 12 and 24 weeks and gene
expression profile was determined by polymerase chain reactions. The pattern of
gene expression was compared to clinical parameters of therapeutic response.
RESULTS: Amongst the target genes studied, there was a progressive decline in the
urinary expression of T-bet, interleukin (IL)-10, transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), and interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) after immunosuppressive treatment, although the change of IFN-gamma
was not statistically significant. The time course of their urinary expression
was parallel to the systemic activity as reflected by the systemic lupus
erythematosus disease activity index (SLEDAI). Throughout the study period, the
SLEDAI score correlated significantly with the expressions of IFN-gamma (r =
0.43, P = 0.009), T-bet (r = 0.40, P = 0.016), TGF-beta (r = 0.51, P = 0.002) and
MCP-1 (r = 0.38, P = 0.022). The anti-double strand(anti-ds)DNA antibody titer
correlated significantly with the expressions of IFN-gamma (r = 0.45, P = 0.009),
T-bet (r = 0.37, P = 0.034), IL-10 (r = 0.59, P<0.001), TGF-beta (r = 0.44, P =
0.010) and MCP-1 (r = 0.49, P = 0.004). On the other hand, the expression level
of IL-2, IL-4, IL-12, IL-18 and GATA-3 remained static throughout the study
period.
CONCLUSIONS: The mRNA expression of T-bet, IL-10, TGF-beta, MCP-1, and probably
IFN-gamma in the urinary sediment of patients with active lupus nephritis
improves with successful immunosuppressive therapy, and the change in gene
expression profile is in phase with the clinical disease activity. Measurement of
urinary mRNA expression of target genes may be a potential non-invasive tool for 
the monitoring of lupus disease activity.

PMID: 16449281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Blood. 2006 May 15;107(10):3983-91. Epub 2006 Jan 24.

T-bet, a Th1 transcription factor, is up-regulated in T cells from patients with 
aplastic anemia.

Solomou EE(1), Keyvanfar K, Young NS.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute/NIH, Bldg 10,
CRC, Rm 3E5216, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. solomoue@nhlbi.nih.gov

In aplastic anemia, immune destruction of hematopoietic cells results in bone
marrow failure. Type 1 cytokines, especially IFN-gamma, have been implicated in
the pathophysiology of T-cell-mediated, Fas-mediated stem cell apoptosis of
hematopoietic cells. Here, we show that the transcription factor T-bet (T-box
expressed in T cells) is increased in T cells from patients with aplastic anemia.
Patients' T-bet bound directly to the proximal site of the IFN-gamma promoter
without any prior stimulation, in contrast to healthy controls. Increased levels 
of Itk kinase participated in T-bet up-regulation and active transcription of the
IFN-gamma gene observed in these patients. Blocking PKC-, a kinase that lies
downstream of Itk kinase, decreased T-bet protein and IFN-gamma intracellular
levels. These data suggest that the increased IFN-gamma levels observed in
aplastic anemia patients are the result of active transcription of the IFN-gamma 
gene by T-bet. Blocking the transcription of the IFN-gamma gene with kinase
inhibitors might lead to the development of novel therapeutic agents for patients
with aplastic anemia and other autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC1895294
PMID: 16434488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Clin Invest. 2006 Feb;116(2):414-21. Epub 2006 Jan 12.

Transcription factor T-bet regulates inflammatory arthritis through its function 
in dendritic cells.

Wang J(1), Fathman JW, Lugo-Villarino G, Scimone L, von Andrian U, Dorfman DM,
Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The transcription factor T-bet (Tbx21) plays a major role in adaptive immunity
and is required for optimal IFN-gamma production by DCs. Here we demonstrate an
essential function for T-bet in DCs in controlling inflammatory arthritis. We
show that collagen antibody-induced arthritis (CAIA), a model of human RA, is a
bipartite disease characterized by an early innate immune system component intact
in RAG2 mice and a later adaptive immune system phase. Mice lacking T-bet had
markedly reduced joint inflammation at both early and late time points and
RAG2T-bet double-deficient mice were essentially resistant to disease.
Remarkably, adoptive transfer of T-bet-expressing DCs reconstituted inflammation 
in a T-bet deficient and T-bet/RAG2-deficient milieu. T-bet regulates the
production of proinflammatory cytokine IL-1alpha and chemokines macrophage
inflammatory protein-1alpha (MIP-1alpha) and thymus- and activation-related
chemokine (TARC) by DCs. Further, T-bet expression in DCs is required for T
helper cell activation. We conclude that T-bet plays a vital function in DCs that
links innate and adaptive immunity to regulate inflammatory responses. T-bet
provides an attractive new target for the development of novel therapeutics for
inflammatory arthritis.

PMCID: PMC1326147
PMID: 16410834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Immunol. 2006 Jan 15;176(2):1036-45.

T-bet down-modulation in tolerized Th1 effector CD4 cells confers a TCR-distal
signaling defect that selectively impairs IFN-gamma expression.

Long M(1), Slaiby AM, Hagymasi AT, Mihalyo MA, Lichtler AC, Reiner SL, Adler AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunotherapy of Cancer and Infectious Diseases and Department of
Immunology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

When Th1 effector CD4 cells encounter tolerizing Ag in vivo, their capacity to
express the effector cytokines IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha is lost more rapidly than 
noneffector functions such as IL-2 production and proliferation. To localize the 
relevant intracellular signaling defects, cytokine expression was compared
following restimulation with Ag vs agents that bypass TCR-proximal signaling.
IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha expression were both partially rescued when TCR-proximal 
signaling was bypassed, indicating that both TCR-proximal and -distal signaling
defects impair the expression of these two effector cytokines. In contrast,
bypassing TCR-proximal signaling fully rescued IL-2 expression. T-bet, a
transcription and chromatin remodeling factor that is required to direct the
differentiation of naive CD4 cells into IFN-gamma-expressing Th1 effectors, was
partially down-modulated in tolerized Th1 effectors. Enforcing T-bet expression
during tolerization selectively rescued the ability to express IFN-gamma, but not
TNF-alpha. Conversely, expression of a dominant-negative T-bet in Th1 effectors
selectively impaired the ability to express IFN-gamma, but not TNF-alpha.
Analysis of histone acetylation at the IFN-gamma promoter further suggested that 
down-modulation of T-bet expression during Th1 effector CD4 cell tolerization
does not impair IFN-gamma expression potential through alterations in chromatin
structure.

PMCID: PMC2846362
PMID: 16393991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Blood. 2006 Apr 1;107(7):2797-805. Epub 2005 Dec 15.

T-bet concomitantly controls migration, survival, and effector functions during
the development of Valpha14i NKT cells.

Matsuda JL(1), Zhang Q, Ndonye R, Richardson SK, Howell AR, Gapin L.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, National Jewish Medical and Research
Center, University of Colorado Health Science Center, Denver, CO, USA.

Valpha14i natural killer T (NKT)-cell function has been implicated in a number of
disease conditions. The molecular events that drive Valpha14i NKT-cell
development remain elusive. We recently showed that T-bet is required for the
terminal maturation of these cells. Here we identify some of the genetic targets 
of T-bet during Valpha14i NKT-cell lineage development. Microarray
gene-expression analyses on developing Valpha14i NKT cells were performed and
provide a molecular framework to study these maturation events. In vitro ectopic 
expression of T-bet in immature Valpha14i NKT cells, which do not yet express
T-bet, was sufficient to promote Valpha14i NKT-cell maturation, driving the
expression of multiple genes, including those that participate in migration,
survival, and effector functions. By regulating the expression of T-helper 1
(Th1)-associated cytokines, chemokines, chemokine receptors, and molecules
involved in cytolysis, T-bet defines the unique lineage attributes of mature
Valpha14i NKT cells and acts to link these attributes to a developmental process.

PMCID: PMC1895373
PMID: 16357323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Cancer Gene Ther. 2006 May;13(5):510-9.

Th2-dominated antitumor immunity induced by DNA immunization with the genes
coding for a basal core peptide PDTRP and GM-CSF.

Chu Y(1), Xia M, Lin Y, Li A, Wang Y, Liu R, Xiong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine of Ministry of 
Education, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Our previous study showed that DNA vaccination with a plasmid vector encoding a
core peptide of mucin1 (PDTRP) provided modest protection against challenge with 
tumor cells that expressed mucin1 protein. We report here that a DNA vaccine
comprising a modified PDTRP plasmid and GM-CSF coding sequence at the C-terminus 
induced better protection against tumor challenge. The increased protection was
directly correlated with a stronger PDTRP-specific immune response induced by the
GM-CSF fusion plasmid. The plasmid encoding GM-CSF and the target PDTRP antigen
induced a greater PDTRP-specific Th proliferation, antibodies, and cytotoxicity. 
Interestingly, the modified plasmid vaccine predominantly enhanced the type 2
immune responses manifested by an increased IgG1 to IgG2a antibody ratio and a
greater induction of GATA-3 and IL-4 mRNA than that of T-bet and IFN-gamma mRNA
in spleen cells from vaccinated mice. In addition, protection against tumor
challenge in vaccinated mice showed that there was no significant change in mice 
survival after in vivo CD8+CTL depletion, indicating that antitumor immunity
augmented by plasmid encoding GM-CSF and target PDTRP gene vaccine was dominated 
by Th2 immune response.

PMID: 16341143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2005 Dec;11(12):1044-52.

T helper 1-inducing property of IL-27/WSX-1 signaling is required for the
induction of experimental colitis.

Honda K(1), Nakamura K, Matsui N, Takahashi M, Kitamura Y, Mizutani T, Harada N, 
Nawata H, Hamano S, Yoshida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Science, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: WSX-1, a component of the interleukin (IL)-27 receptor, is a novel
class I cytokine receptor with homology to the IL-12 receptor beta2 chain.
Initially, WSX-1 signaling was reported to play an important role in the
promotion of T helper-1 responses, but recent reports have revealed an
anti-inflammatory property in WSX-1 signaling. In the present study, we
investigated the role of IL-27/WSX-1 signaling in a murine colitis model, dextran
sulfate sodium (DSS) colitis, by using WSX-1 knockout (KO) mice.
METHODS: First, we observed whether WSX-1 KO mice developed colitis
spontaneously. Second, we induced DSS colitis in WSX-1 KO and wild-type (WT)
mice.
RESULTS: WSX-1 KO mice were observed not to develop colitis spontaneously. The
severity of DSS colitis was decreased in WSX-1 KO mice in comparison with WT mice
in association with a reduced production of interferon-gamma, IL-6, and tumor
necrosis factor-alpha by lamina propria mononuclear cells from WSX-1 KO mice and 
the absence of T-bet expression in the colon from WSX-1 KO mice.
CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed the inflammatory property of IL-27/WSX-1
signaling in intestinal inflammation. As a result, IL-27/WSX-1 signal pathway may
thus be a promising candidate for the therapeutic intervention of human
inflammatory bowel diseases such as Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis.

PMID: 16306766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2005 Dec;54(6):322-31.

A review of trafficking and activation of uterine natural killer cells.

van den Heuvel MJ(1), Xie X, Tayade C, Peralta C, Fang Y, Leonard S, Paffaro VA
Jr, Sheikhi AK, Murrant C, Croy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

Comment in
    Am J Reprod Immunol. 2005 Dec;54(6):321.

PROBLEM: Enrichment of uterine natural killer (uNK) cells occurs during pregnancy
in many species. However, functions of uNK cells and regulation of their uterine 
homing are not fully defined. In mice and women, uNK cells contribute to
angiogenesis, a role reviewed here and now addressed in a mammal with an
alternative placental type.
METHODS OF STUDY: To address lymphocyte functions, RNA from murine or porcine
endometrium and lymphocytes purified from endometrium were analyzed using
real-time or reverse transcription PCR. To address homing potential, human blood 
CD56(+) lymphocytes were evaluated using both RNA and functional adhesion to
endothelium presented under shear force in frozen sections of gestation day 7
C57Bl/6J implantation sites. Women were serially sampled over a menstrual cycle
or a clinical preparatory cycle for embryo transfer.
RESULTS: Activation of murine uNK cells is associated with much greater increases
in transcription for Eomes than for T-bet (Tbx21). Lymphocytes from normal
porcine implantation sites transcribe vascular endothelial growth factor,
placental growth factor, interferon-gamma and hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF)-1alpha. In fertile women, increases in L-selectin- and
alpha4-integrin-mediated interactions between CD56(+) cells and endothelium occur
at luteinizing hormone (LH) surge (cycling women) to oocyte pick up or embryo
transfer, then return to pre-LH levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Uterine lymphocytes may universally promote pregnancy-associated
endometrial angiogenesis. Recruitment of uNK precursor cells from blood appears
to occur in a window promoted by rising plasma estrogen and LH and limited by
rising progesterone.

PMCID: PMC2967519
PMID: 16305657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Immunol. 2005 Dec 1;175(11):7419-24.

Stat1-dependent synergistic activation of T-bet for IgG2a production during early
stage of B cell activation.

Xu W(1), Zhang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Weill Medical College of
Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

During the adaptive phase of an immune response, naive B cells receive multiple
signals to become activated. Among them are the engagement of the B cell Ag
receptor and stimulation by cytokines. Specifically for an anti-microbial
response, the recognition of viral or bacterial Ags by the BCR and the
stimulation of IFN-gamma result in the predominant production of IgG2a. The T-bet
protein has been shown to be required for class switching to IgG2a. In this
report we further investigated the regulation of T-bet gene expression during the
early stage of B cell activation. We show that there is a striking synergistic
activation of T-bet in primary B cells when both the BCR and IFN-gamma signaling 
pathways are activated. The synergistic activation of T-bet correlates with a
100% increase in the number of B cells that produce IgG2a. This transcription
synergy on T-bet is transient in the first 24 h of B cell activation.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that the synergistic activation of T-bet is dependent
on Stat1 and that Stat1 is required for the IgG2a germline transcription and the 
production of IgG2a in response to the simultaneous signaling of BCR and
IFN-gamma. Finally, we show that Stat1 directly regulates the expression of T-bet
by binding to the T-bet promoter. These results reveal the mechanism of
regulation of T-bet expression and uncover a novel physiological function of
Stat1 for B cell activation.

PMID: 16301649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Clin Exp Immunol. 2005 Dec;142(3):519-27.

Predominance of type 1 CD4+ T cells in human abdominal aortic aneurysm.

Galle C(1), Schandené L, Stordeur P, Peignois Y, Ferreira J, Wautrecht JC,
Dereume JP, Goldman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Hôpital Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Brussels, Belgium. cgalle@ulb.ac.be

The functional repertoire of T cells in abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) and the
exact nature of aortic wall adaptive cellular immune responses still remains a
matter of debate. In this study, we sought to determine whether type 1 or type 2 
responses occur predominantly in human aneurysmal aortic lesions. We first
examined the phenotype and cytokine secretion profile of T lymphocytes freshly
isolated from aneurysmal aortic wall for comparison with their circulating
counterparts using flow cytometry. We found that both populations of infiltrating
CD4(+) and CD8(+)T cells displayed a unique activated memory phenotype. In
addition, we identified the presence in human aneurysmal aortic lesion of CD4(+)T
cells producing high levels of interferon (IFN)-gamma but not interleukin (IL)-4,
reflecting their type 1 nature. Quantitative analysis of cytokine gene expression
confirmed increased IFN-gamma transcript levels in infiltrating cells compared to
controls. We next analysed aortic wall responses using LightCycler-based
quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Compared 
to control non-diseased aortic samples, we demonstrated that whole AAA tissues
exhibited high mRNA levels of IFN-gamma but not IL-4. Overexpression of the
transcription factor T-bet in the absence of significant GATA-3 expression
further assessed the type 1 polarization of aortic wall immune responses. These
findings indicate that type 1 CD4(+)T cells predominate in human AAA lesions.
This study has important implications for the pathogenesis of aneurysm disease.
Through the production of IFN-gamma, T cells may indeed contribute to orchestrate
extracellular matrix remodelling.

PMCID: PMC1809544
PMID: 16297165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Nov 22;102(47):17101-6. Epub 2005 Nov 14.

T-bet-dependent expression of osteopontin contributes to T cell polarization.

Shinohara ML(1), Jansson M, Hwang ES, Werneck MB, Glimcher LH, Cantor H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The osteopontin (Opn) glycoprotein has been implicated in diverse physiological
processes, including vascularization, bone formation, and inflammatory responses.
Studies of its role in immune responses has suggested that Opn can set the early 
stage of type-1 immune (cell-mediated) responses through differential regulation 
of IL-12 and IL-10 cytokine gene expression in macrophages. Although Opn has been
suggested to play a role in the development of type-1 immunity, little is known
about control of Opn gene expression. Here, we report that Opn gene expression in
activated T cells, but not macrophages, is regulated by T-bet, a transcription
factor that controls CD4+ T helper (Th1) cell lineage commitment. We also find
that T-bet-dependent expression of Opn in T cells is essential for efficient
skewing of CD4+ T and CD8+ T cells toward the Th1 and type 1 CD8+ T cells (Tc1)
pathway, respectively. Taken together, these findings begin to delineate the
genetic basis of Opn expression in T cells and further clarify the role of Opn in
Th and Tc1 development.

PMCID: PMC1288014
PMID: 16286640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Exp Med. 2005 Nov 7;202(9):1289-300.

IL-2 production in developing Th1 cells is regulated by heterodimerization of
RelA and T-bet and requires T-bet serine residue 508.

Hwang ES(1), Hong JH, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Life Sciences and College of Pharmacy, Ewha Womans
University, Seoul, Korea.

Interleukin (IL)-2 is the predominant cytokine that is produced by naive Th cells
in a primary response. It is required for proliferation and differentiation of Th
precursor cells into effector cells. Initial high-level IL-2 production is
followed by its decline, and the concomitant induction of cytokines that are
typical of the differentiated state. Although the factors that are responsible
for the early induction of IL-2 are well defined, the mechanisms that are
responsible for its down-regulation in later stages of Th development have not
been studied as much. Previous work from our laboratory revealed a repressor
function for the T-box transcription factor, T-bet, in IL-2 gene transcription.
Here, we report that T-bet(S508) is required for the optimal repression of IL-2
production in developing Th1 cells. Phosphorylation of T-bet(S508) by casein
kinase I and glycogen synthase kinase-3 kinases accompanies T-bet's interaction
with the RelA nuclear factor-kappaB transcription factor. Heterodimerization of
T-bet and RelA interferes with the binding of RelA to the IL-2 promoter, and
hence, transcriptional activation of the IL-2 gene by RelA.

PMCID: PMC2213245
PMID: 16275766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Nat Immunol. 2005 Dec;6(12):1236-44. Epub 2005 Nov 6.

Effector and memory CD8+ T cell fate coupled by T-bet and eomesodermin.

Intlekofer AM(1), Takemoto N, Wherry EJ, Longworth SA, Northrup JT, Palanivel VR,
Mullen AC, Gasink CR, Kaech SM, Miller JD, Gapin L, Ryan K, Russ AP, Lindsten T, 
Orange JS, Goldrath AW, Ahmed R, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2006 Jan;7(1):113.

Two seemingly unrelated hallmarks of memory CD8(+) T cells are cytokine-driven
proliferative renewal after pathogen clearance and a latent effector program in
anticipation of rechallenge. Memory CD8(+) T cells and natural killer cells share
cytotoxic potential and dependence on the growth factor interleukin 15. We now
show that mice with compound mutations of the genes encoding the transcription
factors T-bet and eomesodermin were nearly devoid of several lineages dependent
on interleukin 15, including memory CD8(+) T cells and mature natural killer
cells, and that their cells had defective cytotoxic effector programming.
Moreover, T-bet and eomesodermin were responsible for inducing enhanced
expression of CD122, the receptor specifying interleukin 15 responsiveness.
Therefore, these key transcription factors link the long-term renewal of memory
CD8(+) T cells to their characteristic effector potency.

PMID: 16273099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 1;175(9):5981-5.

Transcriptional activators of helper T cell fate are required for establishment
but not maintenance of signature cytokine expression.

Martins GA(1), Hutchins AS, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The stability of helper T cell fates is not well understood. Using conditional
introduction of dominant-negative factors, we now show that T-bet and GATA-3 are 
far more critical in establishment than maintenance of IFN-gamma and IL-4
activity during Th1 and Th2 maturation, respectively. We also show that a genetic
interaction between T-bet and its target Hlx seems to be required for Th1
maturation, but that Hlx may also be dispensable for maintenance of a
transcriptionally permissive ifng gene. In parallel to progressive activator
independence in the permissive lineage, the ifng gene becomes more recalcitrant
to switching as the forbidden lineage matures. T-bet plus Hlx can disrupt ifng
silencing when introduced into developing Th2 cells, but they fail to perturb
ifng silencing in mature Th2 cells. In contrast, a hypermorphic allele of T-bet
can reverse silencing of the ifng gene in mature Th2 cells. These results suggest
that signature gene activity of helper T cells is initially plastic but later
becomes epigenetically fixed and offer an initial strategy for inducing mature
cells to switch their fate.

PMID: 16237092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 1;175(9):5783-9.

JNK1 is essential for CD8+ T cell-mediated tumor immune surveillance.

Gao Y(1), Tao J, Li MO, Zhang D, Chi H, Henegariu O, Kaech SM, Davis RJ, Flavell 
RA, Yin Z.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

JNK1 has divergent roles in regulating the effector functions of CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells. However, the function of JNK1 in tumor immune surveillance is unknown. In 
this study, we show that similar to IFN-gamma-/- mice, JNK1-/- mice are highly
susceptible to tumor development after inoculation of both melanoma cell line B16
and lymphoma cell line EL-4. Using T cell depletion and reconstitution
approaches, we show that CD8+ T cells, but not CD4+ T cells, from JNK1-/- mice
are responsible for tumor susceptibility. JNK1-/- CD8+ T cells have an intrinsic 
defect in early IFN-gamma gene transcription and production after activation by
either anti-CD3/anti-CD28 Abs or dendritic cells loaded with specific Ag in
vitro. The impaired IFN-gamma production in JNK1-/- CD8+ T cells is associated
with reduced expression of both T-bet and Eomesodermin, indicating that JNK1
regulates the transcription program of CD8+ T cells. Finally, JNK1-/- CD8+ T
cells showed reduced perforin expression and impaired CTL function. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that JNK1 plays an important role in tumor
immune surveillance through regulating the effector functions of CD8+ T cells.

PMID: 16237070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 1;175(9):5681-9.

Murine plasmacytoid dendritic cells produce IFN-gamma upon IL-4 stimulation.

Suto A(1), Nakajima H, Tokumasa N, Takatori H, Kagami S, Suzuki K, Iwamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.

IL-4 plays a key role in inducing IL-4 production in CD4+ T cells, functioning as
an important determinant for Th2 cell differentiation. We show here that IL-4
induces IFN-gamma production in B220+ plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDCs). By
searching for cell populations that produce IFN-gamma upon IL-4 stimulation, we
found that PDCs were a major IFN-gamma-producing cell upon IL-4 stimulation in
wild-type and Rag-2-/- splenocytes. Isolated PDCs, but not CD11b+ DCs or CD8+
DCs, produced IFN-gamma upon IL-4 stimulation. In vivo, the depletion of PDCs by 
anti-Ly6G/C Ab prevented IFN-gamma production induced by IL-4 administration. We 
also found that IL-4 induced IFN-gamma production, but not IL-12 or IFN-alpha
production, in PDCs and also strongly enhanced CpG oligodeoxynucleotide-induced
IFN-gamma production, but not CpG oligodeoxynucleotide-induced IL-12 or IFN-alpha
production. However, IL-4 did not induce IFN-gamma production in Stat6-/- PDCs.
Moreover, IL-4 induced Stat4 expression in PDCs through a Stat6-dependent
mechanism, and only the Stat4-expressing PDCs produced IFN-gamma. Furthermore,
IL-4 did not induce IFN-gamma production in Stat4-/- PDCs. These results indicate
that PDCs preferentially produce IFN-gamma upon IL-4 stimulation by Stat6- and
Stat4-dependent mechanisms.

PMID: 16237058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 1;175(9):5666-74.

TGF-beta1 inhibits T-bet induction by IFN-gamma in murine CD4+ T cells through
the protein tyrosine phosphatase Src homology region 2 domain-containing
phosphatase-1.

Park IK(1), Shultz LD, Letterio JJ, Gorham JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

TGF-beta1 prevents the development of autoimmune disease by restraining the
development of autoreactive Th1 cells. TGF-beta1 inhibits Th1 development in part
by suppressing the expression of T-bet, an IFN-gamma-induced transcription factor
that promotes Th1 differentiation, but how TGF-beta1 suppresses T-bet is not
known. In this study we show that TGF-beta1 suppresses IFN-gamma-induced T-bet
expression through the hemopoietic protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) Src
homology region 2 domain-containing phosphatase-1 (Shp-1). In murine CD4+ T
cells, IFN-gamma rapidly induced the expression of T-bet as well as of IFN
regulatory factor-1, another transcription factor important for Th1 development. 
TGF-beta1 antagonized the effects of IFN-gamma, inhibiting IFN-gamma's induction 
of both Th1 transcription factors. In the presence of IFN-gamma, TGF-beta1
rapidly induced in Th cells the synthesis of the PTP Shp-1, but did not induce
Shp-2 or several members of the suppressor of cytokine signaling family of
Jak-Stat inhibitors. We tested the requirement for Shp-1 by using T cells from
the Shp-1-deficient me(v)/me(v) mouse strain. Shp-1 was required for TGF-beta1's 
suppressive effects, because its suppression of T-bet and IFN regulatory factor-1
was completely abrogated in me(v)/me(v) CD4+ T cells. Receptor-proximal responses
to IFN-gamma, such as the induction of Jak-Stat phosphorylation, were inhibited
by TGF-beta1 in wild-type T cells, but not in me(v)/me(v) T cells. Consistent
with a direct role for Shp-1, TGF-beta1's inhibition of IFN-gamma-induced Stat1
phosphorylation was sensitive to the general PTP inhibitor pervanadate. Together,
these data show that TGF-beta1 suppresses IFN-gamma signaling and transcriptional
responses in CD4+ T cells through the PTP Shp-1.

PMID: 16237056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 1;175(9):5606-10.

Cutting edge: a critical role for gene silencing in preventing excessive type 1
immunity.

Hutchins AS(1), Artis D, Hendrich BD, Bird AP, Scott P, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

Immunity often depends on proper cell fate choice by helper T lymphocytes. A
naive cell, with minimal expression of IFN-gamma and IL-4, must give rise to
progeny expressing high levels of either one, but not both, of those cytokines to
defend against protozoan and helminthic pathogens, respectively. In the present
study, we show that inactivation of the Mbd2 gene, which links DNA methylation
and repressed chromatin, results in enhanced resistance to the protozoan parasite
Leishmania major but impaired immunity to the intestinal helminth Trichuris
muris. Helper T cells from methyl CpG-binding domain protein-2-deficient mice
exhibit exuberant patterns of cytokine expression despite appropriate silencing
of genes encoding the lineage-specifying factors T-bet and GATA-3. These results 
suggest that gene silencing can facilitate the ability of a progenitor cell to
give rise to appropriately differentiated daughter cells in vivo. These findings 
also point to novel pathways that could participate in genetic control of
resistance to infection and autoimmunity.

PMID: 16237047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Br J Ophthalmol. 2005 Nov;89(11):1410-2.

Upregulation of T-bet expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells during
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease.

Li B(1), Yang P, Zhou H, Huang X, Jin H, Chu L, Gao Y, Zhu L, Kijlstra A.

Author information: 
(1)Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, 54 Xianlie Road,
Guangzhou 510060, P R China.

AIM: To test the hypothesis that T-bet expression is altered in patients with
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) disease.
METHODS: Peripheral blood was withdrawn from 16 VKH patients before and after
immunosuppressive treatment and from 16 healthy individuals. IFN-gamma, IL-2, and
IL-4 in the serum and the supernatants of peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) cultured with or without phytohaemagglutinin (PHA) were measured by ELISA.
T-bet mRNA and protein expression in PBMC cultured with or without PHA was
detected by RT-PCR and western blot, respectively.
RESULTS: The level of IFN-gamma, but not IL-2 and IL-4, was significantly higher 
in the supernatants of stimulated PBMC in patients than in controls. A
significantly increased T-bet mRNA was found in VKH patients during an active
uveitis episode, but not in quiescent patients, compared to controls. T-bet
protein was detectable in VKH patients during an active uveitis episode, but not 
in quiescent patients nor in the healthy controls. Stimulation of PBMC with PHA
resulted in a marked upregulation of T-bet mRNA and protein expression for both
patients and controls with no significant difference between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Upregulation of T-bet may be associated with the development of a
Th1 mediated immune response in VKH disease.

PMCID: PMC1772933
PMID: 16234441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Clin Exp Immunol. 2005 Nov;142(2):268-74.

Listeriolysin O, a cytolysin derived from Listeria monocytogenes, inhibits
generation of ovalbumin-specific Th2 immune response by skewing maturation of
antigen-specific T cells into Th1 cells.

Yamamoto K(1), Kawamura I, Tominaga T, Nomura T, Kohda C, Ito J, Mitsuyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Japan.

Listeriolysin O (LLO), a cholesterol-dependent cytolysin derived from Listeria
monocytogenes, is a potent inducer of interleukin (IL)-12, IL-18 and interferon
(IFN)-gamma. We have shown that LLO facilitates development of T cells mediating 
protective immunity against L. monocytogenes through the induction of IFN-gamma
production at an early stage. Based on this finding, it is postulated that LLO
inhibits differentiation of Th2 cells and the Th2 immune response. By using a
murine model of ovalbumin (OVA)-induced allergic rhinitis, we investigated
whether LLO has an ability to modulate the Th2-type immune disorder. In mice
sensitized intraperitoneally with ovalbumin (OVA)/alum and challenged
intranasally with OVA, a large number of eosinophils migrated into the nasal
tissue, and high titres of anti-OVA IgE and IgG(1) antibodies were detected in
sera. However, LLO treatment during sensitization markedly inhibited the
eosinophil infiltration and production of these anti-OVA antibodies. A large
number of T cells from mice sensitized and challenged with OVA produced high
level of IL-4 and IL-5 but not IFN-gamma after stimulation with OVA. In contrast,
OVA-specific IFN-gamma-producing T cells were preferentially induced in mice
treated with LLO at the time of sensitization. In the absence of LLO
administration, the expression level of GATA-3 and SOCS-3 in CD4(+) T cells was
enhanced after sensitization with OVA. LLO treatment resulted in a reduction of
GATA-3 and SOCS-3 expressions but induced the transcription of T-bet instead.
Taken together, these data show clearly that LLO is capable of inhibiting Th2
immune response by skewing differentiation of antigen-specific T cells into Th1
cells.

PMCID: PMC1809525
PMID: 16232213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Nov;35(11):3297-306.

IL-12 up-regulates T-bet independently of IFN-gamma in human CD4+ T cells.

Ylikoski E(1), Lund R, Kyläniemi M, Filén S, Kilpeläinen M, Savolainen J,
Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland.

Erratum in
    Eur J Immunol. 2006 Apr;36(4):1058.

T-bet is an important Th1 driving transcription factor regulated by
IFN-gamma/STAT1 pathway. T-bet turns on IFN-gamma transcription in CD4+ T cells
and T-bet-deficient cells fail to differentiate to Th1 direction. Previous
reports have characterized function of T-bet mainly in murine cells and very
little is known about its functions in human cells. Here, we studied T-bet
expression kinetics in parallel with GATA3 during Th1/Th2 polarization. We
demonstrate that in addition to CD3/CD28 activation, cytokines IL-12 and
IFN-alpha in the presence of neutralizing anti-IFN-gamma enhanced T-bet mRNA and 
protein expression in human CD4+ cells. T-bet is known to be a potent inducer of 
IFN-gamma. Even though IFN-gamma and IL-12 stimulation induced similar levels of 
T-bet protein in human CD4+ cells, IFN-gamma-treated cells produced considerably 
less IFN-gamma than cells treated with IL-12. Therefore, high T-bet protein
expression does not necessarily correlate with IFN-gamma production. In addition,
we show that the immunosuppressive cytokine TGF-beta inhibits T-bet and GATA3
protein expression only if it is present prior to primary T cell activation and
is maintained in the cultures during the early polarization of Th1/Th2 cells. In 
conclusion, we report new insights into the cytokine regulation of T-bet in human
CD4+ T cells.

PMID: 16220539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Nov;35(11):3307-19.

Identification of genes involved in the initiation of human Th1 or Th2 cell
commitment.

Lund R(1), Ahlfors H, Kainonen E, Lahesmaa AM, Dixon C, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku/Abo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland.

The differentiation of naïve T helper (Th) cells is induced by TCR activation and
IL-12/STAT4 or IL-4/STAT6 signaling pathways, forming Th1 and Th2 cells,
respectively. In this study, oligonucleotide arrays were used to identify genes
regulated during the initiation of human Th1 and Th2 cell differentiation at 2
and 6 h in presence or absence of immunosuppressive TGF-beta. As a result the
immediate targets of IL-12, IL-4 and TGF-beta were identified. The effects of
IL-12 at this early stage were minimal and consistent with the known kinetics of 
IL-12Rbeta2 expression. IL-4, however, was observed to rapidly regulate 63 genes,
26 of which were differentially expressed at both the 2- and 6-h time points. Of 
these IL-4 regulated genes, one-third have previously been observed to display
expression changes in the later phases of the polarization process. Similarly to 
the key regulators, TBX21 and GATA3, the transcription factors SATB1, TCF7 and
BCL6 were differentially regulated at the protein level during early Th1 and Th2 
cell polarization. Moreover, the developing Th1 and Th2 cells were demonstrated
to be responsive to the immunosuppressive TGF-beta and IL-10. In this study, a
panel of novel factors that may be important regulators of the differentiation
process was identified.

PMID: 16220538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Immunol. 2005 Oct 15;175(8):5457-62.

A genetic basis for IFN-gamma production and T-bet expression in humans.

Höhler T(1), Reuss E, Adams P, Bartsch B, Weigmann B, Wörns M, Galle PR, Victor
A, Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz,
Germany. thomas.hoehler@prosper-hospital.de

Th1 and Th2 cytokines secreted by polarized effector T cells play a pivotal role 
in the development of autoimmune and allergic diseases. However, the genetic
basis of cytokine production by T lymphocytes in humans is poorly understood. In 
this study, we investigated the genetic contribution to cytokine production and
regulation of T cell-specific transcription factors in a prospective twin study. 
We found a substantial genetic contribution to the production of Th1 cytokines
such as IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha with heritabilities of 0.85 (95% confidence
intervals, 0.74-0.95) and 0.72 (0.50-0.93), respectively, whereas no genetic
influence on production of the Th2 signature cytokine IL-4 was observed.
Furthermore, the intrapair variability in IFN-gamma production by isolated T
cells was lower in monozygotic than in dizygotic twins. In contrast to GATA-3,
NFAT, and NF-kappaB, intrapair variability of T-bet, the master transcription
factor of Th1 cells, was very low among monozygotic and high among dizygotic
twins, indicative of a strong genetic influence on T-bet (heritability 0.93, 95% 
confidence interval, 0.84-1.0). Our data provide novel insights into the genetic 
regulation of human Th cell polarization. These data suggest that signature
cytokines and cytokine signaling events of Th1 rather than Th2 cells are
genetically determined and implicate that Th2-associated diseases in humans might
be due to genetic variations in Th1 cytokine regulation via T-bet. This concept
is highlighted by the recent finding that inactivation of the T-bet gene in mice 
results in development of clinical hallmark features of asthma.

PMID: 16210653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Leukoc Biol. 2005 Dec;78(6):1347-55. Epub 2005 Oct 4.

Differential transcription of Eomes and T-bet during maturation of mouse uterine 
natural killer cells.

Tayade C(1), Fang Y, Black GP, V A P Jr, Erlebacher A, Croy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ontario Veterinary College, University of
Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada N1G 2W1. ctayade@uoguelph.ca

During human and rodent uterine decidualization, transient but abundant numbers
of uterine natural killer (uNK) cells appear, proliferate, and differentiate. uNK
cells share features with peripheral NK cells but are specialized to promote
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)-mediated, pregnancy-associated, structural changes
in maternal placental arteries. In CD8+ T cells and NK cells, the transcription
factors T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes) regulate maturation and effector
functions, including IFN-gamma production. No studies are reported for uNK cells.
Implantation sites in T-bet null mice, which have a defect in NK cell maturation,
had uNK cells normal in morphology and number and normally modified spiral
arteries. As Eomes null mice are not viable, real-time polymerase chain reaction 
comparisons between C57Bl/6J (B6) and alymphoid (Rag2(0/0)gammac0/0) mice were
used to assess uNK cell expression of T-bet, Eomes, and the target genes
IFN-gamma, granzyme A, and perforin. Gestation dated (gd) uterine tissues (mixed 
cell composition) and 200 morphologically homogeneous, laser-capture,
microdissected uNK cells of different maturation stages were used. In uterus,
Eomes transcripts greatly outnumbered those of T-bet, whether donors were
nonpregnant or pregnant, and increased to gd10. In uNK cells, transcripts for
T-bet, Eomes, and IFN-gamma were most abundant in mature stage cells, and
transcripts for granzyme A and perforin were lower at this stage than in immature
or senescent cells. Thus, Eomes dominance to T-bet discriminates regulation of
the uNK cell subset from that observed for peripheral NK cells.

PMID: 16204645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Nat Immunol. 2005 Nov;6(11):1123-32. Epub 2005 Oct 2.

Interleukin 17-producing CD4+ effector T cells develop via a lineage distinct
from the T helper type 1 and 2 lineages.

Harrington LE(1), Hatton RD, Mangan PR, Turner H, Murphy TL, Murphy KM, Weaver
CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2005 Nov;6(11):1069-70.

CD4(+) T cells producing interleukin 17 (IL-17) are associated with autoimmunity,
although the precise mechanisms that control their development are undefined.
Here we present data that challenge the idea of a shared developmental pathway
with T helper type 1 (T(H)1) or T(H)2 lineages and instead favor the idea of a
distinct effector lineage we call 'T(H)-17'. The development of T(H)-17 cells
from naive precursor cells was potently inhibited by interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)
and IL-4, whereas committed T(H)-17 cells were resistant to suppression by T(H)1 
or T(H)2 cytokines. In the absence of IFN-gamma and IL-4, IL-23 induced naive
precursor cells to differentiate into T(H)-17 cells independently of the
transcription factors STAT1, T-bet, STAT4 and STAT6. These findings provide a
basis for understanding how inhibition of IFN-gamma signaling enhances
development of pathogenic T(H)-17 effector cells that can exacerbate
autoimmunity.

PMID: 16200070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Blood. 2006 Jan 15;107(2):454-62. Epub 2005 Sep 27.

Role of dendritic cell-derived CXCL13 in the pathogenesis of Bartonella henselae 
B-rich granuloma.

Vermi W(1), Facchetti F, Riboldi E, Heine H, Scutera S, Stornello S, Ravarino D, 
Cappello P, Giovarelli M, Badolato R, Zucca M, Gentili F, Chilosi M, Doglioni C, 
Ponzi AN, Sozzani S, Musso T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and the Section of General Pathology and Immunology,
University of Brescia, Italy.

Dendritic cells (DCs) initiate adaptive immunity and regulate the inflammatory
response by producing inflammatory chemokines. This study was aimed to elucidate 
their role in the pathogenesis of the suppurative granuloma induced by Bartonella
henselae infection, which characterizes cat scratch disease (CSD). In vitro DC
infection by B. henselae results in internalization of bacteria, phenotypic
maturation with increased expression of HLA-DR and CD86, and induction of CD83,
CD208, and CCR7. In comparison to LPS-activated DCs, B henselae-infected DCs
produce higher amounts of IL-10, whereas the production of IL-12p70 is reduced.
Infected DCs also produce high levels of CXCL8 and CXCL13, 2 chemokines active
respectively on neutrophils and B lymphocytes. These results provide the
molecular basis for the morphogenesis of CSD granuloma, which typically contains 
high numbers of neutrophils and B cells. Remarkably, CSD granulomas in vivo
contain CXCL13-producing DCs. We further demonstrate that the B cells in CSD
granulomas are represented by monocytoid B cells and, worth noting, they express 
T-bet, a transcription factor able to induce a T-independent immunoglobulin (Ig) 
class switch in B lymphocytes. These findings suggest that the humoral immune
response to B henselae initiates in the extrafollicular areas of infected lymph
nodes and is regulated by DCs.

PMID: 16189275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Virol. 2005 Oct;79(20):12798-806.

T-bet is required for protection against vaccinia virus infection.

Matsui M(1), Moriya O, Yoshimoto T, Akatsuka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Saitama Medical School, Moroyama-Cho, Iruma-Gun,
Japan. mmatsui@saitama-med.ac.jp

The transcription factor T-bet regulates the differentiation of CD4(+) T-helper
type 1 (Th1) cells and represses Th2 lineage commitment. Since Th1 cells are
crucial in the defense against pathogens, several studies addressed the role of
T-bet in immunity to infection using T-bet knockout (T-bet(-/-)) mice.
Nevertheless, it is still unclear whether T-bet is required for defense. Although
vaccinia virus (VV) has extensively been used as an expression vector and the
smallpox vaccine, there is only limited knowledge about immunity to VV infection.
The urgency to understand the immune responses has been increased because of
concerns about bioterrorism. Here, we show that T-bet is critical in the defense 
against VV infection as follows: (i) the survival rate of T-bet(-/-) mice was
lower than that of control littermates postinfection; (ii) T-bet(-/-) mice lost
more weight postinfection; and (iii) control mice cleared VV faster than
T-bet(-/-) mice. As expected, a significant Th2 shift was observed in CD4(+) T
cells of T-bet(-/-) mice. Furthermore, absence of T-bet impaired VV-specific
CD8(+) cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) function, including cytolytic activity,
antiviral cytokine production, and proliferation. Cytolytic capacity of natural
killer (NK) cells was also diminished in T-bet(-/-) mice, whereas anti-VV
antibody production was not impaired. These data reveal that the enhanced
susceptibility to VV infection in T-bet(-/-) mice was at least partially due to
the Th2 shift of CD4(+) T cells and the diminished function of VV-specific CTLs
and NK cells but not due to downregulation of antibody production.

PMCID: PMC1235859
PMID: 16188982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006 Jan 1;173(1):64-70. Epub 2005 Sep 22.

T-bet polymorphisms are associated with asthma and airway hyperresponsiveness.

Raby BA(1), Hwang ES, Van Steen K, Tantisira K, Peng S, Litonjua A, Lazarus R,
Giallourakis C, Rioux JD, Sparrow D, Silverman EK, Glimcher LH, Weiss ST.

Author information: 
(1)M.D.C.M., Channing Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. benjamin.raby@channing.harvard.edu

RATIONALE: T-bet (TBX21 or T-box 21) is a critical regulator of T-helper 1
lineage commitment and IFN-gamma production. Knockout mice lacking T-bet develop 
airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) to methacholine, peribronchial eosinophilic and 
lymphocytic inflammation, and increased type III collagen deposition below the
bronchial epithelium basement membrane, reminiscent of both acute and chronic
asthma histopathology. Little is known regarding the role of genetic variation
surrounding T-bet in the development of human AHR.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the relationship between T-bet polymorphisms and
asthma-related phenotypes using family-based association.
METHODS: Single nucleotide polymorphism discovery was performed by resequencing
the T-bet genomic locus in 30 individuals (including 22 patients with asthma).
Sixteen variants were genotyped in 580 nuclear families ascertained through
offspring with asthma from the Childhood Asthma Management Program clinical
trial. Haplotype patterns were determined from this genotype data. Family-based
tests of association were performed with asthma, AHR, lung function, total serum 
immunoglobulin E, and blood eosinophil levels.
MAIN RESULTS: We identified 24 variants. Evidence of association was observed
between c.-7947 and asthma in white families using both additive (p = 0.02) or
dominant models (p = 0.006). c.-7947 and three other variants were also
associated with AHR (log-methacholine PC(20), p = 0.02-0.04). Haplotype analysis 
suggested that an AHR locus is in linkage disequilibrium with variants in the
3'UTR. Evidence of association of AHR with c.-7947, but not with other 3'UTR
SNPs, was replicated in an independent cohort of adult males with AHR.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that T-bet variation contributes to airway
responsiveness in asthma.

PMCID: PMC2662983
PMID: 16179640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Histopathology. 2005 Oct;47(4):368-74.

T-bet expression patterns in coeliac disease, cryptic and overt enteropathy-type 
T-cell lymphoma.

Jöhrens K(1), Anagnostopoulos I, Stein H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Consultation and Reference Centre for Lymph Node
Pathology and Haematopathology, Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Medical
University Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

AIMS: To clarify the distribution and lineage allocation of T-bet-expressing
cells in coeliac disease (CD) and in enteropathy-type T-cell lymphoma (ETTCL).
The detection of elevated levels of interferon-gamma, interleukin-18 and the key 
regulator of Th1 helper immune response T-bet in CD biopsies led to the view that
CD is the result of a Th1 response to gluten. It remains unknown whether T-bet is
expressed in cryptic and overt ETTCL.
METHODS: Specimens from 20 patients with CD, five patients with cryptic and 10
patients with overt ETTCL were analysed by immunohistology employing single and
double labellings for T-bet and CD4 or CD8 antigens.
RESULTS: In CD specimens nearly all intraepithelial CD8 cells and many CD4 cells 
in the lamina propria expressed T-bet. Cryptic ETTCL showed T-bet expression in
the intraepithelial neoplastic cells while T-bet+ CD4 cells in the lamina propria
were rare. Overt ETTCL showed T-bet expression in cases with non-anaplastic
morphology. In addition, a proportion of bystander T cells expressed T-bet.
CONCLUSIONS: Morphological evidence proves that while T-bet orchestrates a CD4-
and CD8-based Th1 reaction in CD, its expression shifts to the neoplastic
intraepithelial compartment of cryptic ETTCL and becomes absent or lost in
anaplastic overt ETTCL.

PMID: 16178891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Immunol. 2005 Oct 1;175(7):4603-10.

Expression of T-bet by CD4 T cells is essential for resistance to Salmonella
infection.

Ravindran R(1), Foley J, Stoklasek T, Glimcher LH, McSorley SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Immunology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

Despite the recognized role of the T-bet transcription factor in the
differentiation of Th1 cells, T-bet-deficient mice can develop small numbers of
IFN-gamma-producing CD4 T cells. Although these are not sufficient to allow
normal handling of some pathogens, T-bet-deficient mice do resolve infection with
the intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes. In contrast, we report that
expression of T-bet is required for resistance to Salmonella infection.
T-bet-deficient mice succumbed to infection with attenuated Salmonella and did
not generate IFN-gamma-producing CD4 T cells or isotype-switched
Salmonella-specific Ab responses. Spleen cells from Salmonella-infected
T-bet-deficient mice secreted increased levels of IL-10, but not IL-4, upon in
vitro restimulation. A Salmonella-specific TCR transgenic adoptive transfer
system was used to further define the involvement of T-bet expression in the
development of Salmonella-specific Th1 cells. Wild-type Salmonella-specific CD4 T
cells activated in T-bet-deficient recipient mice displayed no defect in clonal
expansion, contraction, or IFN-gamma production. In contrast, T-bet-deficient,
Salmonella-specific CD4 T cells activated in wild-type recipient mice produced
less IFN-gamma and more IL-2 upon in vivo restimulation. Therefore, expression of
T-bet by CD4 T cells is required for the development of Salmonella-specific Th1
cells, regulation of IL-10 production, and resistance to Salmonella infection.

PMID: 16177105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Immunol. 2005 Oct 1;175(7):4593-602.

Increased susceptibility of mice lacking T-bet to infection with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis correlates with increased IL-10 and decreased IFN-gamma production.

Sullivan BM(1), Jobe O, Lazarevic V, Vasquez K, Bronson R, Glimcher LH, Kramnik
I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

A sustained CD4+ Th1-dominated type 1 immune response is required to successfully
control Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Considerable work has demonstrated 
that the transcription factor, T-bet, is required for IFN-gamma expression and
fundamental to the generation of type 1 immunity in multiple cell types. Mice
lacking T-bet are susceptible to virulent M. tuberculosis infection.
Susceptibility of T-bet-deficient mice is associated with increased systemic
bacterial burden, diminished IFN-gamma production, and the striking accumulation 
of eosinophilic macrophages and multinucleated giant cells in the lung.
Interestingly, T-bet(-/-) mice did not develop a fully polarized Th2 response
toward M. tuberculosis, but exhibited selective elevation of IL-10 production.
These results indicate that T-bet plays a central role in controlling M.
tuberculosis disease progression, in part through the regulation of both
IFN-gamma and IL-10.

PMID: 16177104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Med Food. 2005 Fall;8(3):332-6.

The effects of allitridin on the expression of transcription factors T-bet and
GATA-3 in mice infected by murine cytomegalovirus.

Yi X(1), Feng F, Xiang Z, Ge L.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Pediatric Clinical Virology of Tongji Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
xuyi70@163.com

This study was designed to investigate the effects of allitridin on the
expression of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 in mice infected by murine
cytomegalovirus (MCMV). A BALB/c mouse model system of MCMV infection was
established. Twenty mice were allocated randomly into an allitridin-treated group
(n = 10) and a placebo control group (n = 10). The same dose (25 mg/kg/day) and
regimen of allitridin were used in the treated group in the 24 hours after virus 
infection; the same volume of saline solution was injected in placebo control
mice. In an additional blank control group (n = 10), the same volume of saline
solution was injected. The expression levels of the transcription factors T-bet
and GATA-3 were measured by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The 
expression levels of the T helper (Th) 1 cytokine interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)
and the Th2 cytokine interleukin (IL)-10 in supernatant of spleen cell culture
were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. MCMV infection markedly
down-modulated the expression of IFN-gamma and T-bet and significantly
up-modulated the expression of IL-10 and GATA-3. Allitridin induced significantly
(P < .01) increased expression of the transcription factor T-bet and the Th1
cytokine IFN-gamma and markedly (P < .01) decreased expression of the
transcription factor GATA-3 and the Th2 cytokine IL-10. Thus MCMV infection could
lead to disequilibrium of Th1/Th2 cytokine expression: The level of the Th1
cytokine IFN-gamma was decreased significantly, and Th2 cytokine IL-10 was
overexpressed markedly. Allitridin could up-regulate the expression of T-bet and 
IFN-gamma and inhibit the expression of GATA-3 and IL-10 in MCMV-infected mice,
indicating a Th1 dominant state, which should enhance the specific cellular
immune reactions against cytomegalovirus (CMV) and be helpful for clearance of
CMV from the host.

PMID: 16176143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Immunol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;83(5):536-41.

Correlation between mRNA expression of Th1/Th2 cytokines and their specific
transcription factors in human helper T-cell clones.

Kitamura N(1), Kaminuma O, Mori A, Hashimoto T, Kitamura F, Miyagishi M, Taira K,
Miyatake S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

The mechanisms that underlie Th1/Th2 differentiation of human T cells are
incompletely defined. In the present study, a panel of human T-cell clones was
used to elucidate the relationship between Th1/Th2-specific transcription factors
and cytokine production in human helper T cells. The mRNA expression level of
T-bet, a Th1-specific transcription factor, was higher in Th1 clones than in Th2 
clones. In contrast, inducible expression of Th2-specific transcription factors
(GATA-3 and c-Maf) in Th2 clones was higher than that in Th1 clones. The
expression level of T-bet in various T-cell clones was positively correlated with
that of IFN-gamma and negatively correlated with that of Th2 cytokines,
particularly IL-4. Interestingly, the expression of IL-3 and IL-13, but not of
other Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-5, was strongly correlated with GATA-3 mRNA
levels. A reduction of GATA-3 using RNA interference technology suppressed,
whereas overexpression of GATA-3 enhanced, the expression of IL-3 and IL-13. In
conclusion, the level of T-bet expression is correlated with Th1/Th2 polarization
status, whereas GATA-3 is a crucial factor in determining the IL-3 and IL-13
producing capacity of human T cells.

PMID: 16174104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Sep 13;102(37):13248-53. Epub 2005 Aug 31.

The adjuvant activity of CpG DNA requires T-bet expression in dendritic cells.

Lugo-Villarino G(1), Ito S, Klinman DM, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115-6017, USA.

Treatment with synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides containing CpG motifs (CpG ODNs)
is remarkably protective against otherwise lethal infection. Here, we describe an
essential role for the transcription factor T-bet in mediating the protective
function of CpG ODNs. Loss of T-bet in conventional CD11c(hi) dendritic cells
(DCs) and in plasmacytoid DCs impaired production of IFNs. Strikingly, in
contrast to Rag2-/- mice, Rag2-/- mice that also lacked T-bet (DKO) could not be 
rescued from lethal Listeria monocytogenes infection by prior treatment with CpG 
ODN. Rescue was achieved by adoptive transfer of CD11c(hi) DCs from WT, but not
T-bet-/-, CpG ODN-treated donor mice. We conclude that T-bet in DCs is required
for the adjuvant activity of CpG ODN in infection, revealing its vital role in
innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC1201626
PMID: 16135562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Clin Exp Allergy. 2005 Aug;35(8):1088-95.

Alpha-toxin is produced by skin colonizing Staphylococcus aureus and induces a T 
helper type 1 response in atopic dermatitis.

Breuer K(1), Wittmann M, Kempe K, Kapp A, Mai U, Dittrich-Breiholz O, Kracht M,
Mrabet-Dahbi S, Werfel T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Hannover Medical University,
Hannover, Germany. breuer.kristine@mh-hannover.de

BACKGROUND: Staphylococcus aureus is a well known trigger factor of atopic
dermatitis (AD). Besides the superantigens, further exotoxins are produced by S. 
aureus and may have an influence on the eczema.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the impact of staphylococcal alpha-toxin on human T cells, 
as those represent the majority of skin infiltrating cells in AD.
METHODS: Adult patients with AD were screened for cutaneous colonization with
alpha-toxin producing S. aureus. As alpha-toxin may induce necrosis, CD4(+) T
cells were incubated with sublytic alpha-toxin concentrations. Proliferation and 
up-regulation of IFN-gamma on the mRNA and the protein level were assessed. The
induction of t-bet translocation in CD4(+) T cells was detected with the
Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay.
RESULTS: Thirty-four percent of the patients were colonized with alpha-toxin
producing S. aureus and alpha-toxin was detected in lesional skin of these
patients by immunohistochemistry. Sublytic alpha-toxin concentrations induced a
marked proliferation of isolated CD4(+) T cells. Microarray analysis indicated
that alpha-toxin induced particularly high amounts of IFN-gamma transcripts.
Up-regulation of IFN-gamma was confirmed both on the mRNA and the protein level. 
Stimulation of CD4(+) T cells with alpha-toxin resulted in DNA binding of t-bet, 
known as a key transcription factor involved into primary T helper type 1 (Th1)
commitment.
CONCLUSION: alpha-toxin is produced by S. aureus isolated from patients with AD. 
We show here for the first time that sublytic alpha-toxin concentrations activate
T cells in the absence of antigen-presenting cells. Our results indicate that
alpha-toxin is relevant for the induction of a Th1 like cytokine response. In AD,
this facilitates the development of Th1 cell dominated chronic eczema.

PMID: 16120092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2005 Sep;26(9):1117-22.

Effects of CpG oligodeoxynucleotide on transcription factors GATA-3 and T-bet
mRNA expression in asthmatic mice.

Wu ZQ(1), Xu YP, Xiang H, Shen HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the Second Affiliated Hospital,
4Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310009, China. wuzuqun522@sohu.com

AIM: To investigate effects of CpG oligodeoxynucleotide (CpG ODN) on the mRNA
expression of transcription factors GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3) and T-box
expressed in T cells (T-bet) in asthmatic mice.
METHODS: An asthmatic mouse model was established and treated with CpG ODN. Total
inflammatory cells and eosinophils in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were
counted and inflammatory cell infiltration in lung tissue was evaluated.
Interferon-gamma and interleukin-4 concentrations in BALF and splenocyte culture 
supernatants were detected using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Transcription factor GATA-3 and T-bet mRNA expression in splenocytes and lung
tissue were detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Total inflammatory cells and eosinophils in BALF were reduced in the CpG
ODN-treated group compared with the asthma group, and inflammatory cell
infiltration in lung tissue was also significantly alleviated. CpG ODN treatment 
increased the interferon-gamma concentration but decreased the interleukin-4
concentration in both BALF and splenocyte culture supernatants. GATA-3 mRNA
expression was reduced in both lung tissue and splenocytes in the CpG ODN-treated
group, while the mRNA ratio of T-bet to GATA-3 in splenocytes was increased.
CONCLUSION: CpG ODN treatment inhibits airway inflammatory cell infiltration and 
regulates interferon-gamma/interleukin-4 synthesis in asthmatic mice, possibly
through a mechanism of downregulation of GATA-3 mRNA expression in both lung
tissue and splenocytes.

PMID: 16115380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Am J Kidney Dis. 2005 Aug;46(2):328-38.

Interleukin-12 and -18 levels in peritoneal dialysate effluent correlate with the
outcome of peritonitis in patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis: implications
for the Type I/Type II T-cell immune response.

Wang HH(1), Lin CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan,
ROC.

BACKGROUND: We previously showed that a positive impact of peritoneal defense
response on the outcome of peritoneal dialysis (PD)-related peritonitis is
characterized by an increased pattern of peritoneal CD4/CD8 T-cell ratio with a
predominant CD4(+)-T helper subtype 1 phenotype. To further explore longitudinal 
changes in peritoneal immunity during PD-related peritonitis, we examined the
production of interleukin 12 (IL-12), IL-18, and interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) in 
peritoneal dialysate effluent (PDE) and kinetic expression of the transcription
factors T box expressed in T cells (T-bet) and guanine adenine thymine adenine
(GATA) binding protein 3 (GATA-3) in peritoneal T cells during peritonitis.
Correlations between these observations and responses to antibiotics were
analyzed.
METHODS: IL-12, IL-18, and IFN-gamma protein and IFN-gamma, T-bet, and GATA-3
messenger RNA (mRNA) were measured in PDE during various phases of peritonitis in
40 patients undergoing PD. Patients were divided into 2 groups according to
whether they had a rapid versus delayed response to antibiotic treatment.
RESULTS: In the early phase of peritonitis, IL-12, IL-18, and IFN-gamma levels in
PDE were significantly greater in the rapid-response group (P < 0.05). Changes in
peritoneal IL-12 and IL-18 levels preceded changes in IFN-gamma levels. The
kinetics of IFN-gamma, T-bet, and GATA-3 mRNA expression in peritoneal T cells,
measured by means of real-time polymerase chain reaction, differed between the 2 
groups. In the rapid-response group, IFN-gamma and T-bet mRNA expression
increased, whereas that of GATA-3 decreased over time. Results were opposite in
the delayed-response group, with IFN-gamma and T-bet levels decreasing and GATA-3
levels increasing over time.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that local IL-12 and IL-18 production is part of a
protective early immune response to PD-related peritonitis. High IL-12 and IL-18 
levels in PDE during the early phase of peritonitis correlated with a predominant
type 1 immune response and favorable outcome.

PMID: 16112053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Blood. 2005 Dec 1;106(12):3867-73. Epub 2005 Aug 11.

A crucial role for T-bet in selectin ligand expression in T helper 1 (Th1) cells.

Underhill GH(1), Zisoulis DG, Kolli KP, Ellies LG, Marth JD, Kansas GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, 303 E Chicago Ave, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Proinflammatory T helper 1 (Th1) cells express high levels of carbohydrate
ligands for the endothelial selectins, but the molecular basis for this phenotype
is incompletely understood. We document here a significant role in selectin
ligand formation for the recently described Th1 transcription factor T-bet. Th1
cells generated from T-bet-/- mice showed significantly lower levels of ligands
for both E-selectin and P-selectin, compared with wild-type (WT) Th1 cells.
Enforced expression of T-bet in WT Th0 cells only modestly up-regulated
P-selectin ligands and had no effect on E-selectin ligands. To define a mechanism
for the defects observed in T-bet-/- mice, we examined expression of
glycosyltransferases involved in selectin ligand biosynthesis. T-bet-/- Th1 cells
expressed significantly lower levels of core 2 beta1,6
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I (C2GlcNAcT-I), but no differences in levels of 
alpha 2,3-sialyltransferase IV (ST3Gal-IV). Further, we show that T-bet is
responsible for the signal transducer and activator of transcription 4
(Stat4)-independent increase in Th1 cells of fucosyltransferase VII (FucT-VII).
We also identify ST3Gal-VI, which is thought to play an important role in E- and 
P-selectin ligand formation, as an interleukin 12 (IL-12)-regulated,
T-bet-dependent gene. These data show that T-bet controls selectin ligand
formation in Th1 cells via control of expression of multiple key enzymes in
response to IL-12 signaling and establishes an independent transcriptional
pathway for control of Th1 cell traffic.

PMCID: PMC1895099
PMID: 16099875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Immunol. 2005 Aug 15;175(4):2401-7.

Exacerbation of experimental allergic asthma by augmented Th2 responses in
WSX-1-deficient mice.

Miyazaki Y(1), Inoue H, Matsumura M, Matsumoto K, Nakano T, Tsuda M, Hamano S,
Yoshimura A, Yoshida H.

Author information: 
(1)PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama, Japan.

WSX-1 (IL-27R) is a class I cytokine receptor with homology to gp130 and IL-12
receptors and is typically expressed on CD4+ T lymphocytes. Although previous
reports have clarified that IL-27/WSX-1 signaling plays critical roles in both
Th1 differentiation and attenuation of cell activation and proinflammatory
cytokine production during some bacterial or protozoan infections, little is
known about the importance of WSX-1 in cytokine-mediated diseases of allergic
origin. To this aim, we took advantage of WSX-1-deficient (WSX-1(-/-)) mice and
induced experimental asthma, in which Th2 cytokines are central modulators of the
pathology. OVA-challenged WSX-1(-/-) mice showed marked enhancement of airway
responsiveness with goblet cell hyperplasia, pulmonary eosinophil infiltration,
and increased serum IgE levels compared with wild-type mice. Production of Th2
cytokines, which are largely responsible for the pathogenesis of asthma, was
augmented in the lung or in the culture supernatants of peribronchial lymph node 
CD4+ T cells from WSX-1(-/-) mice compared with those from wild-type mice.
Surprisingly, IFN-gamma production was also enhanced in WSX-1(-/-) mice, albeit
at a low concentration. The cytokine overproduction, thus, seems independent from
the Th1-promoting property of WSX-1. These results demonstrated that IL-27/WSX-1 
also plays an important role in the down-regulation of airway hyper-reactivity
and lung inflammation during the development of allergic asthma through its
suppressive effect on cytokine production.

PMID: 16081811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Immunol. 2005 Aug 15;175(4):2102-10.

Opposing roles for RelB and Bcl-3 in regulation of T-box expressed in T cells,
GATA-3, and Th effector differentiation.

Corn RA(1), Hunter C, Liou HC, Siebenlist U, Boothby MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, TN 37208, USA.

CD4+ T cells with a block in the NF-kappaB signaling pathway exhibit decreases in
Th1 responses and diminished nuclear levels of multiple transactivating
NF-kappaB/Rel/IkappaB proteins. To determine the lineage-intrinsic contributions 
of these transactivators to Th differentiation, T cells from mice deficient in
specific subunits were cultured in exogenous cytokines promoting either Th1 or
Th2 differentiation. RelB-deficient cells exhibited dramatic defects in Th1
differentiation and IFN-gamma production, whereas no consistent defect in either 
Th1 or Th2 responses was observed with c-Rel-deficient cells. In sharp contrast, 
Bcl-3-null T cells displayed no defect in IFN-gamma production, but their Th2
differentiation and IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 production were significantly impaired.
The absence of RelB led to a dramatic decrease in the expression of T-box
expressed in T cells and Stat4. In contrast, Bcl-3-deficient cells exhibited
decreased GATA-3, consistent with evidence that Bcl-3 can transactivate a gata3
promoter. These data indicate that Bcl-3 and RelB exert distinct and opposing
effects on the expression of subset-determining transcription factors, suggesting
that the characteristics of Th cell responses may be regulated by titrating the
stoichiometry of transactivating NF-kappaB/Rel/IkappaB complexes in the nuclei of
developing helper effector cells.

PMID: 16081776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Immunol. 2005 Aug 1;175(3):1686-93.

Augmentation of effector CD8+ T cell generation with enhanced granzyme B
expression by IL-27.

Morishima N(1), Owaki T, Asakawa M, Kamiya S, Mizuguchi J, Yoshimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Intractable Immune System Disease Research Center, Tokyo Medical University,
Tokyo, Japan.

IL-27 is a novel IL-12 family member that plays a role in the early regulation of
Th1 initiation. We have recently demonstrated that IL-27 has a potent antitumor
activity, which is mainly mediated through CD8+ T cells, and also has an adjuvant
activity to induce epitope-specific CTL in vivo. In this study, we further
investigated the in vitro effect of IL-27 on CD8+ T cells of mouse spleen cells. 
In a manner similar to CD4+ T cells, IL-27 activated STAT1, -2, -3, -4, and -5,
and augmented the expression of T-bet, IL-12Rbeta2, and granzyme B, and slightly 
that of perforin in naive CD8+ T cells stimulated with anti-CD3. IL-27 induced
synergistic IFN-gamma production with IL-12 and proliferation of naive CD8+ T
cells. Moreover, IL-27 enhanced proliferation of CD4+ T cell-depleted spleen
cells stimulated by allogeneic spleen cells and augmented the generation of CTL. 
In STAT1-deficient naive CD8+ T cells, IL-27-induced proliferation was not
reduced, but synergistic IFN-gamma production with IL-12 was diminished with
decreased expression of T-bet, IL-12Rbeta2, granzyme B, and perforin. In
T-bet-deficient naive CD8+ T cells, IL-27-induced proliferation was hardly
reduced, but synergistic IFN-gamma production with IL-12 was diminished with
decreased expression of IL-12Rbeta2, granzyme B, and perforin. However, IL-27
still augmented the generation of CTL from T-bet-deficient CD4+ T cell-depleted
spleen cells stimulated by allogeneic spleen cells with increased granzyme B
expression. These results suggest that IL-27 directly acts on naive CD8+ T cells 
in T-bet-dependent and -independent manners and augments generation of CTL with
enhanced granzyme B expression.

PMID: 16034109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Blood. 2005 Nov 15;106(10):3432-9. Epub 2005 Jul 12.

T-bet is required for optimal proinflammatory CD4+ T-cell trafficking.

Lord GM(1), Rao RM, Choe H, Sullivan BM, Lichtman AH, Luscinskas FW, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Inflammatory responses are controlled by T helper 1 (Th1) lymphocytes. An
important function of this polarity is the ability of T cells to traffick
appropriately in vivo. This differential trafficking is dependent upon the
binding of P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 to P- and E-selectin on inflamed
endothelium as well as the expression of specific chemokine receptors. Here we
show that in the absence of T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet), selective
migration of T cells in vivo is completely abrogated and that T-bet regulates the
binding of CD4(+) T cells to P-selectin. T-bet is also required for the
expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR3. Thus, T-bet controls Th1-cell
migration to inflammatory sites, which has fundamental consequences for the
control of immunologic disease.

PMCID: PMC1895048
PMID: 16014561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Int Immunol. 2005 Aug;17(8):993-1007. Epub 2005 Jul 6.

Asthmatic changes in mice lacking T-bet are mediated by IL-13.

Finotto S(1), Hausding M, Doganci A, Maxeiner JH, Lehr HA, Luft C, Galle PR,
Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology of the Lung, University of
Mainz, Mainz, Germany. finotto@mail.uni-mainz.de

Mice with a targeted deletion of the T-bet gene exhibit spontaneous airway
hyperresponsiveness (AHR), airway inflammation, enhanced recovery of T(h)2
cytokines from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, sub-epithelial collagen deposition
and myofibroblast transformation. Here we analyze the mechanisms responsible for 
the chronic airway remodeling observed in these mice. CD4+ T cells isolated from 
the lung of T-bet-deficient mice were spontaneously activated
CD44(high)CD69(high) memory T cells, with a typical T(h)2 cytokine profile.
Neutralization of IL-13 but not IL-4 resulted in amelioration of AHR in airways
of mice lacking T-bet. IL-13 blockade also led to reduced eosinophilia and
decreased vimentin, transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) and alpha smooth
muscle actin (alphaSMA) levels. T-bet(-/-) lung fibroblasts proliferated very
rapidly and released increased amounts of TGF-beta. Interestingly, neutralization
of TGF-beta ameliorated aspects of the chronic airway remodeling phenotype but
did not reduce AHR. These data highlight a T-bet-directed function for IL-13 in
controlling lung remodeling that is both dependent on and independent of its
interaction with TGF-beta in the asthmatic airway.

PMID: 16000330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Haematologica. 2005 Jul;90(7):914-23.

Type 1 and type 2 T-cell profiles in idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.

Wang T(1), Zhao H, Ren H, Guo J, Xu M, Yang R, Han ZC.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology and
Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, 288 Nanjing Road, Tianjin 300020, PR China.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2005 Jul;90(7):868.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Adult idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is a
chronic acquired organ-specific autoimmune hemorrhagic disease characterized by
the production of antibodies against antigens on the membranes of platelet,
resulting in enhanced Fc-mediated destruction of the platelets by macrophages in 
the reticuloendothelial system. Dysfunctional cellular immunity is considered
important in the pathophysiology of ITP. The aim of this study was to explore the
profile of type1 and type2 T cells in chronic ITP patients.
DESIGN AND METHODS: The balance of Th1/Th2 and Tc1/Tc2 was studied by
simultaneous analysis of intracellular cytokines of peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells and splenocytes in short-term cultures activated with PMA/ionomycin as well
as mRNA expression of T-bet and GATA-3 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and 
splenocytes using real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Patients with active disease but not patients in remission had
significant higher Th1/Th2 (p<0.01) and Tc1/Tc2 (p<0.01) ratios in peripheral
blood (PB) and significant higher Th1/Th2 ratio in splenocytes (p<0.01) than
those in the control group. The Tc1/Tc2 ratio in splenocytes in ITP patients was 
higher than that in control, but did not reach significant difference (p=0.082). 
GATA-3 mRNA expression in ITP patients was significantly lower both in PB
(p<0.01) and in splenocytes (p<0.01) than in corresponding samples from controls 
while there was no difference in T-bet expression.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that ITP is a T1 cell (Th1 and 
Tc1) predominant disease although the precise mechanisms await further functional
assay. The T-bet/GATA-3 ratio may provide a surrogate marker of T1/T2 cytokine
balance. Shifting the cytokine patterns from T1 to T2 might be a potential
immunotherapy for ITP.

PMID: 15996929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Haematologica. 2005 Jul;90(7):868.

Type 1 and type 2 T cells profile in idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.

Olsson B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section for Hematology and Coagulation,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital. Bob.Olsson@medic.gu.se

Comment on
    Haematologica. 2005 Jul;90(7):914-23.

PMID: 15996919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Nat Immunol. 2005 Jul;6(7):680-8.

Inhibitors of gamma-secretase block in vivo and in vitro T helper type 1
polarization by preventing Notch upregulation of Tbx21.

Minter LM(1), Turley DM, Das P, Shin HM, Joshi I, Lawlor RG, Cho OH, Palaga T,
Gottipati S, Telfer JC, Kostura L, Fauq AH, Simpson K, Such KA, Miele L, Golde
TE, Miller SD, Osborne BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, 01003, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2005 Jul;6(7):641-2.

Notch receptors are processed by gamma-secretase acting in synergy with T cell
receptor signaling to sustain peripheral T cell activation. Activated CD4+ T
cells differentiate into T helper type 1 (TH1) or TH2 subsets. Molecular cues
directing TH1 differentiation include expression of the TH1-specific
transcription factor T-bet, encoded by Tbx21. However, the regulation of Tbx21
remains incompletely defined. Here we report that Notch1 can directly regulate
Tbx21 through complexes formed on the Tbx21 promoter. In vitro, gamma-secretase
inhibitors extinguished expression of Notch, interferon-gamma and Tbx21 in
TH1-polarized CD4+ cells, whereas ectopic expression of activated Notch1 restored
Tbx21 transcription. In vivo, administration of gamma-secretase inhibitors
substantially impeded TH1-mediated disease progression in the mouse experimental 
autoimmune encephalomyelitis model of multiple sclerosis. Thus, using
gamma-secretase inhibitors to modulate Notch signaling may prove beneficial in
treating TH1-mediated autoimmunity.

PMID: 15991363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2005 Jul;116(1):205-12.

Differential effects of IFN-alpha on the expression of various TH2 cytokines in
human CD4+ T cells.

Shibuya H(1), Hirohata S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In both human subjects and mice, T helper cells are classified into 2
subsets, TH1 and TH2 cells, on the basis of the cytokines they produce. Although 
IFN-alpha has been shown to enhance human TH1 responses, its influences on human 
TH2 responses have not yet been fully characterized. In addition, the mechanism
for induction of TH1 responses by IFN-alpha has not been fully delineated.
OBJECTIVE: The present study was undertaken to explore the direct effects of
IFN-alpha on the expression of various cytokines in human CD4+ T cells with a
system using immobilized anti-CD3, which permits activation of CD4+ T cells in
the complete absence of accessory cells.
METHODS: Highly purified CD4+ T cells obtained from healthy donors were
stimulated with immobilized anti-CD3 with or without IFN-alpha and IL-12 in the
complete absence of accessory cells. The production of cytokines was estimated by
means of ELISA. The expression of mRNA for various cytokines, as well as
transcription factors, was evaluated by using quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: IFN-alpha enhanced IL-4 protein and mRNA expression in immobilized
anti-CD3-stimulated CD4+ T cells, irrespective of the presence of IL-12, whereas 
IFN-alpha suppressed the expression of IL-5 and IL-13. Of note, IFN-alpha
enhanced the expression of mRNA for c-Maf, T-bet, and Fox-P3, irrespective of the
presence of IL-12, but not that for GATA-3, in anti-CD3-stimulated CD4+ T cells.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that IFN-alpha enhances the induction of TH1
responses through upregulation of T-bet mRNA expression, as well as the induction
of TH2 responses through upregulation of c-Maf mRNA expression, followed by IL-4 
expression. Moreover, the data also suggest that IFN-alpha might suppress the
expression of IL-5 and IL-13 in differentiated TH2 cells.

PMID: 15990796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Clin Immunol. 2005 May;25(3):209-14.

mRNA quantification of T-bet, GATA-3, IFN-gamma, and IL-4 shows a defective Th1
immune response in the peripheral blood from rheumatoid arthritis patients: link 
with disease activity.

Kawashima M(1), Miossec P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology and INSERM U-403, Hospital Edouard
Herriot, Lyon, France.

A T helper (Th)1 cytokine profile is predominant in the inflamed synovium of
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Since the situation in the blood is more
controversial, we studied the Th1/Th2 balance in the peripheral blood of RA
patients using mRNA markers. Total RNA was isolated directly from whole blood
from 20 RA patients and 14 healthy controls. T-bet and GATA-3 transcription
factors associated with Th1 and Th2 responses respectively, and IFNgamma and IL-4
mRNA levels were measured by real-time PCR. In RA but not in control samples,
T-bet mRNA levels correlated positively with IFNgamma mRNA levels, and negatively
with CRP levels. Accordingly, RA patients were divided into two groups according 
to CRP levels. In comparison to RA patients with a low CRP (CRP < 40 mg/l),
patients with a high CRP (CRP>or=40 mg/l) had lower IFNgamma/beta-actin,
T-bet/beta-actin mRNA levels and T-bet/GATA-3 expression ratios. In conclusion,
RA blood cells showed a decreased Th1 situation as indicated by low IFNgamma and 
T-bet mRNA expression. This pattern was found only in patients with the most
active disease.

PMID: 15981085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Immunol. 2005 Jul 1;175(1):566-74.

5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside: a novel immunomodulator with
therapeutic efficacy in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Nath N(1), Giri S, Prasad R, Salem ML, Singh AK, Singh I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC
29425, USA.

Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of multiple
sclerosis, is a Th1-mediated inflammatory demyelinating disease of the CNS.
AMP-activated protein kinase was reported recently to have anti-inflammatory
activities by negatively regulating NF-kappaB signaling. In this study, we
investigated the prophylactic and therapeutic efficacy of an AMP-activated
protein kinase activator, 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside (AICAR), 
in active and passive EAE induced by active immunization with PLP(139-151) or
MOG(35-55) and in adoptive transfer of PLP(139-151)-sensitized T cells,
respectively. In vivo treatment with AICAR exerted both prophylactic and
therapeutic effects on EAE, attenuating the severity of clinical disease. The
anti-inflammatory effects of AICAR were associated with the inhibition of the
Ag-specific recall responses and inhibition of the Th1-type cytokines IFN-gamma
and TNF-alpha, whereas it induced the production of Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-10.
Treatment of PLP(139-151)-specific T cells in vitro with AICAR decreased their
expression of T-bet in response to IL-12, a Th1 transcription factor, whereas in 
response to IL-4, it induced the expression and phosphorylation of Th2
transcription factors GATA3 and STAT6, respectively. Moreover, treatment of APCs 
in vitro with AICAR inhibited their capability to present the proteolipid protein
peptide to PLP(139-151)-specific T cells. In an irrelevant Th1-mediated, OT-2 TCR
transgenic mouse model, AICAR impaired in vivo Ag-specific expansion of CD4(+) T 
cells. Together, these findings show for the first time that AICAR is a novel
immunomodulator with promising beneficial effects for the treatment of multiple
sclerosis and other Th1-mediated inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 15972693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Int Immunopharmacol. 2005 Aug;5(9):1406-14. Epub 2005 Apr 20.

Bee venom modulates murine Th1/Th2 lineage development.

Nam S(1), Ko E, Park SK, Ko S, Jun CY, Shin MK, Hong MC, Bae H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee University, #1 Hoeki-dong
Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul, 130-701, Korea.

Administration of bee venom (BV) elicits anti-inflammatory, anti-nociceptive and 
anti-allergic effects in various animal models. This study was designed to
evaluate the direct effects of BV on helper T cell activities and on Th1/Th2
lineage development using both in vitro and in vivo conditions. In the Th1 skewed
condition, BV increased the expression of IFN-gamma mRNA and enhanced the
expression of T-bet on purified CD4(+) T cells from splenocytes of BALB/c mice.
On the other hand, BV treatment did not alter the expression of IL-4 or GATA-3 in
a Th2 driven environment. To elucidate the effects of BV on Th1/Th2 lineage
development under in vivo conditions, BV was given by intraperitonial injection
to BALB/c mice. It significantly increased the CD4(+) T cell population and
enhanced IFN-gamma expression, while IL-4 transcripts were not altered upon in
vivo activation using an anti-CD3 antibody injection. Taken together, these
results imply that BV induces Th1 lineage development from CD4(+) T cells by
increasing the expression of a Th1-specific cytokine, IFN-gamma. In addition,
this result may be mediated by inducing a Th1-specific transcription factor,
T-bet.

PMID: 15953567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Science. 2005 Jun 10;308(5728):1563-5.

Immunology. Opposites attract in differentiating T cells.

Bix M(1), Kim S, Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology,University of Washington School of Medicine, 1959
N.E. Pacific Street, HSC I6071, Seattle,WA 98195, USA. arao.cbr.med.harvard.edu

PMID: 15947163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Leuk Res. 2005 Jul;29(7):841-8. Epub 2005 Feb 24.

Transcription factor expression in B-cell precursor-leukemia cell lines:
preferential expression of T-bet.

Harashima A(1), Matsuo Y, Drexler HG, Okochi A, Motoda R, Tanimoto M, Orita K.

Author information: 
(1)Fujisaki Cell Center, Hayashibara Biochemical Labs Inc., 675-1 Fujisaki,
Okayama 702-8006, Japan. aharashi@hayashibara.co.jp

A number of transcription factors (TFs) have been reported that play crucial
roles in hematopoiesis. However, only little is known about how these factors are
involved in the mechanisms of hematopoietic development and lineage commitment.
To investigate the roles of TFs in human B-cell precursors (BCPs), the present
study analyzed the expression of the following 16 hematopoietic TFs: AML1,
C/EBPalpha, C/EBPbeta, C/EBPgamma, C/EBPepsilon, E2A, Ets-1, GATA-1, GATA-2,
GATA-3, Ikaros, IRF-1, Pax5, PU.1, T-bet and TCF-1 in 30 human BCP-leukemia cell 
lines. All BCP-leukemia cell lines were found to be positive for the expression
of AML1, C/EBPgamma, E2A, Ets-1, IRF-1, Pax5 and PU.1 at the mRNA level. The mRNA
expression of C/EBPalpha, C/EBPbeta, C/EBPepsilon, GATA-2, Ikaros, T-bet and
TCF-1 was detected in 2 to 29 of the cell lines. Eight BCP-cell lines showed
positivity for the dominant negative Ikaros isoform Ik6, while others were
positive for expression of Ik1, 2, 3 and 4. GATA-1 and GATA-3 were universally
negative. The expression of C/EBPalpha, PU.1 and T-bet was positive at the
protein level in five, 29 and four out of 30 BCP-cell lines, respectively. Cell
lines were stimulated with interleukin (IL)-7 and/or interferon (IFN)-gamma to
investigate the regulation of TF expression. T-bet was clearly induced in the two
cell lines NALM-19 and NALM-29 after stimulation. C/EBPbeta and IRF-1 were
up-regulated in both cell lines and TCF-1 was down-regulated in NALM-19. No
significant changes were observed for the other 12 TFs. The present report could 
provide useful information in the study of the role of TFs on normal and
malignant human BCPs.

PMID: 15927679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Infect Immun. 2005 Jun;73(6):3394-401.

Transcriptional control of impaired Th1 responses in patent lymphatic filariasis 
by T-box expressed in T cells and suppressor of cytokine signaling genes.

Babu S(1), Kumaraswami V, Nutman TB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases/NIH, 4 Center Drive, Room 4/B1-05, Bethesda, MD 20892-0425, USA.
sbabu@niaid.nih.gov

T-bet (T-box expressed in T cells) and GATA-3 are transcription factors that play
a critical role in the development of Th1 and Th2 cells, as do genes of the SOCS 
(suppressor of cytokine signaling) family, albeit indirectly. Another
transcription factor, Foxp3, is a master regulator of natural regulatory T cells 
(Tregs). To identify the role of these factors in impaired Th1 responses of
patent filarial infection, analysis of cytokine, SOCS, and transcription factor
mRNA expression was performed on purified T cells of filaria-infected individuals
(n = 6) and uninfected controls (n = 6). As expected (and in contrast to cells of
uninfected individuals), there was a significant depression of gamma interferon
(IFN-gamma) and a concomitant increase in interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5, and IL-10
mRNA expression following stimulation with parasite antigen (BmA) but not with a 
polyclonal T-cell (anti-CD3) stimulus. T-bet (but not GATA-3) was expressed at
significantly lower levels in cells of filaria-infected individuals in response
to BmA compared with those from the uninfected group, accounting, at least
partially, for the diminished IFN-gamma expression. Second, we found no
significant differences in expression of Foxp3 between the two groups, although
induction of Foxp3 expression correlated with induced expression levels of IL-10,
implicating Tregs in the IL-10 expression seen. Finally, parasite-specific T-cell
expression of SOCS-1, SOCS-5, and SOCS-7 was significantly diminished among
infected patients; in contrast, expression of SOCS-3 increased. Our data
therefore indicate that the impaired Th1 responses observed in patent lymphatic
filariasis are associated with decreased expression of T-bet, SOCS-1, SOCS-5, and
SOCS-7 and increased expression of SOCS-3 in T cells.

PMCID: PMC1111868
PMID: 15908366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Immunol. 2005 Jun 1;174(11):6781-90.

Regulation of IFN-gamma production by B effector 1 cells: essential roles for
T-bet and the IFN-gamma receptor.

Harris DP(1), Goodrich S, Gerth AJ, Peng SL, Lund FE.

Author information: 
(1)Trudeau Institute, Saranac Lake, NY 12983, USA.

This manuscript systematically identifies the molecular mechanisms that regulate 
the ability of B cells to produce the critical type 1 cytokine, IFN-gamma. B
cells produce IFN-gamma in response to IL-12 and IL-18 and when primed by Th1
cells. We show that development of IFN-gamma-producing B cells by either Th1
cells or IL-12/IL-18 is absolutely dependent on expression of the IFN-gammaR and 
the T-box transcription factor, T-bet. Interestingly, although T-bet
up-regulation in developing B effector 1 (Be1) cells is controlled by
IFN-gammaR-mediated signals, STAT1-deficient B cells up-regulate T-bet and
produce IFN-gamma, indicating that additional transcriptional activators must be 
coupled to the IFN-gammaR in B cells. Finally, we show that although IL-12/IL-18 
or IFN-gamma-producing Th1 cells are required to initiate transcription of the
IFN-gamma gene in B cells, sustained expression of IFN-gamma and T-bet by B cells
is dependent on an IFN-gamma/IFN-gammaR/T-bet autocrine feedback loop. These
findings have significant implications, because they suggest that
IFN-gamma-producing B cells not only amplify Th1 responses, but also imprint a
type 1 phenotype on B cells themselves. In the case of immune responses to
bacterial or viral pathogens, this B cell-driven autocrine feedback loop is
likely to be beneficial; however, in the case of B cell responses to
autoantigens, it may result in amplification of the autoimmune loop and increased
pathology.

PMID: 15905519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Immunol. 2005 May 15;174(10):6266-73.

Protective immunity to genital herpes simplex [correction of simpex] virus type 2
infection is mediated by T-bet.

Svensson A(1), Nordström I, Sun JB, Eriksson K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Inflammation Research, Göteborg University,
Göteborg, Sweden.

We show, for the first time, that the transcription factor T-bet, which is
implicated in IFN-gamma production, is required for the induction of
vaccine-induced antiviral immune protection. T-bet was found to be important in
both the innate and acquired immune protection against genital HSV-2 infection.
T-bet(-/-) and T-bet(+/+) mice were infected vaginally with HSV-2 and examined
daily for disease and mortality. T-bet(-/-) mice had significantly higher virus
titers than T-bet(+/+) mice following a primary HSV-2 infection, and succumbed
significantly earlier to the infection. This result was associated with an
impaired NK cell cytotoxic capacity and NK cell-mediated IFN-gamma production in 
the T-bet(-/-) mice. To assess the induction of acquired antiviral immune
protection, mice were vaccinated with an attenuated virus before infection.
Vaccinated T-bet(-/-) mice could not control viral replication following an HSV-2
challenge and had significantly higher virus titers and mortality rates than
vaccinated T-bet(+/+) mice that remained healthy. The impaired acquired immune
protection in T-bet(-/-) mice was associated with a significantly decreased
HSV-2-specific delayed-type hypersensitivity response and a significantly reduced
HSV-2-specific IFN-gamma production from CD4(+) T cells. However, T-bet
deficiency did not impair either the IFN-gamma production or the cytotoxic
capacity of HSV-2-specific CD8(+) T cells. We conclude that T-bet plays a crucial
role in both the innate defense and the generation of vaccine-induced immunity
against genital HSV-2 infection in mice.

PMID: 15879125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Immunol. 2005 May 15;174(10):5950-8.

TGF-beta 1 uses distinct mechanisms to inhibit IFN-gamma expression in CD4+ T
cells at priming and at recall: differential involvement of Stat4 and T-bet.

Lin JT(1), Martin SL, Xia L, Gorham JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and The Norris Cotton Cancer Center,
Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

TGF-beta1 plays a critical role in restraining pathogenic Th1 autoimmune
responses in vivo, but the mechanisms that mediate TGF-beta1's suppressive
effects on CD4(+) T cell expression of IFN-gamma expression remain incompletely
understood. To evaluate mechanisms by which TGF-beta1 inhibits IFN-gamma
expression in CD4(+) T cells, we primed naive wild-type murine BALB/c CD4(+) T
cells in vitro under Th1 development conditions in the presence or the absence of
added TGF-beta1. We found that the presence of TGF-beta1 during priming of CD4(+)
T cells suppressed both IFN-gamma expression during priming as well as the
development of Th1 effector cells expressing IFN-gamma at a recall stimulation.
TGF-beta1 inhibited the development of IFN-gamma-expressing cells in a
dose-dependent fashion and in the absence of APC, indicating that TGF-beta1 can
inhibit Th1 development by acting directly on the CD4(+) T cell. During priming, 
TGF-beta1 strongly inhibited the expression of both T-bet (T box expressed in T
cells) and Stat4. We evaluated the importance of these two molecules in the
suppression of IFN-gamma expression at the two phases of Th1 responses. Enforced 
expression of T-bet by retrovirus prevented TGF-beta1's inhibition of Th1
development, but did not prevent TGF-beta1's inhibition of IFN-gamma expression
at priming. Conversely, enforced expression of Stat4 partly prevented TGF-beta1's
inhibition of IFN-gamma expression during priming, but did not prevent
TGF-beta1's inhibition of Th1 development. These data show that TGF-beta1 uses
distinct mechanisms to inhibit IFN-gamma expression in CD4(+) T cells at priming 
and at recall.

PMID: 15879087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Allergy. 2005 Jun;60(6):780-7.

Polarization of Th1/Th2 in human CD4 T cells separated by CD62L: analysis by
transcription factors.

Matsuzaki S(1), Shinozaki K, Kobayashi N, Agematsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Shinshu University,
Matsumoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: T-cell surface antigens that differentiate clearly between Th1 and
Th2 have not been identified. Discrimination of Th1/Th2 subpopulations by CD62L
expression has been reported. We investigated the expression of transcription
factors that regulate Th1/Th2 cytokine synthesis in human CD4+ T-cell
subpopulations separated by CD45RO and CD62L, and compared the ratio of CD62L+ to
CD62L- cells between healthy individuals and patients with allergic diseases.
METHODS: Human peripheral blood samples were obtained from healthy volunteers and
patients. CD4+ T cells were isolated by negative selection. Three CD4+ T-cell
subpopulations separated by CD45RO and CD62L were isolated using three-color
fluorescence. Sorted cells were stimulated with anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody, and
the cytokine levels were measured using a Cytometric Bead Array Kit.
Transcription factor expression was examined by reverse transcriptase polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-5 production levels by CD45RO+CD62L+CD4+ T
cells were higher than those of CD45RO+CD62L-CD4+ T cells (P < 0.05), whereas
interferon-gamma and tumor necrosis factor-alpha production were lower levels (P 
< 0.05). T-cell immunoglobulin mucin-3 and T-bet expression were detected in
CD45RO-CD62L+ and CD45RO+CD62L- cells following stimulation, but not in
CD45RO+CD62L+ cells. However, the ratio of CD62L+ to CD62L- cells was the same in
both healthy individuals and patients (P = 0.54). There was no difference in
Th1/Th2 cytokine synthesis by CD4+ T cells.
CONCLUSION: Analyses of cytokine syntheses and transcription factor expression
demonstrated that CD62-negative and -positive subpopulations of human CD45RO+CD4+
T cells represent characteristics of Th1 and Th2, respectively.

PMID: 15876308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Apr;63 Suppl 4:477-82.

[Molecular mechanism of host response to bacterial infection].

[Article in Japanese]

Kawamura I(1), Mitsuyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine.

PMID: 15861698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Apr;63 Suppl 4:355-63.

[Th1/Th2 differentiation].

[Article in Japanese]

Kubo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Signal Network, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and
Immunology, RIKEN Yokohama Institute.

PMID: 15861681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Aug;19(8):2047-59. Epub 2005 Apr 28.

Female steroid hormones use signal transducers and activators of transcription
protein-mediated pathways to modulate the expression of T-bet in epithelial
cells: a mechanism for local immune regulation in the human reproductive tract.

Kawana K(1), Kawana Y, Schust DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Fearing Research Laboratory, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and
Reproductive Biology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The transcription factor T-bet promotes the differentiation of inflammatory Th1 T
helper cells. T-bet expression in lymphoid cells is regulated by cytoplasmic
signaling through Janus kinase phosphorylation, nuclear signaling using signal
transducers and activators of transcription (Stat) family proteins, and
autocrine/paracrine feedback involving interferon (IFN)-gamma. T-bet is here
shown to be present in epithelial cells of the human female reproductive tract.
Regulation of T-bet expression was modulated by cytokines and the female
reproductive steroids, estrogen, and progesterone. The mechanisms of T-bet
regulation in epithelia differ from those in conventional immune cells. During a 
15-d exposure to progesterone, T-bet levels in endometrial epithelial cells
(EECs) undulated. Prior exposure to estrogen enhanced these effects. More
prolonged exposure of EECs to these hormones, singly or in combination,
suppressed T-bet production. Stat1 and Stat5 bound to the EEC T-bet regulatory
region (TRR) at the IFN-gamma-activated sequence site, but Stat3 and Stat4 did
not. Binding of Stat1 and Stat5 to the TRR were modified by progesterone in
distinct ways. Estrogen suppressed the binding of Stat1 and Stat5 to the TRR.
Mutation of gamma-activated sequence element reduced T-bet promoter activity,
binding of Stat proteins to the TRR and regulation of the promoter by cytokines
and hormones. In EECs, cytokine exposure caused phosphorylation of Janus kinase 2
and TRR-bound Stat proteins; female steroid hormones altered only phosphorylation
of TRR-bound Stat5. Although there is no autocrine IFN-gamma feedback loop in
reproductive tract epithelial cells, an IL-15/T-bet positive feedback loop may
exist. The implications of hormonally regulated T-bet expression are discussed.

PMID: 15860546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Hum Genet. 2005 Jun;117(1):16-26. Epub 2005 Apr 2.

Functional promoter polymorphism in the TBX21 gene associated with
aspirin-induced asthma.

Akahoshi M(1), Obara K, Hirota T, Matsuda A, Hasegawa K, Takahashi N, Shimizu M, 
Nakashima K, Cheng L, Doi S, Fujiwara H, Miyatake A, Fujita K, Higashi N,
Taniguchi M, Enomoto T, Mao XQ, Nakashima H, Adra CN, Nakamura Y, Tamari M,
Shirakawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genetics of Allergic Diseases, SNP Research Center, RIKEN
Yokohama Institute, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN),
Tsurumi-ku, Kanagawa, Japan.

Asthma is a phenotypically heterogeneous disorder with many etiologic factors and
clinical characteristics. T-bet, a Th1-specific transcription factor of T-box
family, has been found to control interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) expression in T
cells. Mice lacking the T-bet gene (tbx21) demonstrate multiple physiological and
inflammatory features reminiscent of human asthma. In order to examine whether
polymorphisms in the candidate gene, TBX21, located on chromosome 17q21.32, are
related to the risk of human asthma phenotypes, we have searched for genetic
variations in the human TBX21 gene and identified 24 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), including five novel SNPs, by direct sequencing in Japanese
subjects. Among asthma phenotypes, a promoter -1993T-->C SNP, which is in linkage
disequilibrium with a synonymous coding 390A-->G SNP in exon 1, is significantly 
associated with a risk of aspirin-induced asthma (AIA; P = 0.004, P(c) = 0.016). 
This association has also been confirmed in additional independent samples of
asthma with nasal polyposis (P = 0.008), regardless of aspirin hypersensitivity. 
Furthermore, our data indicate that the -1993T-->C substitution increases the
affinity of a particular nuclear protein to the binding site of TBX21 covering
the -1993 position, resulting in increased transcriptional activity of the TBX21 
gene. Thus, in addition to the antigen-driven excess Th2 response, increased
T-bet (and subsequent IFN-gamma) production in human airways of individuals with 
the -1993T-->C polymorphism could contribute to the development of certain
asthma-related phenotypes, such as AIA.

PMID: 15806396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Immunology. 2005 Apr;114(4):484-92.

Transforming growth factor-beta1 enhances the interferon-gamma-dependent,
interleukin-12-independent pathway of T helper 1 cell differentiation.

Smeltz RB(1), Chen J, Shevach EM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Immunology. 2005 Apr;114(4):459-60.

Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta, a pleiotropic cytokine that has multiple
effects on immune responses, has been shown to inhibit interleukin (IL)-4/GATA-3 
expression as well as T helper 2 (Th2) differentiation. Consistent with these
reports, we found that priming T cells from DO11.10 transgenic mice with antigen 
in the presence of TGF-beta inhibited GATA-3 expression and the development of
IL-4-producing T cells. Unexpectedly, the inhibition of Th2 development was
accompanied by a substantial increase in the number of interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma)-producing cells. T cells primed with TGF-beta secreted IFN-gamma in
response to both T-cell receptor ligation and IL-12/IL-18 stimulation, and
expressed high levels of T-bet and low levels of GATA-3. The TGF-beta-mediated
enhancement of T helper 1 (Th1) priming was independent of IL-12 and signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-4, but required endogenous
IFN-gamma. TGF-beta-mediated enhancement of the IFN-gamma-dependent,
IL-12-independent pathway of Th1 priming was mediated primarily by the inhibition
of IL-4 produced by memory/activated T cells in the unfractionated CD4+ responder
population. Nevertheless, TGF-beta did not inhibit this pathway of Th1
differentiation when purified naive CD4+ T cells were used as responders. These
data have important implications for strategies being considered for the use of
TGF-beta-producing T cells for the treatment of autoimmune disorders.

PMCID: PMC1782105
PMID: 15804285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2005 Apr 1;44(1):43-50.

Altered T helper 1 reaction but not increase of virus load in patients with
dengue hemorrhagic fever.

Chen RF(1), Liu JW, Yeh WT, Wang L, Chang JC, Yu HR, Cheng JT, Yang KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

To investigate whether dengue-2 patients with and without dengue hemorrhagic
fever had different virus load, immune mediators, or T helper (Th) reaction, we
simultaneously measured virus load, immune mediators and the Th1/Th2
transcription factors T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA expression in a large outbreak of
dengue-2 infections in Southern Taiwan. Results showed that virus load was not
significantly different between patients with and without dengue hemorrhagic
fever. Patients with dengue fever had higher IFN-gamma levels, but patients with 
dengue hemorrhagic fever had significantly higher IL-10 levels. Further studies
showed that patients with dengue hemorrhagic fever had a significantly lower
T-bet than those with dengue fever, but GATA-3 mRNA expression in peripheral
blood leukocytes was not significant difference between both groups. In
conclusion, altered Th1 reaction as reflected by lower T-bet mRNA expression
associated with higher IL-10 levels might be involved in the pathogenesis of
dengue hemorrhagic fever.

PMID: 15780577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Planta Med. 2005 Mar;71(3):202-7.

Protopanaxatriol-type ginsenosides differentially modulate type 1 and type 2
cytokines production from murine splenocytes.

Yu JL(1), Dou DQ, Chen XH, Yang HZ, Guo N, Cheng GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, 1 Xian Nong Tan Street, Xuan Wu
District, 100050 Beijing, P. R. China.

Seven protopanaxatriol-type ginsenosides and their aglycones including PPT, PT,
-Re, -Rg (1), -F (1), -Rh (1), 20(R)-Rh (1) which are closely related in
structure were studied for their effects on type 1 and type 2 cytokines
production from murine splenocytes and their related mechanisms were examined.
The results indicate that PPT, PT and ginsenoside-Re show hardly any or weak
effects on concanavalin A (Con A)-induced production of IFN-gamma and IL-4.
Ginsenoside-Rh (1) and 20(R)-Rh (1) induce a Con A-induced type 1 cytokine
pattern by increasing the production of interleukin-12 (IL-12), the expression of
IFN-gamma, T-bet and enhancing NF-kappaB DNA binding activity. In contrast
ginsenosides-Rg (1) and -F (1) cause a Con A-induced type 2 cytokines response by
increasing the expression of IL-4, GATA-3 and enhancing NF-kappaB DNA binding
activity. Thus, these protopanaxatriol-type ginsenosides have different
immunomodulatory effects, which might explain the complex immunomodulatory effect
of Panax ginseng.

PMID: 15770538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Immunol. 2005 Mar 15;174(6):3227-36.

Heat shock protein 60 inhibits Th1-mediated hepatitis model via innate regulation
of Th1/Th2 transcription factors and cytokines.

Zanin-Zhorov A(1), Bruck R, Tal G, Oren S, Aeed H, Hershkoviz R, Cohen IR, Lider 
O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

Extracellular heat shock protein 60 (HSP60) has been considered a proinflammatory
danger signal. Yet, HSP60 can also down-regulate experimental immune arthritis
and diabetes models by specific inhibition of Th1-like responses. We now report
that HSP60 in vitro differentially modulates the expression of Th1/Th2
transcription factors in human T cells: HSP60 down-regulates T-bet, NF-kappaB,
and NFATp and up-regulates GATA-3, leading to decreased secretion of TNF-alpha
and IFN-gamma and enhanced secretion of IL-10. These effects depended on TLR2
signaling and could not be attributed to LPS or to other contaminants. In BALB/c 
mice, HSP60 in vivo inhibited the clinical, histological, and serological
manifestations of Con A-induced hepatitis associated with up-regulated T cell
expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 and GATA-3 and down-regulated
T-bet expression. These results provide a molecular explanation for the effects
of HSP60 treatment on T cell inflammation via innate regulation of the
inflammatory response.

PMID: 15749853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Apr 8;329(2):706-12.

HIV-1 Tat modulates T-bet expression and induces Th1 type of immune response.

Kulkarni A(1), Ravi DS, Singh K, Rampalli S, Parekh V, Mitra D, Chattopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Cell Science, Pune University Campus, Ganeshkhind, Pune
411 007, India.

The HIV-1 transactivator Tat performs various viral and cellular functions.
Primarily, it induces processive transcription from the HIV-1 LTR promoter.
However, Tat secreted from infected cells is known to activate uninfected
lymphocytes through receptors. To further delineate the specific target genes,
extracellular Tat was expressed on the cell membrane of stimulator cells and
co-cultured with human PBMCs. Along with induced CD4(+) T cell proliferation and 
IFN-gamma secretion, there was strong upregulation of T-bet expression which is
majorly implicated in generating T(H)1 type of immune response. To further
delineate the effect of extracellular Tat on HIV replication, both p24 analysis
and in vivo GFP expression were performed. There was a significant inhibition of 
HIV-1 replication in human CEM-GFP cell line and hPBMCs. Thus, for the first time
we report that apart from its transactivation activity, extracellular Tat acts as
a costimulatory molecule that affects viral replication by modulating host immune
response through induction of T-bet expression and IFN-gamma secretion.

PMID: 15737643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Exp Med. 2005 Feb 21;201(4):615-26.

Ets-1, a functional cofactor of T-bet, is essential for Th1 inflammatory
responses.

Grenningloh R(1), Kang BY, Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

To mount an effective type 1 immune response, type 1 T helper (Th1) cells must
produce inflammatory cytokines and simultaneously suppress the expression of
antiinflammatory cytokines. How these two processes are coordinately regulated at
the molecular level is still unclear. In this paper, we show that the
proto-oncogene E26 transformation-specific-1 (Ets-1) is necessary for T-bet to
promote interferon-gamma production and that Ets-1 is essential for mounting
effective Th1 inflammatory responses in vivo. In addition, Ets-1-deficient Th1
cells also produce a very high level of interleukin 10. Thus, Ets-1 plays a
crucial and unique role in the reciprocal regulation of inflammatory and
antiinflammatory Th responses.

PMCID: PMC2213045
PMID: 15728239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Mar;35(3):757-65.

Direct effects of T-bet and MHC class I expression, but not STAT1, on peripheral 
NK cell maturation.

Robbins SH(1), Tessmer MS, Van Kaer L, Brossay L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology and Graduate Program in
Pathobiology, Division of Biology and Medicine, Brown University, Providence,
USA.

The homeostatic maturation of NK cells is severely impaired in mice lacking the
transcription factor T-bet, and the expression of the NK cell maturation marker
killer cell lectin-like receptor G1 (KLRG1) has been shown to be dependent on MHC
class I molecules. Interferon (IFN)-gamma signaling via the signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT)1 is vital for T-bet and MHC class I induction. 
Here we investigated the relationship between STAT1, T-bet, and MHC class I
molecules with regard to the phenotypic maturation of peripheral NK cells. We
demonstrate that, to varying degrees, the maturation status of peripheral NK
cells is impaired in naive mice with deficiencies in STAT1, T-bet, or MHC class I
molecules. We find that in naive animals, the expression of wild-type levels of
MHC class I molecules in trans is sufficient to restore the maturation profiles
of STAT1(-/-) NK cells in vivo. In contrast, expression of T-bet is required in
cis for normal NK cell maturation to occur. Additionally, we demonstrate that the
activation-induced maturation of NK cells during the course of murine
cytomegalovirus (MCMV) infection does not require expression of MHC class I
molecules or STAT1 but is severely delayed in the absence of T-bet.

PMID: 15719366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Hum Pathol. 2005 Jan;36(1):10-5.

T-bet, a T cell-associated transcription factor, is expressed in Hodgkin's
lymphoma.

Dorfman DM(1), Hwang ES, Shahsafaei A, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
ddorfman@partners.org

Comment in
    Hum Pathol. 2005 Jan;36(1):1-4.

T-bet, a T-box transcription factor, is expressed in CD4+ T lymphocytes committed
to Th1 T-cell development and may participate in immunoglobulin class switching
in B lymphocytes. T-bet is also expressed in a subset of T-cell lymphomas,
particularly those that express other markers of Th1 T cell differentiation, and 
in a subset of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Because of the evidence that
Hodgkin's lymphoma is a neoplasm of B cells, we examined cases of Hodgkin's
lymphoma for T-bet expression by immunohistochemical staining and found that
neoplastic cells in most cases of classic Hodgkin's lymphoma (33 of 37 cases,
89%), including nodular sclerosis type (17 of 21 cases, 81%) and mixed
cellularity type (15 of 15, 100%), express T-bet. Neoplastic cells in most cases 
of nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's lymphoma (15 of 18, 83%), a distinct 
clinical entity that differs from classic Hodgkin's lymphoma, also express T-bet.
A Hodgkin's lymphoma-derived cell line, L1236, expresses T-bet by Western blot
analysis as well as by immunohistochemical staining. In contrast, almost all
cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and most cases of anaplastic large cell
lymphoma, neoplasms that may be confused with Hodgkin's lymphoma, are negative
for T-bet. On that basis, T-bet should serve as a useful new marker for the
diagnosis of Hodgkin's lymphoma. In addition, because T-bet expression is not
detectable in the majority of reactive B cells, including germinal-center B
cells, but is characteristically expressed by the neoplastic cells in Hodgkin's
lymphoma, thought to be derived from germinal-center B cells, T-bet may play a
role in Hodgkin's lymphoma oncogenesis.

PMID: 15712176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 8;102(6):2034-9. Epub 2005 Jan 31.

T-bet antagonizes mSin3a recruitment and transactivates a fully methylated
IFN-gamma promoter via a conserved T-box half-site.

Tong Y(1), Aune T, Boothby M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical
School, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Promoter DNA methylation is a major epigenetic mechanism for silencing genes and 
establishing commitment in cells differentiating from their precursors. The
transcription factor T-bet is a key determinant of IFN-gamma gene expression in
helper T cells, but the mechanisms by which it achieves this effect are not
clear. It is shown here that T-bet binds to a highly conserved T-box half-site in
the IFN-gamma promoter, is recruited to the endogenous IFN-gamma promoter in T
lymphoid cells, and transactivates gene expression through this sequence in a
manner dependent on consensus T-box residues. This conserved promoter site is
methylated in a model T cell line, and enforced T-bet expression did not alter
its complete methylation. T-bet transactivated the conserved core promoter in
transfection assays and collaborated functionally with C/EBPbeta despite
methylation of the conserved element. Importantly, enforced T-bet expression led 
to dissociation of the mSin3a corepressor from the endogenous, chromatinized
IFN-gamma promoter without decreasing loading of the methyl-CpG binding protein
MeCP2. These data indicate that T-bet can override repressive epigenetic
modification by a mechanism in which this master regulator acts through a T-box
half-site to enforce the activation of IFN-gamma gene expression in part by
decreased loading of a corepressor on methylated DNA.

PMCID: PMC548570
PMID: 15684083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 8;102(6):2016-21. Epub 2005 Jan 31.

NFATc2 and T-bet contribute to T-helper-cell-subset-specific regulation of IL-21 
expression.

Mehta DS(1), Wurster AL, Weinmann AS, Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

T helper (Th) 2 cells selectively express IL-21 in addition to the classic Th2
cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13. In contrast to these clustered Th2 cell cytokine
genes, the IL-21 gene resides on a different chromosome and is not coordinately
regulated by the same locus control region that directs the expression of other
Th2 cytokines. We demonstrate that the proximal promoter of IL-21 controls its
Th-cell-subset-specific expression through the action of NFATc2 and T-bet.
Whereas NFATc2 directly binds to and activates transcription of the IL-21
promoter in Th2 cells, T-bet represses IL-21 transcription by inhibiting the
binding of NFATc2 to the promoter in Th1 cells. These data suggest that there are
multiple mechanisms by which Th-cell-subset-specific cytokine genes are
regulated.

PMCID: PMC548571
PMID: 15684054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 1;102(5):1596-601. Epub 2005 Jan 21.

T-bet deficiency reduces atherosclerosis and alters plaque antigen-specific
immune responses.

Buono C(1), Binder CJ, Stavrakis G, Witztum JL, Glimcher LH, Lichtman AH.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Research Division, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The influence of the immune system on atherosclerosis involves both helper T (Th)
cell and antibody responses to plaque antigens. These responses may have
proatherogenic and protective effects. T-bet is a transcription factor required
for Th1 differentiation and regulates the balance between Th1 and Th2 responses
in inflammatory diseases. To clarify how helper T cell subset differentiation
influences atherosclerosis, we compared lesion development and immune responses
to plaque antigens in low-density lipoprotein receptor-deficient (Ldlr-/-) mice
with or without functional T-bet genes. Atherosclerosis was significantly reduced
in T-bet-deficient Ldlr-/- mice compared with Ldlr-/- controls, and the lesions
that did develop in the absence of T-bet had less smooth muscle cell content.
Furthermore, T-bet deficiency caused a Th2 switch in the response to the
atherosclerosis-associated antigen heat shock protein-60, and a change in
T-dependent isotypes of oxidized LDL-specific antibodies. Of particular
significance, T-bet deficiency caused a >250% increase in the titer of E06
antibodies, which are known to be atheroprotective and whose production by B-1 B 
cells is enhanced by IL-5. These findings establish that T cell subset
differentiation influences both T cell and antibody responses that modulate
atherosclerosis, and validate the therapeutic goal of skewing T responses to
atherosclerosis-associated antigens.

PMCID: PMC547865
PMID: 15665085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Science. 2005 Jan 21;307(5708):430-3.

T helper cell fate specified by kinase-mediated interaction of T-bet with GATA-3.

Hwang ES(1), Szabo SJ, Schwartzberg PL, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Cell lineage specification depends on both gene activation and gene silencing,
and in the differentiation of T helper progenitors to Th1 or Th2 effector cells, 
this requires the action of two opposing transcription factors, T-bet and GATA-3.
T-bet is essential for the development of Th1 cells, and GATA-3 performs an
equivalent role in Th2 development. We report that T-bet represses Th2 lineage
commitment through tyrosine kinase-mediated interaction between the two
transcription factors that interferes with the binding of GATA-3 to its target
DNA. These results provide a novel function for tyrosine phosphorylation of a
transcription factor in specifying alternate fates of a common progenitor cell.

PMID: 15662016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Immunol. 2005 Feb 1;174(3):1405-15.

Tim-3+ T-bet+ tumor-specific Th1 cells colocalize with and inhibit development
and growth of murine neoplasms.

Simmons WJ(1), Koneru M, Mohindru M, Thomas R, Cutro S, Singh P, Dekruyff RH,
Inghirami G, Coyle AJ, Kim BS, Ponzio NM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey-New Jersey Medical School and Graduate School Biomedical 
Sciences, Newark, NJ 07101, USA.

Although T cells infiltrate many types of murine and human neoplasms, in many
instances tumor-specific cytotoxicity is not observed. Strategies to stimulate
CTL-mediated antitumor immunity have included in vitro stimulation and/or genetic
engineering of T cells, followed by adoptive transfer into tumor-bearing hosts.
In this model of B cell lymphoma in SJL/J mice, we used Tim-3(+) T-bet(+) Th1
cells to facilitate the development of tumor-specific CTL. Tumor-specific Th1
cell lines were polarized with IL-12 during in vitro stimulation and long term
maintenance. As few as 5 million Tim-3(+) T-bet(+) Th1 cells enabled recipients
to resist growth of malignant transplantable cells. In addition, similar numbers 
of Th1 cells injected into 2- to 3-mo-old mice inhibited development of the
spontaneous primary lymphomas, which normally arise in 90% of aging mice. CFSE(+)
Th1 cells colocalized with injected tumor cells in vivo and formed conjugates
with the tumor cells within follicles, whereas in nontumor-challenged recipients 
the CFSE(+) Th1 cells localized only within the T cell zones of the spleen. These
results provide evidence that adoptive immunotherapy with Tim-3(+) T-bet(+)
tumor-specific Th1 cells can be used to induce host cytotoxic responses that
inhibit the development and growth of neoplastic cells.

PMID: 15661898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Immunol. 2005 Feb 1;174(3):1188-95.

Polarized development of memory cell-like IFN-gamma-producing cells in the
absence of TCR zeta-chain.

Krymskaya L(1), Lee WH, Zhong L, Liu CP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte, CA
91010, USA.

TCR/CD3 complex-mediated signals play critical roles in regulating CD4(+) Th cell
differentiation. In this report, we have examined the in vivo role of a key
TCR/CD3 complex molecule zeta-chain in regulating the differentiation of Th
cells. We have studied T cells from zeta-chain-deficient mice (zetaKO mice),
zeta-chain-bearing mice (zeta(+) mice), and from zetaKO mice expressing a
FcRgamma chain transgene (FcRgammaTG, zetaKO mice). Our results demonstrated
that, compared with those of control mice, CD4(+) T cells and not CD8(+) T cells 
from zetaKO mice were polarized into IFN-gamma-producing cells. Some of these
IFN-gamma-producing cells could also secrete IL-10. Interestingly, zetaKO mouse T
cells produced IFN-gamma even after they were cultured in a Th2 condition. Our
studies to determine the molecular mechanisms underlying the polarized IFN-gamma 
production revealed that the expression level of STAT4 and T-bet were
up-regulated in freshly isolated T cells from zetaKO mice. Further studies showed
that noncultured zetaKO mice CD4(+) T cells and thymocytes bore a unique memory
cell-like CD44(high), CD62L(low/neg) phenotype. Altogether, these results suggest
that, in the absence of the zeta-chain, CD4(+) T cells develop as polarized
IFN-gamma-producing cells that bear a memory cell-like phenotype. The
zeta-chain-bearing T cells may produce a large amount of IFN-gamma only after
they are cultured in a condition favoring Th1 cell differentiation. This study
may provide important implications for the down-regulation of zeta-chain in T
cells of patients bearing a variety of tumors, chronic inflammatory and
infectious diseases.

PMID: 15661872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Am J Pathol. 2005 Jan;166(1):127-34.

Expression of the T-cell transcription factors, GATA-3 and T-bet, in the
neoplastic cells of Hodgkin lymphomas.

Atayar C(1), Poppema S, Blokzijl T, Harms G, Boot M, van den Berg A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Groningen University Medical 
Center, Hanzeplein 1, P.O. Box 30.001 9700 RB Groningen, The Netherlands.

Since Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) generally
have immunoglobulin gene rearrangements, they are considered to be of B-cell
origin. One of the characteristics of HRS cells is a prominent production of
various cytokines and chemokines. Cytokine production is generally driven by
expression of T-cell transcription factors (TFs). Only limited information is
available on the expression of T-cell TFs in HL. Expression of four T-cell TFs
and the target cytokine spectrum of these TFs were analyzed in six HL and three
large B-cell lymphoma (LBCL) cell lines using quantitative PCR. ERM expression
was observed in all HL and LBCL cell lines. Out of HL cell lines, T-bet was
expressed in five, GATA-3 in four, and c-Maf in two cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry in HL tissues revealed that in 11 of 12 (92%) of the
classical HL cases HRS cells were GATA-3 and/or T-bet positive. In three of six
cases of nodular lymphocyte predominance type of HL, the neoplastic cells were
T-bet positive. Overall, the T-cell TF and cytokine profiles of the HL cell lines
showed a considerable degree of consistency. The expression of T-cell TFs may
explain the production of various cytokines by HL cell lines and HRS cells.

PMCID: PMC1602286
PMID: 15632006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Dec 28;101(52):18099-104. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

TBX21: a functional variant predicts improvement in asthma with the use of
inhaled corticosteroids.

Tantisira KG(1), Hwang ES, Raby BA, Silverman ES, Lake SL, Richter BG, Peng SL,
Drazen JM, Glimcher LH, Weiss ST.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory and Pulmonary Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
kelan.tantisira@channing.harvard.edu

TBX21 encodes for the transcription factor T-bet (T-box expressed in T cells),
which influences naive T lymphocyte development and has been implicated in asthma
pathogenesis. Specifically, the T-bet knockout mouse spontaneously develops
airway hyperresponsiveness and other changes consistent with asthma. Because
airway responsiveness is moderated by the use of inhaled corticosteroids in
asthma, it is conceivable that genetic variation in TBX21 may alter asthma
phenotypes in a treatment-specific fashion. Here we demonstrate that the
nonsynonymous variation in TBX21 coding for replacement of histidine 33 with
glutamine is associated with significant improvement in the PC(20) (a measure of 
airway responsiveness) of asthmatic children in a large clinical trial spanning 4
years. We note that this increase occurs only in the children randomized to
inhaled corticosteroids and that it dramatically enhances the overall improvement
in PC(20) associated with inhaled corticosteroid usage. The average PC(20) at
trial end for subjects on inhaled corticosteroids possessing a variant allele was
in the normal range for nonasthmatics. In cellular models, we show that the TBX21
variant increases T helper 1 and decreases T helper 2 cytokine expression
comparably with wild type. TBX21 may thus be an important determinant
pharmacogenetic response to the therapy of asthma with inhaled corticosteroids.

PMCID: PMC539815
PMID: 15604153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Aug;25(8):458-61.

[T-bet gene expression in acute graft versus host disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan ZS(1), Liu QG, Yang DL, Zhou SY, Jiang EL, Huang Y, Wang HH, Zhai WJ, Zhou Z,
Wang M, Feng SZ, Han MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology and Blood Disease Hospital, CAMS and PUMC, Tianjin
300020, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the role of T-bet [a T helper 1 (Th1) lymphocyte
transcription factor] gene expression in predicting acute graft-versus-host
disease (aGVHD) and evaluate the correlation between T-bet gene and aGVHD.
METHODS: Twenty patients who underwent allogeneic stem cell transplantation
(allo. HSCT) entered this study. The expression of T-bet gene was examined with
reverse transcription (RT)-PCR in bone marrow samples collected from patients on 
the day before conditioning, and day 0, day 14, day 28, and day 42 after HSCT.
RESULTS: The expression level of T-bet in patients developed aGVHD was increased 
compared with that before conditioning (P = 0.043). The incidence of aGVHD was
91.7% in patients whose T-bet expression level was increased on day 14 after
transplant while was 12.5% in those whose T-bet gene expression level was not
increased on that day (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Patients with increased expression levels of T-bet after allo-HSCT
may have an increased possibility to develop aGVHD. T-bet expression level may
serve as an advisable guide to the clinician in predicting aGVHD and monitoring
treatment.

PMID: 15555259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Immunity. 2004 Nov;21(5):719-31.

Silencing T-bet defines a critical role in the differentiation of autoreactive T 
lymphocytes.

Lovett-Racke AE(1), Rocchini AE, Choy J, Northrop SC, Hussain RZ, Ratts RB,
Sikder D, Racke MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323
Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390 USA. amy.lovett-racke@utsouthwestern.edu

As a means of developing therapies that target the pathogenic T cells in multiple
sclerosis (MS) without compromising the immune system or eliciting systemic side 
effects, we investigated the use of T-bet-specific antisense oligonucleotides and
small interfering RNAs (siRNA) to silence T-bet expression in autoreactive
encephalitogenic T cells and evaluated the biological consequences of this
suppression in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a model for MS. The
T-bet-specific AS oligonucleotide and siRNA suppressed T-bet expression, IFNgamma
production, and STAT1 levels during antigen-specific T cell differentiation. In
vitro suppression of T-bet during differentiation of myelin-specific T cells and 
in vivo administration of a T-bet-specific antisense oligonucleotide or siRNA
inhibited disease. T-bet was shown to bind the IFNgamma and STAT1 promoters, but 
did not regulate the IL-12/STAT4 pathway. Since T-bet regulates IFNgamma
production in CD4(+) T cells, but to a lesser extent in most other
IFNgamma-producing cells, T-bet may be a target for therapeutics for Th1-mediated
diseases.

PMID: 15539157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Immunol. 2004 Nov 15;173(10):5918-22.

Cutting edge: immunity and IFN-gamma production during Listeria monocytogenes
infection in the absence of T-bet.

Way SS(1), Wilson CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Washington, 1959
NE Pacific Street, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The T-box transcription factor T-bet is an important regulator of IFN-gamma
production in all cell types and is considered to be essential for the generation
of CD4 Th1 T cells. IFN-gamma in turn plays a critical role in immunity to many
infectious agents. In this study, we demonstrate that T-bet is not required for
host resistance to primary Listeria monocytogenes (LM) infection. In the innate
immune phase, control of LM replication, serum IFN-gamma, and numbers of
IFN-gamma-producing NK cells were similar in T-bet-deficient and control mice. In
the adaptive immune phase, there was no defect in bacterial clearance or in the
numbers of LM-specific IFN-gamma-producing CD8 T cells in T-bet-deficient mice
and only a modest, although significant, reduction in the numbers of Th1 CD4 T
cells and IFN-gamma secretion by CD4 T cells. Thus, host resistance and the
generation of IFN-gamma-producing cells in response to LM infection are not
substantially compromised in the absence of T-bet.

PMID: 15528324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Clin Exp Immunol. 2004 Nov;138(2):213-20.

The lung cytokine microenvironment influences molecular events in the lymph nodes
during Th1 and Th2 respiratory mucosal sensitization to antigen in vivo.

Ritz SA(1), Cundall MJ, Gajewska BU, Swirski FK, Wiley RE, Alvarez D, Coyle AJ,
Stampfli MR, Jordana M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Diseases and Allergy, Centre for Gene Therapeutics and
Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
ON, Canada.

Originally defined by their patterns of cytokine production, Th1 and Th2 cells
have been described more recently to express other genes differentially as well, 
at least in vitro. In this study we compared the expression of Th1- and
Th2-associated genes directly during in vivo sensitization to ovalbumin (OVA) in 
Th1- and Th2-polarized models of airways inflammation. Th1-polarized airway
inflammation was achieved by the intranasal instillation of adenoviral vectors
(Ad) encoding granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and
interleukin (IL)-12, followed by daily aerosolizations of OVA; instillation of
Ad/GM-CSF alone with OVA aerosolization led to Th2-polarized responses. Lymph
nodes were obtained at various time-points, RNA extracted, and analysed by
real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Consistent with reports
from in vitro and human studies, mice undergoing Th1-polarized inflammation
showed preferential expression of the transcription factor t-bet, the chemokines 
IFN-gamma inducible protein (IP)-10 and macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha
(MIP-1-alpha), and the chemokine receptor CCR5. In contrast, the transcription
factor GATA-3, the chemokines I-309 and thymus and activation regulated chemokine
(TARC), and the chemokine receptors CCR3 and CCR4 were preferentially expressed
in the Th2 model. Importantly, we also show that Ad/transgene expression remains 
compartmentalized to the lung after intranasal instillation. Flow cytometric
analysis of lung myeloid dendritic cells indicated that B7.1 was expressed more
strongly in the Th1 model than in the Th2 model. These studies provide a direct
comparison of gene expression in in vivo Th1- and Th2-polarized models, and
demonstrate that molecular events in the lymph nodes can be altered fundamentally
by cytokine expression at distant mucosal sites.

PMCID: PMC1809215
PMID: 15498029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Eur J Immunol. 2004 Dec;34(12):3604-13.

Nuclear repositioning marks the selective exclusion of lineage-inappropriate
transcription factor loci during T helper cell differentiation.

Hewitt SL(1), High FA, Reiner SL, Fisher AG, Merkenschlager M.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, London, UK.

To address how heritable patterns of gene expression are acquired during the
differentiation of Th1 and Th2 cells, we analyzed the nuclear position of
lineage-restricted cytokine genes and their upstream regulators by 3-dimensional 
fluorescence in situ hybridization. During Th1 differentiation, GATA-3 and c-maf 
loci, which encode upstream regulators of Th2 cytokines, were progressively
repositioned to centromeric heterochromatin as defined by a gamma-satellite
repeat probe and/or the nuclear periphery, compartments that have been associated
with transcriptional repression. A third transcription factor locus, T-bet, which
controls Th1-specific programs, was subject to de novo CpG methylation in a Th2
cell clone. In contrast, we did not find repositioning of the cytokine gene loci 
IL-2, IL-3, IL-4 or IFN-gamma during T helper cell differentiation. Instead,
IFN-gamma was constitutively associated with the nuclear periphery, even when
primed for expression in Th1 cells. Our results suggest that Th1/Th2 lineage
commitment and differentiation involve repositioning of the regulators of
cytokine expression, rather than the cytokine genes themselves.

PMID: 15484194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2004 Sep;93(3):212-7; quiz 217-9, 271.

Rationale for new treatments aimed at IgE immunomodulation.

Stokes J(1), Casale TB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy/Immunology, Department of Medicine, Creighton University, 
Omaha, Nebraska 68131, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To review potential or current therapies that decrease IgE synthesis
or effects.
DATA SOURCES: Relevant literature in peer-reviewed journals and abstracts from
national meetings.
STUDY SELECTION: Key articles were selected by the authors.
RESULTS: Modulation of IgE-mediated diseases can occur at several levels.
Transcription factors may be altered to differentiate lymphocytes into a TH1
phenotype, thus decreasing TH2-driven IgE production. This may be accomplished by
inhibiting GATA-3 with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonists or
promoting T-bet expression with CpG motifs. Inhibiting IgE-promoting cytokines
may be accomplished by blocking the effects or synthesis of interleukin 4 (IL-4) 
or IL-13 by suplatast tosilate. Cytokine therapy with anti-IL-4 or anti-IL-13 has
the potential to directly influence IgE-mediated diseases, but strategies aimed
at IL-4 alone have been disappointing. Clinical trials with interferon-gamma or
IL-12, 2 cytokines important in promoting TH1 and inhibiting TH2 responses, have 
been fraught with adverse effects that make their use limited. The use of
plasmids encoding interferon-gamma or IL-12 has shown promise in animal models.
Inhibition of IgE synthesis has been demonstrated with anti-CD23 antibodies.
Early human studies have been very encouraging, and larger studies are under way.
The only IgE immunomodulator currently available for use is omalizumab.
Omalizumab is effective for allergic asthma in children and adults.
CONCLUSIONS: Newer therapies hold great promise for the future treatment of
allergic respiratory diseases, but clinical trials are necessary to accurately
evaluate risk-benefit ratios of IgE immunomodulators.

PMID: 15478378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nat Immunol. 2004 Nov;5(11):1149-56. Epub 2004 Sep 26.

Induction of T helper type 1-like regulatory cells that express Foxp3 and protect
against airway hyper-reactivity.

Stock P(1), Akbari O, Berry G, Freeman GJ, Dekruyff RH, Umetsu DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Allergy, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford
University, Stanford, California 94305-5208, USA.

The range of regulatory T cell (T(R) cell) types that control immune responses is
poorly understood. We describe here a population of T(R) cells that developed in 
vivo from naive CD4(+)CD25(-) T cells during a T helper type 1 (T(H)1)-polarized 
response, distinct from CD25(+) T(R) cells. These antigen-specific T(R) cells
were induced by CD8alpha(+) DCs, produced both interleukin 10 and
interferon-gamma, and potently inhibited the development of airway
hyper-reactivity. These T(R) cells expressed the transcription factors Foxp3 and 
T-bet, indicating that these T(R) cells are related to T(H)1 cells. Thus,
adaptive T(R) cells are heterogeneous and comprise T(H)1-like T(R) cells as well 
as previously described T(H)2-like T(R) cells, which express Foxp3 and are
induced during the development of respiratory tolerance by CD8alpha(-) DCs.

PMID: 15448689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Theor Biol. 2004 Nov 21;231(2):181-96.

Combining cytokine signalling with T-bet and GATA-3 regulation in Th1 and Th2
differentiation: a model for cellular decision-making.

Yates A(1), Callard R, Stark J.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Unit, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N
1EH, UK. ayates@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Differentiation of uncommitted T cells into Th1 and Th2 subpopulations depends on
both intracellular events controlling expression of transcription factors T-bet
and GATA-3 and interactions between cells mediated by cytokines, particularly IL4
and IFNgamma. A great deal is known about the intracellular and extracellular
events involved in Th1 and Th2 (Th) differentiation, but how these are integrated
in T-cell populations or indeed why extracellular cytokine control is required
after a decision has been made at a transcriptional level is not at all
understood. We present a mathematical model of CD4+ T-cell differentiation that
describes both intracellular and extracellular processes and the interactions
between them. It shows how antigen stimulation in conjunction with cytokines and 
other extracellular signals gives rise to rapid, reversible and mutually
exclusive expression of T-bet or GATA-3 due to feedback between the transcription
factors and their signalling pathways. After transient signalling by APC,
continued Th1 and Th2 differentiation is shown to require cytokine production by 
the proliferating T cells. Moreover, intercellular communication by
T-cell-derived cytokines lowers the threshold of APC signals required for Th
differentiation. This provides an explanation for enhanced Th differentiation by 
pre-existing memory T cells. The model also predicts that Th differentiation can 
be reversed at the single cell level before commitment by manipulating the
cytokine environment. It suggests a mechanism for switching between Th1 and Th2
in the so-called irreversible state that may be developed as a novel therapeutic 
means of manipulating Th1 and Th2 responses.

PMID: 15380383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Immunol. 2004 Sep 15;173(6):4120-9.

Activation of signaling lymphocytic activation molecule triggers a signaling
cascade that enhances Th1 responses in human intracellular infection.

Quiroga MF(1), Martínez GJ, Pasquinelli V, Costas MA, Bracco MM, Malbrán A,
Olivares LM, Sieling PA, García VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Parasitology, and Immunology, University of Buenos
Aires School of Medicine, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

T cell production of IFN-gamma contributes to host defense against infection by
intracellular pathogens, including mycobacteria. Lepromatous leprosy, the
disseminated form of infection caused by Mycobacterium leprae, is characterized
by loss of cellular response against the pathogen and diminished Th1 cytokine
production. Relieving bacterial burden in Ag-unresponsive patients might be
achieved through alternative receptors that stimulate IFN-gamma production. We
have previously shown that ligation of signaling lymphocytic activation molecule 
(SLAM) enhances IFN-gamma in mycobacterial infection; therefore, we investigated 
molecular pathways leading from SLAM activation to IFN-gamma production in human 
leprosy. The expression of the SLAM-associated protein (an inhibitory factor for 
IFN-gamma induction) on M. leprae-stimulated cells from leprosy patients was
inversely correlated to IFN-gamma production. However, SLAM ligation or exposure 
of cells from lepromatous patients to a proinflammatory microenvironment
down-regulated SLAM-associated protein expression. Moreover, SLAM activation
induced a sequence of signaling proteins, including activation of the NF-kappaB
complex, phosphorylation of Stat1, and induction of T-bet expression, resulting
in the promotion of IFN-gamma production, a pathway that remains quiescent in
response to Ag in lepromatous patients. Therefore, our findings reveal a cascade 
of molecular events during signaling through SLAM in leprosy that cooperate to
induce IFN-gamma production and strongly suggest that SLAM might be a focal point
for therapeutic modulation of T cell cytokine responses in diseases characterized
by dysfunctional Th2 responses.

Copyright 2004 The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 15356162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Immunol. 2004 Sep 15;173(6):3871-7.

An indispensable role for STAT1 in IL-27-induced T-bet expression but not
proliferation of naive CD4+ T cells.

Kamiya S(1), Owaki T, Morishima N, Fukai F, Mizuguchi J, Yoshimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Intractable Immune System Disease Research Center, Tokyo Medical University,
Japan.

IL-27 is a novel IL-12 family member that plays a role in the early regulation of
Th1 initiation, induces proliferation of naive CD4+ T cells, and synergizes with 
IL-12 in IFN-gamma production. It has been recently reported that IL-27 induces
T-bet and IL-12Rbeta2 expression through JAK1/STAT1 activation. In the present
study, we further investigated the JAK/STAT signaling molecules activated by
IL-27 and also the role of STAT1 in IL-27-mediated responses using
STAT1-deficient mice. In addition to JAK1 and STAT1, IL-27-activated JAK2,
tyrosine kinase-2, and STAT2, -3, and -5 in naive CD4+ T cells. The activation of
STAT2 and STAT5, but not of STAT3, was greatly diminished in STAT1-deficient
naive CD4+ T cells. Comparable proliferative response to IL-27 was observed
between STAT1-deficient and wild-type naive CD4+ T cells. In contrast, IL-27
hardly induced T-bet and subsequent IL-12Rbeta2 expression, and synergistic
IFN-gamma production by IL-27 and IL-12 was impaired in STAT1-deficient naive
CD4+ T cells. Moreover, IL-27 augmented the expression of MHC class I on naive
CD4+ T cells in a STAT1-dependent manner. These results suggest that IL-27
activates JAK1 and -2, tyrosine kinase-2, STAT1, -2, -3, and -5 in naive CD4+ T
cells and that STAT1 plays an indispensable role in IL-27-induced T-bet and
subsequent IL-12Rbeta2 expression and MHC class I expression as well but not
proliferation, while STAT3 presumably plays an important role in IL-27-induced
proliferation.

Copyright 2004 The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 15356135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Immunity. 2004 Jul;21(1):67-80.

Signaling through Itk promotes T helper 2 differentiation via negative regulation
of T-bet.

Miller AT(1), Wilcox HM, Lai Z, Berg LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55 Lake
Avenue North, Worcester 01655, USA.

The Tec family tyrosine kinase, Itk, is critical for PLC-gamma1 activation
downstream of the TCR. Studies of Itk-/- mice have demonstrated a requirement for
Itk in Th2 cytokine production and protective immunity to parasitic infections.
Here we address the mechanism by which Itk regulates Th2 differentiation. We find
that naive Itk-/- CD4+ T cells respond normally to cytokine skewing signals and
can differentiate efficiently into either Th1 or Th2 lineage cells. In the
absence of skewing cytokines, wild-type CD4+ T cells stimulated with low-avidity 
ligands preferentially express GATA-3 mRNA and differentiate into Th2 cells.
Under these same stimulation conditions, Itk-/- T cells produce large amounts of 
T-bet mRNA and differentiate into IFN-gamma-producing cells. Furthermore, Itk is 
upregulated during Th2 differentiation, while Rlk, a related Tec kinase,
disappears rapidly from differentiating Th2 cells. Together, these findings
provide a molecular explanation for the essential role of Itk in Th2
differentiation.

PMID: 15345221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Microbes Infect. 2004 Aug;6(10):960-4.

Stressing the virtues of the immune system.

Faure M(1), Gapin L, Viret C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunochimie, Inserm U548 and CEA-DRDC, Commissariat à l'Energie
Atomique, Grenoble, France. mfaure@cea.fr

PMID: 15332301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Am J Clin Pathol. 2004 Aug;122(2):292-7.

T-bet, a T-cell-associated transcription factor, is expressed in a subset of
B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders.

Dorfman DM(1), Hwang ES, Shahsafaei A, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Pathol. 2004 Aug;122(2):173-5.

T-bet, a T-box transcription factor, is expressed in CD4+ T lymphocytes committed
to Th1 T-cell development and in a subset of T-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Recent
evidence indicates that T-bet also is expressed in B lymphocytes and might
participate in immunoglobulin class switching. We examined T-bet expression in
116 cases of B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders by immunostaining and found
that T-bet was expressed consistently in precursor B-cell lymphoblastic
leukemia/lymphoblastic lymphoma (14/14 cases) in contrast with precursor T-cell
lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoblastic lymphoma, which is consistently T-bet- (13
cases), as previously reported. T-bet is expressed in memory B cell-derived
neoplasms (chronic lymphocytic leukemia, marginal zone lymphoma, hairy cell
leukemia; 35/42 cases) but not in cases of mantle cell, follicular, and large
cell lymphoma (43 cases). Expression of T-bet in precursor B-cell lymphoblastic
leukemia/lymphoblastic lymphoma was confirmed by Western blot analysis. The
expression of T-bet in a significant subset of B-cell lymphoproliferative
disorders but not in the vast majority of reactive B cells suggests it might have
a role in the oncogenesis of T-bet+ B-cell neoplasms. In addition, T-bet should
serve as a useful new marker for the diagnosis and subtyping of B-cell
lymphoproliferative disorders.

PMID: 15323146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Gut. 2004 Sep;53(9):1303-8.

T-bet upregulation and subsequent interleukin 12 stimulation are essential for
induction of Th1 mediated immunopathology in Crohn's disease.

Matsuoka K(1), Inoue N, Sato T, Okamoto S, Hisamatsu T, Kishi Y, Sakuraba A,
Hitotsumatsu O, Ogata H, Koganei K, Fukushima T, Kanai T, Watanabe M, Ishii H,
Hibi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Keio University, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Erratum in
    Gut. 2004 Nov;53(11):1722.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Many lines of evidence suggest that T helper cell type 1
(Th1) immune responses predominate in Crohn's disease (CD). Recently, a novel
transcription factor T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) has been reported as the 
master regulator of Th1 development. This study was designed to investigate the
role of T-bet and proinflammatory cytokines in Th1 mediated immunopathology in
CD.
MATERIALS: CD4+ lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMCs) were isolated from
surgically resected specimens (CD, n = 10; ulcerative colitis (UC), n = 10;
normal controls (NL), n = 5).
METHODS: (1) T-bet expression of CD4+ LPMCs was examined by quantitative real
time polymerase chain reaction and western blotting. (2) T-bet expression of
LPMCs stimulated by interleukin (IL)-12/IL-18 was analysed by western blotting.
(3) Interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) production and T-bet expression of CD4+
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were examined with or without
stimulation by anti-CD3/CD28 monoclonal antibodies and/or IL-12.
RESULTS: (1) T-bet expression of CD4+ LPMCs was increased in CD compared with UC 
and NL. (2) Synergistically, augmentation of IFN-gamma production by IL-12/IL-18 
was independent of T-bet expression in LPMCs. (3) T-bet was induced by T cell
receptor stimulation in CD4+ PBMCs. T-bet induction correlated with IFN-gamma
production and with augmentation of surface expressed IL-12 receptor beta2.
CONCLUSIONS: T-bet induction by antigenic stimulation and subsequent stimulation 
by macrophage derived IL-12/IL-18 are important for establishing Th1 mediated
immunopathology in CD.

PMCID: PMC1774174
PMID: 15306590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Aug 24;101(34):12622-7. Epub 2004 Aug 10.

Evolutionarily conserved sequence elements that positively regulate IFN-gamma
expression in T cells.

Shnyreva M(1), Weaver WM, Blanchette M, Taylor SL, Tompa M, Fitzpatrick DR,
Wilson CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Our understanding of mechanisms by which the expression of IFN-gamma is regulated
is limited. Herein, we identify two evolutionarily conserved noncoding sequence
elements (IFNgCNS1 and IFNg CNS2) located approximately 5 kb upstream and
approximately 18 kb downstream of the initiation codon of the murine Ifng gene.
When linked to the murine Ifng gene (-3.4 to +5.6 kb) and transiently transfected
into EL-4 cells, these elements clearly enhanced IFN-gamma expression in response
to ionomycin and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate and weakly enhanced expression
in response to T-bet. A DNase I hypersensitive site and extragenic transcripts at
IFNgCNS2 correlated positively with the capacity of primary T cell subsets to
produce IFN-gamma. Transcriptionally favorable histone modifications in the Ifng 
promoter, intronic regions, IFNgCNS2, and, although less pronounced, IFNgCNS1
increased as naïve T cells differentiated into IFN-gamma-producing effector CD8+ 
and T helper (TH) 1 T cells, but not into TH2 T cells. Like IFN-gamma expression,
these histone modifications were T-bet-dependent in CD4+ cells, but not CD8+ T
cells. These findings define two distal regulatory elements associated with T
cell subset-specific IFN-gamma expression.

PMCID: PMC515107
PMID: 15304658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Immunol. 2004 Aug 15;173(4):2479-85.

Induction of IgG2a class switching in B cells by IL-27.

Yoshimoto T(1), Okada K, Morishima N, Kamiya S, Owaki T, Asakawa M, Iwakura Y,
Fukai F, Mizuguchi J.

Author information: 
(1)Intractable Immune System Disease Research Center, Tokyo Medical University,
Tokyo, Japan. yoshimot@tokyo-med.ac.jp

IL-27 is a novel IL-12 family member that plays a role in the early regulation of
Th1 initiation. However, its role in B cells remains unexplored. We here show a
role for IL-27 in the induction of T-bet expression and regulation of Ig class
switching in B cells. Expression of WSX-1, one subunit of IL-27R, was detected at
the mRNA level in primary mouse spleen B cells, and stimulation of these B cells 
by IL-27 rapidly activated STAT1. IL-27 then induced T-bet expression and IgG2a, 
but not IgG1, class switching in B cells activated with anti-CD40 or LPS. In
contrast, IL-27 inhibited IgG1 class switching induced by IL-4 in activated B
cells. Similar induction of STAT1 activation, T-bet expression and IgG2a class
switching was observed in IFN-gamma-deficient B cells, but not in STAT1-deficient
ones. The induction of IgG2a class switching was abolished in T-bet-deficient B
cells activated with LPS. These results suggest that primary spleen B cells
express functional IL-27R and that the stimulation of these B cells by IL-27
induces T-bet expression and IgG2a, but not IgG1, class switching in a
STAT1-dependent but IFN-gamma-independent manner. The IL-27-induced IgG2a class
switching is highly dependent on T-bet in response to T-independent stimuli such 
as LPS. Thus, IL-27 may be a novel attractive candidate as a therapeutic agent
against diseases such as allergic disorders by not only regulating Th1
differentiation but also directly acting on B cells and inducing IgG2a class
switching.

PMID: 15294962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Ann Rheum Dis. 2005 Mar;64(3):415-8. Epub 2004 Jul 29.

Effect of treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with infliximab on IFN gamma, IL4,
T-bet, and GATA-3 expression: link with improvement of systemic inflammation and 
disease activity.

Kawashima M(1), Miossec P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, INSERM U-403, Hospital Edouard
Herriot, 69437 Lyon Cedex 03, France.

OBJECTIVE: To study interferon gamma (IFN gamma) production and the expression of
T-bet and GATA-3, the transcription factors associated with Th1 and Th2, in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from patients with rheumatoid arthritis
before and during infliximab treatment, so as to distinguish between a disease
specific and a disease activity dependent defect.
METHODS: Rheumatoid PBMC were obtained at weeks 0 and 6 of infliximab treatment
and cultured for seven days with or without interleukin (IL)12 or the combination
of IL12 and IL18. IFN gamma concentrations in supernatants were determined by
ELISA. mRNA expression of IFN gamma, IL4, T-bet, and GATA-3 was determined by
real time RT-PCR in whole blood at weeks 0 and 22.
RESULTS: A reduction in spontaneous IFN gamma production and in the response to
Th1 inducing cytokines occurred in rheumatoid PBMC. Reduction of systemic
inflammation with infliximab treatment increased IFN gamma production in response
to IL12 or IL12+IL18. The IFN gamma/IL4 expression ratio of rheumatoid blood
before treatment was lower than in healthy controls but was increased by
infliximab treatment. T-bet expression or T-bet/GATA-3 ratio of rheumatoid blood 
was less than in controls. The T-bet/GATA-3 ratio was not influenced by
infliximab treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Regulation of T-bet and GATA-3 or IFN gamma and IL4 expression
appeared different. The IFN gamma/IL4 ratio might express the blood Th1/Th2
balance better than the T-bet/GATA-3 ratio. Reduced IFN gamma production by
rheumatoid PBMC and levels of IFN gamma and IL4 mRNA expression in blood were
linked to disease improvement, indicating an association between this systemic
Th1 feature and disease activity.

PMCID: PMC1755397
PMID: 15286007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Clin Exp Immunol. 2004 Aug;137(2):444-9.

Th1 and Th2 cytokine production is suppressed at the level of transcriptional
regulation in Kawasaki disease.

Kimura J(1), Takada H, Nomura A, Ohno T, Mizuno Y, Saito M, Kusuhara K, Hara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

To clarify the functional state of T cells in Kawasaki disease, we analysed mRNA 
expression levels of Th1/Th2 cytokines (IFN-gamma and IL-4) along with
Th1/Th2-inducing transcription factors, T-bet and GATA-3, which play pivotal
roles in the development of Th1 and Th2 cells, respectively. By real-time PCR,
IFN-gamma mRNA levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMNC) were
significantly decreased in Kawasaki disease patients compared with those with
measles, and tended to be lower than those in healthy controls. T-bet mRNA levels
were significantly decreased in patients with Kawasaki disease compared with
healthy controls. In addition, IL-4 and GATA-3 mRNA levels were significantly
decreased in Kawasaki disease compared with healthy controls. Regulatory cytokine
mRNA levels (TGF-beta and IL-10) were also decreased in Kawasaki disease. The
mRNA levels of IFN-gamma showed a significant positive correlation with those of 
T-bet in Kawasaki disease. These results suggest that the suppressed function of 
Th1 and Th2, associated with the suppression of both T-bet and GATA-3 gene
expression, may be one of the immunological characteristics of Kawasaki disease.

PMCID: PMC1809116
PMID: 15270865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2004 Jun;27(6):398-402.

[Imbalanced T cell-specific transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 contributes to
type 2 T helper cell polarization in asthmatic patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu CT(1), Wang G, Luo FM, Wang ZL, Liu R, Wang CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the T helper cell predominant differentiation in asthmatic
patients and to explore the modulation of T cell-specific transcription factors
T-bet/GATA-3.
METHODS: Thirty-two asthmatic patients were enrolled, among whom 18 were atopic
defined by positive antigen skin test and 12 were children. Lymphocytes were
isolated from peripheral blood and incubated with PHA (100 microg/ml) at 37
degrees C for 48 hours. INF-gamma and IL-4 concentrations in the supernatant were
detected by ELISA. The T-bet and GATA-3 mRNA expression levels in lymphocytes
were assayed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) while
the ratio of CCR3+ and CCR5+ cells in lymphocytes was counted by flow cytometry
(FCM) after direct immunofluorescence staining.
RESULTS: IL-4 concentration in the lymphocyte supernatant of the asthmatic group 
was (118 +/- 25) microg/L, which was significantly elevated compared to that of
the healthy control group (75 +/- 12) microg/L (P < 0.01). When subgroups of
asthmatic patients were compared, the results showed that atopic subjects had a
higher IL-4 level than non-atopic subjects [(126 +/- 23) microg/L vs (107 +/- 26)
microg/L, P < 0.01], but no significant difference was demonstrated between
adults and children [(118 +/- 25) micro g/L vs (121 +/- 25) microg/L, P > 0.05]. 
Significantly lower concentration of INF-gamma in the asthmatic group was
detected as compared to the control [(651 +/- 85) microg/L vs (1 179 +/- 332)
microg/L, P < 0.001]. The concentration of INF-gamma was higher in atopic
subjects than in non-atopic subjects [(618 +/- 89) micro g/L vs (680 +/- 83)
microg/L, P < 0.01], but no difference was found between adults and children. The
percentage of CCR3+ cells in lymphocytes was (9.4 +/- 5.8)% in the asthmatic
group and (4.9 +/- 2.3)% in the control (P < 0.05), while the percentages of
CCR5+ cells was (6 +/- 7)% and (13 +/- 7)%, respectively (P < 0.05). RT-PCR
revealed that T-bet mRNA expression levels were as follows: 0.13 +/- 0.03 in the 
asthmatic group and 0.18 +/- 0.04 in the control (P < 0.01); 0.120 +/- 0.030 in
atopic subjects and 0.140 +/- 0.010 in the non-atopic subjects (P < 0.05); 0.120 
+/- 0.020 in children and 0.130 +/- 0.020 in adults (P > 0.05). The levels of
GATA-3 mRNA expression were 0.43 +/- 0.07 in asthma and 0.29 +/- 0.09 in the
control (P < 0.01), however, no differences were found between atopic and
non-atopic, children and adults (0.50 +/- 0.12 vs 0.40 +/- 0.10, 0.44 +/- 0.09 vs
0.43 +/- 0.07, respectively, P > 0.05). A positive correlation was found between 
concentration of INF-gamma and T-bet mRNA level (r=0.663, P < 0.01), while no
correlation with GATA-3 mRNA expression was found. The concentration of IL-4 was 
negatively correlated with T-bet mRNA level (r=-0.250, P < 0.05) and positively
with GATA-3 mRNA level (r=0.72, P < 0.01). It was interesting that a closer
relationship existed between the ratio of T-bet to GATA-3 and the ratio of
INF-gamma to IL-4 (r=0.873, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: In asthma there is a tendency of Th2 polarization with
over-production of Th2-like cytokines in which T-bet deficiency may be a key
factor. T-bet might direct T cells to Th1 differentiation while GATA-3 orientated
Th2 maturation. Considering the fact that committed Th2 cells underwent
re-differentiation induced by T-bet, this novel Th1-specific transcription factor
is a fascinating target gene for modifying to restore the Th1 and Th2 balance.

PMID: 15256090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Dev Dyn. 2004 Aug;230(4):743-53.

T-box genes in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis: characterization of cDNAs and
spatial expression.

Takatori N(1), Hotta K, Mochizuki Y, Satoh G, Mitani Y, Satoh N, Satou Y,
Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto, Japan.

Members of the T-box family of transcription factors share an evolutionarily
conserved DNA-binding domain and play significant roles in various processes of
embryonic development. Vertebrate T-box genes are categorized into the following 
five major subfamilies (eight groups), depending on sequence similarities:
Brachyury, Tbx1 (Tbx1/10, Tbx15/18/22, Tbx20), Tbx2/3/4/5 (Tbx2/3 and Tbx4/5),
Tbx6, and Tbr/Eomes/TBX21. Ascidians are primitive chordates, and their tadpole
larva are considered to represent the simplified and basic body plan of
vertebrates. In addition, it has been revealed that the ascidian genome contains 
the basic ancestral complement of genes involved in development. The present
characterization of cDNAs and survey of the Ciona intestinalis draft genome
demonstrated that the Ciona genome contains a single copy gene for each of the
Brachyury, Tbx1/10, Tbx15/18/22, Tbx20, Tbx2/3, and Tbr/Eomes/TBX21 groups, and
at least three copies of the Tbx6 subfamily. Each of the Ciona T-box genes shows 
a characteristic expression pattern, although that of Tbx20 was not determined in
the present study. These results provide basic information that will be useful
for future studies of the function of each gene, genetic cascades of different
T-box genes, and genome-wide surveys of evolutionary changes in the T-box gene
structure and organization in this primitive chordate.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15254908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Clin Exp Allergy. 2004 Jul;34(7):1049-55.

Association study of 15 novel single-nucleotide polymorphisms of the T-bet locus 
among Finnish asthma families.

Ylikoski E(1), Kinos R, Sirkkanen N, Pykäläinen M, Savolainen J, Laitinen LA,
Kere J, Laitinen T, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi University,
Finland. emmi.ylikoski@btk.utu.fi

OBJECTIVE: T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) is a transcription factor
regulating the commitment of T helper (Th) cells by driving the cells into the
Th1 direction. Abnormal Th1/Th2 balance may lead to complex disorders like asthma
or autoimmune diseases. Recent studies have suggested that T-bet might be a
candidate gene for asthma. This led us to screen 23 Finnish individuals for
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the T-bet locus and study the
association between the SNPs and high serum IgE level and asthma.
METHODS: We screened all six exons, adjacent intronic areas and 2 kb of the
5'-flanking region from 23 individuals utilizing WAVE trade mark technology. To
explore whether T-bet is associated in serum IgE regulation or asthma we
genotyped the SNPs in a Finnish asthmatic founder population. The association
analyses were made using haplotype pattern mining.
RESULTS: Fifteen novel SNPs were found in the T-bet gene. Within the Finnish
asthmatic founder population, there was no association between T-bet SNPs and
high serum IgE level or asthma.
CONCLUSIONS: The genetic variability in the T-bet gene does not play a role in
the pathogenesis of human asthma. Our results provide a novel panel of SNPs in
T-bet and will help determine whether the SNPs have a functional role in other T 
cell-mediated diseases.

PMID: 15248849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Gut. 2004 Aug;53(8):1090-5.

Regulation of the T helper cell type 1 transcription factor T-bet in coeliac
disease mucosa.

Monteleone I(1), Monteleone G, Del Vecchio Blanco G, Vavassori P, Cucchiara S,
MacDonald TT, Pallone F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Centro di Eccellenza per lo studio delle
malattie complesse e multifattoriali, Università Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
Gi.Monteleone@Med.uniroma2.it

Comment in
    Gut. 2004 Aug;53(8):1065-7.

BACKGROUND: In coeliac disease (CD) mucosa, the histological lesion is associated
with marked infiltration of T helper cell type 1 (Th1) cells. However, the
molecular mechanisms which regulate Th1 cell differentiation in CD mucosa are
unknown.
AIMS: To analyse expression of transcription factors which control the Th1 cell
commitment in CD.
PATIENTS: Duodenal mucosal samples were taken from untreated CD patients and
normal controls.
METHODS: Interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) and interleukin (IL)-4 RNA expression was
examined in T lamina propria lymphocytes by quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. T-bet and STAT-4, two Th1 promoting
transcription factors, and STAT-6 and GATA-3, transcription factors which govern 
T helper cell type 2 (Th2) cell polarisation, were examined in duodenal biopsies 
by western blotting. The effect of gliadin and IFN-gamma on expression of T-bet
was examined in an ex vivo culture of biopsies taken from normal and treated CD
patients.
RESULTS: As expected, IFN-gamma but not IL-4 RNA transcripts were increased in
the mucosa of CD patients in comparison with controls. CD mucosal samples
consistently exhibited higher levels of T-bet than controls. However, no
difference in active STAT-4 expression was seen between CD patients and controls,
suggesting that Th1 polarisation was not induced by local IL-12. GATA-3 and
STAT-6 were also low in both CD and control mucosa. In normal duodenal biopsies, 
IFN-gamma stimulated T-bet through a STAT-1 dependent mechanism. Challenge of
treated CD but not control biopsies with gliadin enhanced T-bet and this effect
was also inhibited by STAT-1 inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that activation of STAT-1 by IFN-gamma promotes
T-bet in CD mucosa.

PMCID: PMC1774159
PMID: 15247173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Gut. 2004 Aug;53(8):1065-7.

T helper cell polarisation in coeliac disease: any (T-)bet ?

Holtmann MH(1), Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Medicine, Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany.

Comment on
    Gut. 2004 Aug;53(8):1090-5.

PMCID: PMC1774133
PMID: 15247168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Hum Genet. 2004 Aug;115(3):177-84. Epub 2004 Jul 6.

Identification of a novel type 1 diabetes susceptibility gene, T-bet.

Sasaki Y(1), Ihara K, Matsuura N, Kohno H, Nagafuchi S, Kuromaru R, Kusuhara K,
Takeya R, Hoey T, Sumimoto H, Hara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.
yuka@pediatr.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

The gene encoding interferon (IFN)-gamma, IFNG, is known as one of the candidate 
susceptibility genes for type 1 diabetes. In addition, cytokines, including
IFN-gamma, play important roles in the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes.
Therefore, we focused on the Th1-specific T-box transcription factor gene
(T-bet), which contributes to the induction of the hallmark Th1 cytokine,
IFN-gamma. We first screened for polymorphisms in the T-bet gene and detected two
microsatellite repeat polymorphisms located in intron 1 and the 3'- flanking
region, and two single nucleotide polymorphisms, including a His33Gln
substitution within the coding region. By association studies, the Gln-positive
phenotype and (CA)14 allele in 3'-flanking region of T-bet were found to be
associated with type 1 diabetes in the Japanese population. Furthermore, Gln33
T-bet showed a significantly higher transcriptional activity of the IFNG gene via
a dual luciferase reporter assay. Our study suggests the first evidence of an
association between type 1 diabetes and polymorphisms in the T-bet gene, and that
variation in T-bet transcriptional activity may play a role in the development of
type 1 diabetes, possibly through the effect on IFN-gamma production in Th1
cells.

Copyright 2004 Springer-Verlag

PMID: 15241679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Immunol. 2004 Jul 15;173(2):1249-57.

Human dendritic cells respond to Helicobacter pylori, promoting NK cell and
Th1-effector responses in vitro.

Hafsi N(1), Voland P, Schwendy S, Rad R, Reindl W, Gerhard M, Prinz C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Technical University, Munich, Germany.

Helicobacter pylori infection leads to chronic gastric inflammation. The current 
study determined the response of human APCs, NK cells, and T cells toward the
bacteria in vitro. Human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DC) were incubated
with bacteria for 48 h. Intact H. pylori at a multitude of infection 5 stimulated
the expression of MHC class II (4- to 7-fold), CD80, and CD86 B7 molecules (10-
to 12-fold) and the CD83 costimulatory molecule (>30-fold) as well as IL-12
secretion (>50-fold) in DCs, and thereby, strongly induced their maturation and
activation. CD56(+)/CD4(-) NK cells, as well as CD4(+)/CD45RA(+) naive T cells,
were isolated and incubated with DCs pulsed with intact bacteria or different
cellular fractions. Coculture of H. pylori-pulsed DCs with NK cells strongly
potentiated the secretion of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma. Coculture of naive T cells 
with H. pylori-pulsed DCs significantly enhanced TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, and IL-2
secretion as well as T-bet mRNA levels, while GATA-3 mRNA was lowered. However,
the effect appeared attenuated compared with coculture with Escherichia coli. A
greater stimulation was seen with naive T cells and DCs pulsed with H. pylori
membrane preparations. Intact H. pylori potently induced the maturation and
activation of human monocyte-derived DC and thereby promote NK and Th1 effector
responses. The strong activation of NK cells may be important for the innate
immune response. Th1-polarized T cells were induced especially by incubation with
membrane preparations of H. pylori, suggesting that membrane proteins may account
for the specific adaptive immune response.

PMID: 15240717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Exp Med. 2004 Jul 5;200(1):79-87.

Loss of T-bet, but not STAT1, prevents the development of experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis.

Bettelli E(1), Sullivan B, Szabo SJ, Sobel RA, Glimcher LH, Kuchroo VK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, 77 Avenue
Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factors signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT)1 and T-bet control the differentiation of interferon (IFN)-gamma-producing
T helper type (Th)1 cells. Here we compare the role of T-bet and STAT1 in the
initiation and regulation of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a
disease initiated by Th1 cells. T-bet-deficient mice immunized with myelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) were resistant to the development of EAE. This
protection was also observed when T-bet(-/-) mice were crossed to the
MOG-specific 2D2 T cell receptor transgenic strain. In contrast, although T-bet
is downstream of STAT1, STAT1(-/-) mice were highly susceptible to EAE and
developed more severe and accelerated disease with atypical neuropathologic
features. The function of T-bet was dominant as mice deficient in both T-bet and 
STAT1 were also protected from EAE. CD4(+) CD25(+) regulatory T cells from these 
two mice strains were fully competent and do not explain the difference in
disease susceptibility. However, enhanced EAE in STAT1(-/-) mice was associated
with continued generation of IFN-gamma-producing Th1 cells and up-regulation of
selective chemokines responsible for the increased recruitment of macrophages and
neutrophils in the central nervous system. Although the two transcription
factors, STAT1 and T-bet, both induce IFN-gamma gene transcription, our results
demonstrate marked differences in their function in regulating pathogenic Th1
cell responses.

PMCID: PMC2213316
PMID: 15238607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2004 Jul;100(1-2):105-11.

Identification of key immune mediators regulating T helper 1 responses in swine.

Dawson HD(1), Royaee AR, Nishi S, Kuhar D, Schnitzlein WM, Zuckermann F, Urban J 
Jr, Lunney JK.

Author information: 
(1)Nutrient Requirements and Functions Laboratory, Beltsville Human Nutrition
Research Center, USDA, Bldg. 307C, Room 213, BARC-East, Beltsville, MD 20705,
USA.

This publication describes the cloning of full or partial length sequences for
pig TBX21 (T-bet), MYD88, ICSBP1, CD8A (CD8alpha), CD8B (CD8beta), and CD28
cDNAs. Real-time PCR assays have been developed for the relative quantitation of 
these products as well as previously characterized transcripts that encode exon
A-containing CD45, HLX1, IRF1, STAT1 and RPL32. When used for examining temporal 
immune gene expression in the liver of Toxoplasma gondii infected pigs, the
positive regulators of Th1 responses, IRF1, MYD88, and STAT1, were found to be
expressed prior to the simultaneous upregulation of interferon gamma (IFNG), HLX1
and TBX21 gene expression. In contrast, in the mesenteric lymph node (MLN), only 
expression of IRF1 and IFNG was significantly upregulated. Based on their
demonstrated utility in establishing an immune response pathway, these PCR assays
should be valuable additions to our swine immune toolkit.

PMID: 15183000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Microbes Infect. 2004 May;6(6):529-35.

T-box transcription-factor-deficient mice display increased joint pathology and
failure of infection control during staphylococcal arthritis.

Hultgren OH(1), Verdrengh M, Tarkowski A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, Göteborg University Gulhedsgatan 10A S-413 
46 Göteborg, Sweden. olof.hultgren@immuno.gu.se

To study the impact of T-box transcription factor (T-bet) on initiation and
progression of Staphylococcus aureus sepsis and arthritis, T-bet-deficient mice
(T-bet(-/-)) and their wild-type controls (T-bet(+/+)) were intravenously
inoculated with 8 x 10(6) S. aureus. Already 48 h after inoculation of S. aureus,
T-bet-deficient mice displayed increased frequency (62% versus 19%, P = 0.002) as
well as severity of arthritis compared with wild-type controls. The bacterial
counts were significantly increased in T-bet(-/-) mice compared with T-bet(+/+)
as measured in kidneys 72 h after the inoculation (4.3 +/- 1.8 x 10(7) versus 3.2
+/- 3.2 x 10(6) colony-forming units (CFU); P = 0.003). As expected,
T-bet-deficient mice displayed significantly decreased production of IFN-gamma
(10-15-fold) at 24 and 72 h after bacterial inoculation compared with wild-type
mice. Interestingly, in the absence of T-bet, serum IL-4 was decreased at 24 h.
IL-6 did not differ at early stage of infection but was sixfold increased in
T-bet(-/-) mice over T-bet(+/+) animals at 72 h postinoculation. Ten days after
the inoculation, T-bet(-/-) mice still displayed significantly more pronounced
weight loss and increased serum IL-6 levels, probably due to increased bacterial 
burden compared with T-bet(+/+) mice. The cumulative mortality was 19% in T-bet
mice (5/27) and 0% (0/27) in control animals (P = 0.05). In conclusion, T-bet
plays an important role in early response to S. aureus infection, protecting
against bacterial accumulation, cachexia and septic death. Furthermore T-bet
downregulates joint inflammation in the early phase of disease.

PMID: 15158185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004 May;113(5):987-94.

Sustained T-bet expression confers polarized human TH2 cells with TH1-like
cytokine production and migratory capacities.

Lametschwandtner G(1), Biedermann T, Schwärzler C, Günther C, Kund J, Fassl S,
Hinteregger S, Carballido-Perrig N, Szabo SJ, Glimcher LH, Carballido JM.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research-Vienna, Brunnerstrasse 59, A-1235
Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor T-bet mediates IFN-gamma production by T(H)1
cells and suppresses T(H)2 cytokine production when ectopically expressed in
polarized murine T(H)2 cells. Thus T-bet-mediated inhibition of T(H)2 cytokine
production might be beneficial for the treatment of allergic diseases like asthma
or atopic dermatitis.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to investigate the effects of ectopic T-bet expression in
highly polarized human T(H)2 cells obtained from skin biopsy specimens of
patients with atopic dermatitis.
METHODS: The cytokine production of T(H)2 cells retrovirally transfected with a
vector expressing human T-bet was determined by means of intracellular FACS
staining and ELISA. The effects of T-bet transfection were analyzed at the mRNA
level by means of real-time PCR and DNA microarrays and confirmed by using
functional chemokine response assays.
RESULTS: Transfection of T-bet into T(H)2 cells induced high levels of IFN-gamma 
and suppressed IL-5, but IL-2 and IL-4 production remained unchanged. T-bet
transfection also induced IL-12Rbeta2 and CXCR3 expression on human T(H)2 cells, 
whereas the IL-18 receptor was only induced as a consequence of T-bet-mediated
increased responsiveness to IL-12. Furthermore, sustained T-bet expression in
human T(H)2 cells induced IL-2 production and decreased the secretion of IL-4. In
addition, the chemokine receptor repertoire of these cells was changed toward a
T(H)1-like profile.
CONCLUSION: The combined switch in cytokine pattern and migratory potential of
highly polarized human T(H)2 cells mediated by T-bet might provide an additional 
advantage for the treatment of allergic diseases.

PMID: 15131585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Nat Rev Immunol. 2004 May;4(5):381-6.

Novel ChIP-based strategies to uncover transcription factor target genes in the
immune system.

Weinmann AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195,
USA. weinmann@u.washington.edu

PMID: 15122203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Exp Med. 2004 Apr 19;199(8):1153-62.

T-bet controls autoaggressive CD8 lymphocyte responses in type 1 diabetes.

Juedes AE(1), Rodrigo E, Togher L, Glimcher LH, von Herrath MG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and
Immunology, 10355 Science Center Dr., San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

The T-box transcription factor T-bet is known to control lineage commitment and
interferon-gamma production by T helper 1 (Th1) CD4 lymphocytes. We report here
that T-bet is essential for development of CD8 lymphocyte-dependent autoimmune
diabetes (type 1 diabetes [T1D]) in the rat insulin promoter-lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) transgenic model for virally induced T1D. In the
absence of T-bet, autoaggressive (anti-LCMV) CD8 lymphocytes were reduced in
number and produced less IFN-gamma, but increased IL-2 compared with controls.
Further analysis showed that T-bet intrinsically controls the generation, but not
apoptosis, maintenance, or secondary expansion of antiviral effector/memory CD8
lymphocytes. This observation points toward a therapeutic opportunity for the
treatment of T1D and other autoimmune disorders.

PMCID: PMC2211889
PMID: 15096540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004 Feb;4(1):69-74.

Regulation of T cells in asthma: implications for genetic manipulation.

Luft C(1), Hausding M, Finotto S.

Author information: 
(1)I Medical Clinic, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

PURPOSE OF THE REVIEW: Allergic asthma is a disease characterized by airway
hyperresponsiveness, inflammation and remodeling. In the past few decades it has 
become clear that the pathogenesis and development of this disease is controlled 
by cytokines released by CD4 T helper type 2 lymphocytes that develop under the
influence of natural killer lymphocytes. At birth, T cell priming exhibits a T
helper type 2 bias and the development of the T helper phenotype is determined in
the first year of life by environmental exposure to virus or bacterial substances
or environmental allergens in genetically predisposed individuals. Decreased
exposure to infection in early childhood has thus been linked to the increased
incidence of asthma in industrialized countries (hygiene hypothesis). In this
review, we discuss the possibility that the kind and the quantity of infectious
agent determines the type of immune response.
RECENT FINDINGS: It has previously been shown that Toll-like receptors are
involved in the recognition of intermediate components, which is the result of
processed foreign antigens or damage products (produced during infection, damage 
or inflammation). In addition, the protective effect against allergic diseases is
mediated by a new subset of CD4 T cells: the T-regulatory cells.
SUMMARY: The kind and dose of antigen or infectious agent determines the
development of a T helper type 1 or type 2 immune response and the activation of 
T-regulatory cells. The latter are known to play an important role in
downregulating allergic immune responses.

PMID: 15090923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Immunity. 2004 Apr;20(4):477-94.

T-bet regulates the terminal maturation and homeostasis of NK and Valpha14i NKT
cells.

Townsend MJ(1), Weinmann AS, Matsuda JL, Salomon R, Farnham PJ, Biron CA, Gapin
L, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2004 Apr;20(4):363-5.

Natural killer (NK) and CD1d-restricted Valpha14i natural killer T (NKT) cells
play a critical early role in host defense. Here we show that mice with a
targeted deletion of T-bet, a T-box transcription factor required for Th1 cell
differentiation, have a profound, stem cell-intrinsic defect in their ability to 
generate mature NK and Valpha14i NKT cells. Both cell types fail to complete
normal terminal maturation and are present in decreased numbers in peripheral
lymphoid organs of T-bet(-/-) mice. T-bet expression is regulated during NK cell 
differentiation by NK-activating receptors and cytokines known to control NK
development and effector function. Our results identify T-bet as a key factor in 
the terminal maturation and peripheral homeostasis of NK and Valpha14i NKT cells.

PMID: 15084276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Immunity. 2004 Apr;20(4):363-5.

Betting on NKT and NK cells.

Yokoyama WM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Rheumatology Division Box 8045, Washington
University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2004 Apr;20(4):477-94.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells, as their name implies, constitutively express
markers and receptors first identified on bona fide natural killer (NK) cells,
supporting a potential relationship between NKT and NK cells. In this issue of
Immunity, Townsend et al. further define this relationship in terms of the
transcription factor, T-bet.

PMID: 15084266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Clin Exp Immunol. 2004 Mar;135(3):505-10.

Differential expression of mRNA for Th1 and Th2 cytokine-associated transcription
factors and suppressors of cytokine signalling in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells of patients with atopic dermatitis.

Arakawa S(1), Hatano Y, Katagiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Biology and Medicine (Dermatology), Faculty of
Medicine, Oita University, Oita, Japan. arakawa@med.oita-u.ac.jp

Atopic dermatitis is characterized by Th2-dominant immunity. Recently many
intracellular molecules have been reported to regulate cytokine expression and T 
cell differentiation. GATA-3 and T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) are
transcription factors that play a critical role in the development of Th2 and Th1
immunity, respectively. Suppressor of cytokine signalling (SOCS)-3 and SOCS-5,
are negative regulators of the cytokine signalling induced by IL-12 and IL-4,
respectively. Txk is a transcription factor that activates IFN-gamma gene
directly. The present study was designed to identify intracellular molecules that
are responsible for the pathogenesis and the imbalance of cytokines in atopic
dermatitis. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed that in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells without any stimulation the levels of mRNA for GATA-3 and
SOCS-3 were elevated, the levels of mRNA for Txk were depressed and the levels of
mRNA for T-bet and SOCS-5 were comparable in patients with atopic dermatitis as
compared with healthy controls. In addition, successful therapy normalized levels
of mRNA for GATA-3 and Txk, although those for the others including IL-4, IL-5,
IL-10, IL-13 and IFN-gamma did not change. Levels of Txk mRNA correlated with
those of IFN-gamma, while the mRNA levels of the other regulators did not
correlate with those of any of the cytokines. These results suggest GATA-3 and
Txk might be involved in skin lesions, while SOCS-3 might be associated with an
imbalance of cytokines that is difficult to normalize in atopic dermatitis.

PMCID: PMC1808976
PMID: 15008986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Gastroenterology. 2004 Mar;126(3):674-82.

Induction and regulation of Smad7 in the gastric mucosa of patients with
Helicobacter pylori infection.

Monteleone G(1), Del Vecchio Blanco G, Palmieri G, Vavassori P, Monteleone I,
Colantoni A, Battista S, Spagnoli LG, Romano M, Borrelli M, MacDonald TT, Pallone
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Center for Excellence for Genomic Risk
Assessment in Multifactorial and Complex Diseases, University Tor Vergata, Rome, 
Italy. Gi.Monteleone@Med.uniroma2.it

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Helicobacter pylori (Hp) infection causes a chronic gastric
inflammation, which can lead to peptic ulceration and cancer. The inflammatory
response is multifactorial and is characterized by exaggerated Th1 cytokine
production. How the Th1 response is induced and maintained in the stomach of
Hp-infected patients remains unclear. Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta 1
negatively regulates Th1 cell development, and TGF-beta 1-deficient mice
spontaneously develop gastritis. Here, we examined TGF-beta 1 signaling in
Hp-associated gastritis.
METHODS: Gastric biopsy specimens taken from patients with or without Hp
infection were analyzed for the content of activated TGF-beta1 by ELISA and Smad3
and 7 expression by Western blotting. Induction of Smad7 by interferon
(IFN)-gamma was examined in normal gastric mucosal biopsy specimens, whereas the 
effect of Smad7 inhibition on the ongoing Th1 response was analyzed in
Hp-colonized biopsy specimens.
RESULTS: Activated TGF-beta 1 was abundant in the mucosa of controls and
Hp-infected patients, with no significant difference between the 2 groups.
Despite this, in whole biopsy specimens and isolated mucosal cells from
Hp-infected patients, there was defective TGF-beta 1-associated Smad3
phosphorylation, which was associated with high expression of the inhibitor
Smad7. Blocking Smad7 with antisense oligonucleotides restored TGF-beta 1
signaling in biopsy specimens from Hp-infected patients and concomitantly reduced
interferon-gamma and T-bet. Smad7 was inducible in normal gastric biopsy
specimens by interferon-gamma through a STAT1-dependent mechanism, and
neutralization of interferon-gamma in biopsy specimens from Hp-infected patients 
reduced Smad7 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that, in Hp-infected gastric mucosa,
interferon-gamma induces the expression of Smad7, which then prevents endogenous 
TGF-beta 1 from down-regulating the ongoing tissue-damaging Th1 response.

PMID: 14988821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cancer Res. 2004 Feb 1;64(3):1152-6.

Potent antitumor activity of interleukin-27.

Hisada M(1), Kamiya S, Fujita K, Belladonna ML, Aoki T, Koyanagi Y, Mizuguchi J, 
Yoshimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Intractable Immune System Disease Research Center and Department of
Immunology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

Although much promising data that interleukin (IL)-12 could be a powerful
therapeutic agent against cancer were reported in animal models, its excessive
toxicity has become a problem for its clinical application. IL-27 is a novel
IL-12 family member that plays a role in the early regulation of T helper cell 1 
initiation, including induction of T-bet and IL-12 receptor beta 2 expression. In
the present study, we have evaluated the antitumor activity of IL-27 against a
murine tumor model of colon carcinoma C26. C26 cells, which were transduced with 
the single-chain IL-27 cDNA and became secreting IL-27 (C26-IL-27), exhibited
minimal tumor growth in vivo, and all of the mice inoculated with these cells
survived healthily with complete tumor remission. Inoculation of mice with
C26-IL-27 induced enhanced IFN-gamma production and cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
activity against C26 tumor in spleen cells. Recovered mice from the inoculation
showed a tumor-specific protective immunity to the following challenge with
parental C26 tumor. The antitumor activity of IL-27 was almost diminished in nude
mice, and depletion of CD8(+) T cells and neutralization of IFN-gamma in
immunocompetent mice reduced greatly the antitumor activity. Moreover, the
antitumor activity was abolished in T-bet-deficient mice, whereas it was observed
unexpectedly in mice deficient of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 4. These results suggest that IL-27 has potent abilities to 
induce tumor-specific antitumor activity and protective immunity and that the
antitumor activity is mediated mainly through CD8(+) T cells, IFN-gamma, and
T-bet but not through STAT4.

PMID: 14871851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cancer Res. 2004 Jan 15;64(2):452-5.

T-bet regulates metastasis rate in a murine model of primary prostate cancer.

Peng SL(1), Townsend MJ, Hecht JL, White IA, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The local progression of primary tumors is extrinsically controlled by type 1
immune responses, particularly via the cytokine IFN-gamma, whose secretion is
highly dependent on helper T cells. The T-box transcription factor T-bet (Tbx21) 
plays a critical role in the development of type 1 helper T cells and is
essential for the production of IFN-gamma. Here, the T-bet pathway in the
autochthonous transgenic adenocarcinoma mouse prostate model is demonstrated to
have only a modest effect on the characteristics of primary prostate cancers but 
rather exerts a significant suppressor function in the development of metastatic 
disease.

PMID: 14744755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Neuroimmunol. 2004 Feb;147(1-2):78-81.

Chronic morphine treatment differentiates T helper cells to Th2 effector cells by
modulating transcription factors GATA 3 and T-bet.

Roy S(1), Wang J, Gupta S, Charboneau R, Loh HH, Barke RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. royxx002@umn.edu

Chronic morphine treatment in animal models has been shown to alter a number of
immune parameters including suppression of cellular immunity. T helper cell
differentiation into Th2 effector cell may be a major contributing factor to
impaired cellular immunity following chronic drug abuse. We had previously shown 
that chronic morphine treatment in vivo and in vitro decreases IL-2 and IFNgamma 
(Th1) protein levels and increases IL-4 and IL-5 (Th2) protein levels in a
time-dependent manner. In addition in this paper, we show that chronic morphine
treatment resulted in a decrease in IFNgamma and IL-2 mRNA and an increase in
IL-4 and IL-5 mRNA accumulation in murine splenocytes. Furthermore, chronic
morphine treatment inhibited IFNgamma promoter activity and increased IL-4
promoter activity in respective promoter transfected primary T cells. In
addition, we also demonstrate that chronic morphine treatment resulted in an
increase in GATA 3 binding to DNA consensus elements in electromobility shift
assays and an increase in GATA 3 protein and mRNA levels. In contrast, chronic
morphine treatment resulted in a decrease in T-bet mRNA levels. From these data, 
we conclude that chronic morphine treatment differentiates T helper cell to Th2
effector cells by modulating key master switches that results in committing T
helper cell to a Th2 phenotype.

PMID: 14741432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 15;172(2):1273-86.

Potential targets of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitor
for multiple sclerosis therapy.

Nath N(1), Giri S, Prasad R, Singh AK, Singh I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of South Carolina, Ralph H.
Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 96 Jonathan Lucas Street, Charleston, SC
29425.

The 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors or
statins are newly identified immunomodulators. In vivo treatment of SJL/J mice
with lovastatin reduced the duration and clinical severity of active and passive 
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model for multiple
sclerosis. Lovastatin induced the expression of GATA3 and the phosphorylation of 
STAT6, whereas it inhibited tyrosine phosphorylation of Janus kinase 2, tyrosine 
kinase 2, and STAT4. Inhibition of the Janus kinase-STAT4 pathway by lovastatin
modulated T0 to Th1 differentiation and reduced cytokine (IFN-gamma and
TNF-alpha) production, thus inducing Th2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10). It
inhibited T-bet (T box transcription factor) and NF-kappaB in activated T cells
and significantly reduced infiltration of CD4- and MHC class II-positive cells to
CNS. Further, it stabilized IL-4 production and GATA-3 expression in
differentiated Th2 cells, whereas in differentiated Th1 cells it inhibited the
expression of T-bet and reduced the production of IFN-gamma. Moreover,
lovastatin-exposed macrophage and BV2 (microglia) in allogeneic MLRs induced the 
production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. These observations indicate
that the anti-inflammatory effects of lovastatin are mediated via T cells as well
as APCs, because it modulates the polarization patterns of naive T cell
activation in an APC-independent system. Together, these findings reveal that
lovastatin may have possible therapeutic value involving new targets (in both
APCs and T cells) for the treatment of multiple sclerosis and other inflammatory 
diseases.

PMID: 14707106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 1;172(1):457-63.

STAT1 plays a critical role in the regulation of antimicrobial effector
mechanisms, but not in the development of Th1-type responses during
toxoplasmosis.

Lieberman LA(1), Banica M, Reiner SL, Hunter CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The production of IFN-gamma by T cells and the ability of this cytokine to
activate the transcription factor STAT1 are implicated in the activation of
antimicrobial mechanisms required for resistance to intracellular pathogens. In
addition, recent studies have suggested that the ability of STAT1 to inhibit the 
activation of STAT4 prevents the development of Th1 responses. However, other
studies suggest that STAT1 is required to enhance the expression of T-bet, a
transcription factor that promotes Th1 responses. To address the role of STAT1 in
resistance to T. gondii, Stat1-/- mice were infected with this pathogen, and
their response to infection was assessed. Although Stat1-/- mice produced normal 
serum levels of IL-12 and IFN-gamma, these mice were unable to control parasite
replication and rapidly succumbed to this infection. Susceptibility to
toxoplasmosis was associated with an inability to up-regulate MHC expression on
macrophages, defects in NO production, and the inability to up-regulate some of
the IFN-inducible GTPase family of proteins, molecules associated with
antitoxoplasma activity. Analysis of T cell responses revealed that STAT1 was not
required for the development of a Th1 response, but was required for the
infection-induced up-regulation of T-bet. Together these studies suggest that
during toxoplasmosis the major role of STAT1 is not in the development of
protective T cell responses, but, rather, STAT1 is important in the development
of antimicrobial effector mechanisms.

PMID: 14688355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Nov;1005:187-91.

Absence of the T-bet gene coding for the Th1-related transcription factor does
not affect diabetes-associated phenotypes in Balb/c mice.

Melanitou E(1), Liu E, Miao D, Yu L, Glimcher LH, Eisenbarth G.

Author information: 
(1)Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado Health
Science Center, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA. eviemel@pasteur.fr

The T-box expressed in T cells gene (T-bet) is a member of the T-box family of
transcription factors. T-bet-deficient mice show normal lymphoid development, but
exhibit profound defects in their Th1-mediated immune responses. As the balance
between Th1- and Th2-mediated immune responses plays a role in autoimmune-prone
diseases, we have investigated the diabetes-related insulin autoantibody (IAA)
and cellular immune responses (insulitis), in the absence of Th1 lineage
commitment, in T-bet KO Balb/c mice, after immunization with the B9-23 insulin
peptide. We have therefore investigated whether absence of the T-bet gene
influences diabetes-related phenotypes in Balb/c T-bet KO mice.

PMID: 14679057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Dec 23;100(26):15818-23. Epub 2003 Dec 12.

Antigen-driven effector CD8 T cell function regulated by T-bet.

Sullivan BM(1), Juedes A, Szabo SJ, von Herrath M, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Type 1 immunity relies on the differentiation of two major subsets of T
lymphocytes, the CD4+ T helper (Th) cell and the CD8+ cytotoxic T cell, that
direct inflammatory and cytotoxic responses essential for the destruction of
intracellular and extracellular pathogens. In contrast to CD4 cells, little is
known about transcription factors that control the transition from the CD8 naïve 
to effector cell stage. Here, we report that the transcription factor T-bet,
known to regulate Th cell differentiation, also controls the generation of the
CD8+ cytotoxic effector cell. Antigen-driven generation of effector CD8+ cells
was impaired in OT-I T cell receptor transgenic mice lacking T-bet, resulting in 
diminished cytotoxicity and a marked shift in cytokine secretion profiles.
Furthermore, mice lacking T-bet responded poorly to infection with lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus. T-bet is a key player in the generation of type 1
immunity, in both Th and T cytotoxic cells.

PMCID: PMC307651
PMID: 14673093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Am J Clin Pathol. 2003 Dec;120(6):866-73.

Differential expression of T-bet, a T-box transcription factor required for Th1
T-cell development, in peripheral T-cell lymphomas.

Dorfman DM(1), van den Elzen P, Weng AP, Shahsafaei A, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

We studied T-bet expression in 91 cases of peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) by
immunostaining and found expression in 42 cases (46%), including all 5
lymphoepithelioid lymphoma cases and 12 (86%) of 14 angioimmunoblastic lymphoma
cases, but only 9 (25%) of 36 anaplastic large cell lymphoma cases. Expression of
T-bet in PTCL correlates with expression of other markers of Th1 T-cell
differentiation, including CXCR3 (P < .0001), CD69 (P = .0013), LEF-1 (P =
.0007), and OX40/CD134 (P = .005), and absence of expression of markers of Th2
T-cell differentiation, including CD30 (P = .0001) and CXCR4 (P = .0144). Of 22
cases of PTCL immunoreactive for all Th1-associated markers previously studied
and nonreactive for Th2-associated markers, 20 (91%) were immunoreactive for
T-bet. Of 22 PTCL cases immunoreactive for Th2-associated markers studied and
nonreactive for all Th1-associated markers studied, 4 (18%) were immunoreactive
for T-bet. The remaining 47 PTCL cases (52%) exhibited incomplete or mixed
staining for Th1- and Th2-associated markers, with 18 (38%) of 47 immunoreactive 
for T-bet. T-bet is a new marker that may contribute to the diagnosis and
subtyping of PTCLs. T-bet expression in these neoplasms provides further support 
for a model of PTCL in which tumor subsets express markers of, and may be derived
from, Th1- or Th2-committed T cells.

PMID: 14671975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003 Dec;112(6):1171-7.

In vitro allergen-induced mRNA expression of signaling lymphocytic activation
molecule by PBMC of patients with allergic rhinitis is increased during specific 
pollen immunotherapy.

Laaksonen K(1), Junikka M, Lahesmaa R, Terho EO, Savolainen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Disease and Clinical Allergology, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Specific immunotherapy (SIT) acts by inducing a shift from T(H)2 to
T(H)1 cell response on mucous membranes, reducing allergic inflammation. New
genes expressed primarily in T(H)1-type cells have been found. Of these genes,
signaling lymphocytic activation molecule (SLAM) promotes T-cell proliferation
and IFN-gamma production. Nothing is known about its role in T(H)2-T(H)1 switch
during SIT.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to analyze the mRNA expression of SLAM and other
T(H)1-associated genes, interleukin-12 receptor beta2 (IL-12Rbeta2) and T-box
expressed in T cells (T-bet), and compare them with the clinical outcome of the
therapy.
METHODS: PBMC from 30 patients allergic to pollen undergoing SIT were collected
during the therapy. Control PBMC were collected from 10 patients with allergic
rhinitis not participating in SIT and from 10 nonallergic subjects. Cells were
stimulated in vitro with pollen allergen extracts. SLAM, IL-12Rbeta2, and T-bet
mRNA expressions were studied by real-time quantitative RT-PCR technique
(Taqman). Symptom scoring and medication scoring were registered before
commencement of SIT and after 1 year of the therapy.
RESULTS: Before the treatment, in vitro allergen-induced SLAM mRNA expression in 
PBMC was significantly lower in the patients with allergic rhinitis than in the
healthy control subjects. After 1 year of the treatment, SLAM mRNA expression was
increased in the patients undergoing SIT and was associated with IFN-gamma mRNA
expression and inversely associated with the symptom improvement. At the
maintenance dose, an increase in SLAM mRNA expression was associated with the
clinical symptom improvement at 1 year. No changes were seen in IL-12Rbeta(2) or 
T-bet mRNA expressions.
CONCLUSIONS: SLAM mRNA expression in PBMC is modulated during the course of SIT, 
and an early and transient increase of SLAM mRNA expression is associated with
clinical symptom improvement.

PMID: 14657878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Hepatology. 2003 Dec;38(6):1573-80.

A key pathogenic role for the STAT1/T-bet signaling pathway in T-cell-mediated
liver inflammation.

Siebler J(1), Wirtz S, Klein S, Protschka M, Blessing M, Galle PR, Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Labor für Klinische Immunologie I, I Medizinische Klinik, Johannes Gutenberg
Universität, Mainz, Germany.

TH1 cytokines have been suggested to contribute to the pathogenesis of
T-cell-mediated liver injury and inflammation. However, the molecular signaling
pathways involved in such injury are still poorly understood. In the present
study, we investigated the role of the STAT1/T-bet signaling pathway in a murine 
model of T-cell-mediated liver inflammation induced by the application of
concanavalin A (Con A) using newly created STAT1 transgenic mice as well as
STAT1- and T-bet-deficient mice. Liver injury induced by Con A was associated
with an increase of both pSTAT1 and T-bet levels in the liver. Furthermore,
functional studies suggested a pathogenic role for STAT1 in Con A-induced liver
injury, because transgenic mice overexpressing STAT1 under the control of the CD2
promoter/enhancer construct showed elevated interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) and
IRF-1 levels as well as significantly augmented liver injury following
administration of Con A. Consistently, we observed that both STAT1-deficient and 
T-bet-deficient mice were protected from such T-cell-dependent liver injury. In
conclusion, these findings suggest a key pathogenic role for the STAT1/T-bet
signaling pathway for T-cell activation in the Con A model of T-cell-mediated
liver pathology.

PMID: 14647068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Immunol. 2003 Nov 15;171(10):5328-36.

Identification of novel genes regulated by IL-12, IL-4, or TGF-beta during the
early polarization of CD4+ lymphocytes.

Lund R(1), Aittokallio T, Nevalainen O, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, Turku University and Abo Akademi, Turku,
Finland. riikka.lund@btk.utu.fi

Th1 and Th2 cells arise from a common precursor cell in response to triggering
through the TCR and cytokine receptors for IL-12 or IL-4. This leads to
activation of complex signaling pathways, which are not known in detail.
Disturbances in the balance between type 1 and type 2 responses can lead to
certain immune-mediated diseases. Thus, it is important to understand how Th1 and
Th2 cells are generated. To clarify the mechanisms as to how IL-12 and IL-4
induce Th1 and Th2 differentiation and how TGF-beta can inhibit this process, we 
have used oligonucleotide arrays to examine the early polarization of Th1 and Th2
cells in the presence and absence of TGF-beta. In addition to genes previously
implicated in the process, we have identified 20 genes with various known and
unknown functions not previously associated with Th1/2 polarization. We have also
further determined which genes are targets of IL-12, IL-4, and TGF-beta
regulation in the cells induced to polarize to Th1 and Th2 directions.
Interestingly, a subset of the genes was coregulated by IL-12 or IL-4 and
TGF-beta. Among these genes are candidates that may modulate the balance between 
Th1 and Th2 responses.

PMID: 14607935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Science. 2003 Nov 7;302(5647):1041-3.

Control of effector CD8+ T cell function by the transcription factor
Eomesodermin.

Pearce EL(1), Mullen AC, Martins GA, Krawczyk CM, Hutchins AS, Zediak VP, Banica 
M, DiCioccio CB, Gross DA, Mao CA, Shen H, Cereb N, Yang SY, Lindsten T, Rossant 
J, Hunter CA, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, and Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2003 Nov 7;302(5647):993-4.

Activated CD8+ T cells play a critical role in host defense against viruses,
intracellular microbes, and tumors. It is not clear if a key regulatory
transcription factor unites the effector functions of CD8+ T cells. We now show
that Eomesodermin (Eomes), a paralogue of T-bet, is induced in effector CD8+ T
cells in vitro and in vivo. Ectopic expression of Eomes was sufficient to invoke 
attributes of effector CD8+ T cells, including interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma),
perforin, and granzyme B. Loss-of-function analysis suggests Eomes may also be
necessary for full effector differentiation of CD8+ T cells. We suggest that
Eomesodermin is likely to complement the actions of T-bet and act as a key
regulatory gene in the development of cell-mediated immunity.

PMID: 14605368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Science. 2003 Nov 7;302(5647):993-4.

Immunology. T-bet or not T-bet.

Hatton RD(1), Weaver CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 2003 Nov 7;302(5647):1041-3.

PMID: 14605354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nat Immunol. 2003 Nov;4(11):1041; author reply 1041.

The role of T-bet in B cells.

Peng SL, Li J, Lin L, Gerth A.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2003 Jul;4(7):687-93.

PMID: 14586416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2003 Oct;5(5):537-48.

Role of redox imbalance in the molecular mechanisms responsible for
immunosenescence.

Daynes RA(1), Enioutina EY, Jones DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, UT 84132-2501, USA. daynes.office@path.utah.edu

The elderly suffer impairments to their immune system, evidenced by higher
susceptibility to infections, cancer, and many diseases believed to be autoimmune
in nature. A dysregulated overexpression of many proinflammatory cytokines also
occurs with aging, as does the synthesis of enzymes that control expression of
inflammatory lipid mediators and reactive oxygen species. An inappropriate
activation of redox-controlled transcription factors, like nuclear factor-kappaB,
occurs in many tissues from aged donors, and has been linked to excesses in
cellular oxidative stress. Recently, the peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-alpha (PPARalpha) has been evaluated for its effects on inflammatory and
adaptive immune processes. PPARalpha provides redox-balancing influences on
various lymphoid cell types and their inducible responses. We recently discovered
that PPARalpha transiently suppresses the transcription of gamma-interferon
(IFNgamma) by inhibiting the induction of T-bet. We now report that PPARalpha
expression in CD4+ T cells is affected by the aging process. Lower PPARalpha
levels are present in aged CD4+ T cells, and appear responsible for the
suppressed interleukin-2 and exaggerated IFNgamma responses by these cells.
Restoration of PPARalpha, T-bet, interleukin-2, and IFNgamma responses was found 
in T cells from aged animals supplemented with vitamin E, suggesting that
interventions that focus on restoring redox balance might benefit the ailing aged
immune system.

PMID: 14580308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2003 Sep;23(9):513-22.

IL-27 and IFN-alpha signal via Stat1 and Stat3 and induce T-Bet and IL-12Rbeta2
in naive T cells.

Hibbert L(1), Pflanz S, De Waal Malefyt R, Kastelein RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Discovery Biology, DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA 94304,
USA.

Interleukin-27 (IL-27) supports proliferation of naive CD4(+) T cells and
enhances interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) production by activated T cells and natural
killer (NK) cells. We report here that IL-27 induces Stat1 and Stat3
phosphorylation and activation in human and murine cell lines and primary human T
cells. IL-27 also induces T-Bet, a Stat1-dependent gene crucial to Th1 cell
commitment. Similarly, IFN-alpha activates Stat1 and Stat3 and T-Bet expression
in naive T cells. Induction of T-Bet results in upregulation of IL-12Rbeta2 on
naive T cells, which is essential for responsiveness to IL-12 and differentiation
to a Th1 phenotype. Both IL-27 and IFN-alpha induce expression of IL-12Rbeta2 in 
T cells. In contrast, IFN-gamma, which activates Stat1 but not Stat3, induces
expression of T-Bet but not IL-12Rbeta2 in naive T cells. We propose that IL-27
and IFN-alpha are important for early Th1 commitment and act upstream of IL-12
and IFN-gamma in this pathway.

PMID: 14565860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Immunity. 2003 Oct;19(4):549-59.

Delta1-Notch3 interactions bias the functional differentiation of activated CD4+ 
T cells.

Maekawa Y(1), Tsukumo S, Chiba S, Hirai H, Hayashi Y, Okada H, Kishihara K,
Yasutomo K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology & Parasitology, School of Medicine, The University of
Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Following activation by antigen, naive CD4+ T helper precursor cells execute
distinct genetic programs that result in their differentiation toward the type 1 
or type 2 helper T cell (Th1 or Th2) phenotype. Although the differentiation and 
function of these Th subsets has been well studied, little is known about the
contribution to these differentiation events of cell surface receptors other than
those for soluble cytokines, such as IL-12 or IL-4. Here, we provide direct
evidence that the Delta1 interaction with Notch3 on CD4+ T cells transduces
signals, promoting development toward the Th1 phenotype. The positive role of
Notch signaling in effector cell differentiation was dose dependent, with high
levels of stimulation resulting in reduced T cell activation. Our data revealed a
clear contribution of Notch pathways to Th1 versus Th2 fate decisions, while also
providing insight into another mechanism for inhibition of CD4+ T cell
activation.

PMID: 14563319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2003 Nov 15;96(1-2):83-91.

Recurrent airway obstruction (RAO) in horses is characterized by IFN-gamma and
IL-8 production in bronchoalveolar lavage cells.

Ainsworth DM(1), Grünig G, Matychak MB, Young J, Wagner B, Erb HN, Antczak DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY, USA. dma2@cornell.edu

In horses prone to developing recurrent airway obstruction (RAO), we tested the
hypotheses that the cytokine profile in the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells of
affected horses would reflect a polarized Th-2 response; that cytokine and
chemokine alterations would occur within 24 h of allergen exposure; and that
allergen exposure would induce alterations in the expression of the transcription
factor t-bet (t-box-expressed in T-cells). The expression levels of interleukin-4
(IL-4), IL-13, Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), t-bet, IL-8 and
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) were measured in BAL
cells obtained from control and RAO-susceptible horses during an asymptomatic
phase and at 24 h and 5 weeks post-stabling and hay exposure. At each sampling
time, BAL neutrophil percentages in the RAO-group exceeded controls. In the
RAO-group, only IL-13 expression was decreased 2-fold during the asymptomatic
phase. No differences in cytokine or chemokine expression were detected during
the acute exposure phase. During the chronic phase, IFN-gamma and IL-8 expression
levels were 2.5- and 3-fold greater, respectively, in the RAO-group. No other
differences in gene expression were detected. We conclude that the cytokine
profile of the airway cells does not reflect a polarized Th-2 response; that
increases in IFN-gamma result from a t-bet independent pathway and that
chemokines from epithelial or interstitial cells may contribute to early
neutrophil influx.

PMID: 14522137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Br J Ophthalmol. 2003 Oct;87(10):1264-7.

T-bet expression is upregulated in active Behçet's disease.

Li B(1), Yang P, Zhou H, Zhang Z, Xie C, Lin X, Huang X, Kijlstra A.

Author information: 
(1)Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, 54 Xianlie Road,
Guangzhou 510060, P R China.

Comment in
    Br J Ophthalmol. 2003 Oct;87(10):1199-200.

AIM: To investigate T-bet mRNA and protein expression on peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) in patients with Behçet's disease with active uveitis.
METHODS: Blood samples were taken from 24 patients with Behçet's disease who had 
active uveitis and 16 healthy individuals. PBMC were subjected to analysis of
T-bet mRNA and protein expression using semiquantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blot, respectively. 
The products from PCR were sequenced. In order to determine the influence of
activation on T-bet expression, the phytohaemagglutinin (PHA) stimulated PBMC
from each sample were also evaluated for expression of T-bet mRNA and protein.
RESULTS: A significantly increased T-bet mRNA accumulation was detected in the
samples from patients with active Behçet's disease compared with that in
controls. A 62 kDa band was detectable in patients with active Behçet's disease, 
but not in controls. No difference was found between patients with Behçet's
disease who had active uveitis and normal controls concerning the expression of
either T-bet mRNA or its protein after stimulation with PHA for 72 hours.
CONCLUSION: Behçet's disease is associated with an upregulation of T-bet
expression, which supports a role for the Th1 subset of T cells in the
pathogenesis of this disease.

PMCID: PMC1920767
PMID: 14507763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Br J Ophthalmol. 2003 Oct;87(10):1199-200.

Molecular mechanisms in Behçet's disease.

Rajendram R, Rao NA.

Comment on
    Br J Ophthalmol. 2003 Oct;87(10):1264-7.

PMCID: PMC1920789
PMID: 14507744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Immunol. 2003 Oct 1;171(7):3542-9.

Genetic reprogramming of primary human T cells reveals functional plasticity in
Th cell differentiation.

Sundrud MS(1), Grill SM, Ni D, Nagata K, Alkan SS, Subramaniam A, Unutmaz D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical
School, Nashville, TN 37232-2363, USA.

Activation of naive T cells through the TCR and cytokine signals directs their
differentiation into effector or memory subsets with different cytokine profiles.
Here, we tested the flexibility of human Th1 or Th2 differentiation by forced
expression of transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3. Ectopic expression of T-bet
and GATA-3 in freshly isolated human T(N) cells resulted in their differentiation
to a Th1 and Th2 phenotype, respectively, in the absence of polarizing cytokines.
Introduction of GATA-3 into lineage-committed Th1 cells induced the expression of
Th2-specific cytokines (IL-4 and IL-5) and chemotactic receptors (CCR4,
chemoattractant receptor-homologous molecule expressed on Th2 cells (CRTH2).
However, these cells partially maintained their Th1-specific profile (IFN-gamma
and IL-12Rbeta2 expression). Conversely, expression of T-bet in lineage-committed
Th2 cells caused a more profound switch to the Th1 phenotype, including the
up-regulation of CXCR3 and down-regulation of CCR4 and CRTH2. Interestingly,
similar to the naive T cell subset, central memory T cells were also largely
programmed toward Th1 or Th2 effector cells upon expression of T-bet and GATA-3, 
respectively. However, expression of these transcription factors in effector
memory T cells was much less influential on cytokine and chemokine receptor
expression profiles. Our results reveal remarkable plasticity in the
differentiation programs of human memory T cells. This flexibility is
progressively diminished as cells mature from naive to effector T cells. These
findings have important implications in understanding the molecular mechanisms of
human T cell differentiation and for devising novel therapeutic strategies aimed 
at immunomodulation of skewed effector T cell responses.

PMID: 14500650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Int Immunol. 2003 Oct;15(10):1149-60.

Identification of cooperative monomeric Brachyury sites conferring T-bet
responsiveness to the proximal IFN-gamma promoter.

Cho JY(1), Grigura V, Murphy TL, Murphy K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The T-box transcription factor T-bet has been reported to augment the activity of
IFN-gamma reporter constructs and to be required for CD4(+), but not CD8(+), T
cell production for IFN-gamma. Despite these observations, the precise sequence
targets of T-bet within the IFN-gamma locus have not been identified and the
nature of T-bet's role in selectively augmenting IFN-gamma production in CD4(+) T
cells has not been elucidated. As an initial step in this process, we examined
the basis of T-bet-dependent augmentation of IFN-gamma reporter constructs to
identify specific targets of this factor within the IFN-gamma locus. Deletion of 
previously proposed TDB and TRU elements left T-bet-induced IFN-gamma reporter
activity unchanged, suggesting the existence of additional T-bet-responsive
elements. We identified several additional monomeric Brachyury consensus elements
within the proximal IFN-gamma promoter that operate cooperatively to increase
both constitutive and stimulated promoter activity. The most proximal of these
Brachyury elements is most significant quantitatively in mediating
T-bet-dependent promoter augmentation. Mutation of this with any of the other
Brachyury elements leads to a near eradication of T-bet-dependent promoter
activation. The identification of these individual monomeric Brachyury-binding
sites within the IFN-gamma locus should facilitate the in vivo analysis of the
function of T-bet in the lineage- and background-dependent requirement for T-bet 
in IFN-gamma gene regulation.

PMID: 13679385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Leukoc Biol. 2003 Nov;74(5):952-8. Epub 2003 Jul 22.

Different antigens trigger different Th1/Th2 reactions in neonatal mononuclear
cells (MNCs) relating to T-bet/GATA-3 expression.

Yu HR(1), Chang JC, Chen RF, Chuang H, Hong KC, Wang L, Yang KD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology & Allergy, Chang Gung Children's Hospital,
Chang Gung University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.

Neonates are known to have poor cellular immunity, especially poor Th1 response. 
We investigated how neonatal mononuclear cells raised different Th1/Th2 reactions
in response to different antigens. Employing Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (Der 
p) extract and varicella zoster virus (VZV) as antigens, we assessed Th1/Th2
reactions as demonstrated by IL-4/IFNgamma production and mRNA expression, and
transcriptional factors T-bet/GATA-3 mRNA expression in mononuclear cells from
human umbilical cord blood (CBMC). Results showed that VZV induced a dramatic
increase of IFNgamma production by adult peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC), whereas VZV did not drive CBMC to release significant IFNgamma production
(1614.7+/-362.0 vs. 49.0+/-29.3,p<0.005). However, Der p induced higher IFNgamma 
production by CBMC than VZV (298.1+/-171.8 vs. 49.0+/-29.3, P=0.047). In
contrast, VZV did not induce significant IL-4 production either by CBMC or by
PBMC. Der p induced a comparative IL-4 production by CBMC and PBMC (2.58+/-0.84
vs. 2.04+/-0.37, p>0.05). A real-time RT-PCR analysis of IL-4 and IFNgamma mRNA
expression showed that VZV induced a significantly higher IFNgamma, but not IL-4,
mRNA expression in PBMC than CBMC. Der p did not induce significant difference of
IFNgamma or IL-4 mRNA expression in PBMC and CBMC. VZV enhanced Th1-related
transcription factor T-bet mRNA expression, in association with later
down-regulation of Th2-related GATA-3 mRNA expression in PBMC. However, VZV did
not up-regulate T-bet or down-regulate GATA-3 expression significantly in CBMC.
In contrast, Der p induced an early GATA-3 expression and later T-bet expression 
in CBMC. These results suggest that different antigens trigger various Th1/Th2
reactions in PBMC and CBMC resulting from kinetic changes of T-bet/GATA-3
expression.

PMID: 12960249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Immunol Methods. 2003 Jul;278(1-2):157-69.

T-bet/GATA-3 ratio as a measure of the Th1/Th2 cytokine profile in mixed cell
populations: predominant role of GATA-3.

Chakir H(1), Wang H, Lefebvre DE, Webb J, Scott FW.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

The differentiation of naive T-helper (Th) cells towards Th1 or Th2 cells is
regulated by the transcription factors T-box expressed in T-cells (T-bet) and
GATA-binding protein-3 (GATA-3). In the present study, the gene expression of
T-bet and GATA-3 was measured by semi-quantitive reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) in Th1 and Th2 cells derived from purified splenic CD4+ T
cells from DO11.10/Rag2(-/-) transgenic mice and control BioBreeding (BBc) Wistar
rat splenic T cells stimulated under Th1 or Th2 conditions. In both sets of
experiments, changes in the ratio of expression of T-bet and GATA-3 reflected
changes in the Th1-specific cytokine interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and
Th2-specific cytokine interleukin (IL)-4. T-bet gene expression was not
maintained in fully polarized rat Th1 cells whereas GATA-3 gene expression was
maintained in long-term polarized rat Th2 cells, indicating that maintenance of
Th1/Th2 status occurred more as a result of altered GATA-3 mRNA expression than
T-bet. These transcription factors are up-regulated in several cells that produce
type 1 and type 2 cytokines and can be analyzed readily by RT-PCR using total RNA
isolated from mixed cell populations or cultured splenocytes thereby providing a 
surrogate marker of Th1/Th2 cytokine balance under a variety of conditions.

PMID: 12957404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Hum Mutat. 2003 Sep;22(3):257.

Association analysis of novel TBX21 variants with asthma phenotypes.

Chung HT(1), Kim LH, Park BL, Lee JH, Park HS, Choi BW, Hong SJ, Chae SC, Kim JJ,
Park CS, Shin HD.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Research Center for Immune Disorders, Wonkwang University School of
Medicine, Iksan, Chonbuk 570-749, Korea.

Human TBX21 expressed in T Cells (T-BOX21) is a Th1-specific T-box transcription 
factor that controls the expression of the hallmark Th1 cytokine, IFNG. As a
potent candidate gene for asthma genetic study, we have sequenced the full gene
of human TBX21, including the -1,500bp promoter region to identify its gene
polymorphisms. Twenty-three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
identified; one in promoter region (c.-1514T>C), one in 5'UTR (c.-138C>A), two in
exon 1 (c.99C>G (p.His33Gln), c.390A>G), sixteen in introns (c.492+806T>C,
c.492+1170C>A, c.492+1514G>A, c.492+1907A>C, c.492+2116G>A, c.492+2516A>G,
c.492+2953C>T, c.492+4207A>T, c.492+4211A>T, c.492+4985T>A, c.492+4207G>A,
c.492+5533C>T, c.492+7889T>A, c.492+8270G>C, c.768+417T>C and c.989+183C>T), one 
in exon 4 (c.831C>T), one in exon 6 (c.1455G>A), and one in 3'UTR (c.2103A>C).
Among twenty-three identified variants, seven were selected for larger scale
genotyping (n=721) for asthma association study based on frequencies and
location. Haplotypes, their frequencies and linkage disequilibrium coefficients
(mid R:D'mid R:) between SNP pairs were estimated. The associations with risk of 
asthma, skin-test reactivity and total serum IgE levels were analyzed. Using
statistical analyses for association of TBX21 polymorphisms with these three
asthma phenotypes, no significant signals were detected. In conclusion, we
identified twenty-three genetic polymorphisms in the important TBX21 gene, but no
significant associations of TBX21 variants with asthma phenotypes were detected. 
TBX21 variation/haplotype information identified in this study will provide
valuable information for future association studies of other immunological
diseases.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12938094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Immunol. 2003 Aug 15;171(4):1816-24.

T cell-intrinsic requirement for NF-kappa B induction in postdifferentiation
IFN-gamma production and clonal expansion in a Th1 response.

Corn RA(1), Aronica MA, Zhang F, Tong Y, Stanley SA, Kim SR, Stephenson L,
Enerson B, McCarthy S, Mora A, Boothby M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical
School, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

NF-kappaB/Rel transcription factors are linked to innate immune responses and APC
activation. Whether and how the induction of NF-kappaB signaling in normal CD4(+)
T cells regulates effector function are not well-understood. The liberation of
NF-kappaB dimers from inhibitors of kappaB (IkappaBs) constitutes a central
checkpoint for physiologic regulation of most forms of NF-kappaB. To investigate 
the role of NF-kappaB induction in effector T cell responses, we targeted
inhibition of the NF-kappaB/Rel pathway specifically to T cells. The Th1 response
in vivo is dramatically weakened when T cells defective in their NF-kappaB
induction (referred to as IkappaBalpha(DeltaN) transgenic cells) are activated by
a normal APC population. Analyses in vivo, and IL-12-supplemented T cell cultures
in vitro, reveal that the mechanism underlying this T cell-intrinsic requirement 
for NF-kappaB involves activation of the IFN-gamma gene in addition to clonal
expansion efficiency. The role of NF-kappaB in IFN-gamma gene expression includes
a modest decrease in Stat4 activation, T box expressed in T cell levels, and
differentiation efficiency along with a more prominent postdifferentiation step. 
Further, induced expression of Bcl-3, a trans-activating IkappaB-like protein, is
decreased in T cells as a consequence of NF-kappaB inhibition. Together, these
findings indicate that NF-kappaB induction in T cells regulates efficient clonal 
expansion, Th1 differentiation, and IFN-gamma production by Th1 lymphocytes at a 
control point downstream from differentiation.

PMID: 12902482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Blood. 2003 Dec 1;102(12):4084-9. Epub 2003 Jul 31.

In human B cells, IL-12 triggers a cascade of molecular events similar to Th1
commitment.

Durali D(1), de Goër de Herve MG, Giron-Michel J, Azzarone B, Delfraissy JF,
Taoufik Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM E-109, Faculté de Médecine Paris XI, 63 rue Gabriel Péri, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre Cedex, 94276 France.

Two functionally distinct subsets of B cells that produce Th1- and Th2-like
patterns of cytokines have recently been identified. Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a 
critical immunoregulatory cytokine that promotes Th1 differentiation through
activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4). IL-12
has been reported to induce interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) production in B cells,
but the relevant signaling pathways are poorly documented. Here, in human primary
B cells, we found a functional IL-12 receptor (IL-12R) that internalizes
following IL-12 binding. IFN-gamma and, to a lesser extent, IL-12 positively
regulated the IL-12Rbeta2 subunit but had no effect on IL-12Rbeta1. On examining 
the effect of IL-12 on STAT4 and T-bet (2 key factors involved in IFN-gamma
promoter activation), we found that IL-12 induced the phosphorylation and nuclear
translocation of STAT4. IL-12-dependent constitutive STAT4 activation was also
observed in the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed B-cell line RPMI 8866 that
spontaneously produces IL-12. T-bet expression has been shown to be dependent on 
STAT1. IL-12 had no direct effect on STAT1 activation or T-bet expression in
primary B cells. In contrast, IL-12-induced IFN-gamma led to STAT1 activation,
strong expression of T-bet, and IFN-gamma expression. IL-12 therefore initiates a
cascade of events in B cells, including STAT4 activation, IL-12Rbeta2
up-regulation, IFN-gamma production, and T-bet up-regulation, potentially leading
to Th1-like differentiation.

PMID: 12893768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Int Immunol. 2003 Aug;15(8):1017-25.

Retinoic acids exert direct effects on T cells to suppress Th1 development and
enhance Th2 development via retinoic acid receptors.

Iwata M(1), Eshima Y, Kagechika H.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life Sciences, 11 Minamiooya, Machida-shi,
Tokyo 194-8511, Japan. iwata@libra.Is.m-kagaku.co.jp

The vitamin A metabolite, retinoic acid (RA), affects Th1 and Th2 development.
The effect is partly exerted through the modulation of antigen-presenting cell
functions, but it remains unclear whether RA directly exerts its effect on T
cells to influence Th1/Th2 development. To clarify this problem, we used two
experimental systems with isolated T cells in vitro. In one system, isolated
CD4+CD8+ thymocytes differentiated into Th1 and Th2 by two transient stimulations
with defined combinations of ionomycin and phorbol myristate acetate followed by 
treatment with IL-2 and IL-4 and/or IL-12. In the second system, functional
differentiation was induced in purified naive CD4 T cells from DO-11.10
TCR-transgenic and RAG-2-deficient mice with cytokines and antibodies to CD3 and 
CD28. In both systems, all-trans-RA at > or = 1 nM concentrations suppressed Th1 
development, but enhanced Th2 development. 9-cis-RA elicited similar effects. The
optimal enhancement of Th2 development in the second system, however, was
achieved with a delayed addition of RA. The presence of RA during the initial
stimulation period often suppressed Th2 development. The RA receptor (RAR)
antagonists, LE540 and LE135, but not the retinoic X receptor (RXR) antagonist,
PA452, inhibited the effect of RA on Th1/Th2 development. Accordingly, the RAR
agonists, Am80 and Tp80, but not the RXR agonists, HX600 and TZ335, mimicked the 
effect of RA. The RXR agonists enhanced the effect of the RAR agonists only
slightly, if at all. These results indicate that, via RAR, RA directly suppresses
Th1 development and directly enhances Th2 development with its timely addition.

PMID: 12882839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Int Immunol. 2003 Aug;15(8):937-44.

T-bet regulates T-independent IgG2a class switching.

Gerth AJ(1), Lin L, Peng SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The IgG2a Ig subclass plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of humoral
autoimmunity and protection against pathogens. The T-box transcription factor
T-bet has been implicated as a critical mediator of class-switch recombination
(CSR) to IgG2a, but its relative importance to this process in various immune
contexts remains incompletely defined. We report here that, surprisingly, T-bet
is selectively required for IgG2a class switching in response to T-independent,
but not T-dependent, stimuli. Specifically, T-dependent signaling through CD40,
in contrast to T-independent signaling via lipopolysaccharide, can bypass a
requirement for T-bet in IgG2a germline transcription and subsequent isotype
switching. In contrast, T-bet-deficient B cells undergo class switching to other 
IgG isotypes at least as well as wild-type counterparts. Thus, T-bet is a
class-specific regulator of IgG CSR and represents a unique regulator of B cell
differentiation by participating in a T-independent, but not a T-dependent,
activation pathway. T-bet-deficient B cells therefore represent a novel paradigm 
by which to investigate the regulation of humoral immune responses.

PMID: 12882831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Nat Immunol. 2003 Jul;4(7):650-2.

T-bet: the Toll-bridge to class-switch recombination?

Rifkin IR, Marshak-Rothstein A.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2003 Jul;4(7):687-93.

PMID: 12830144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Immunol. 2003 Jul 1;171(1):196-203.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha negatively regulates T-bet
transcription through suppression of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
activation.

Jones DC(1), Ding X, Zhang TY, Daynes RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, UT 84132, USA.

Expression of the nuclear hormone receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor alpha (PPARalpha) in resting lymphocytes was recently established,
although the physiologic role(s) played by this nuclear hormone receptor in these
cell types remains unresolved. In this study, we used CD4(+) T cells isolated
from PPARalpha(-/-) and wild-type mice, as well as cell lines that constitutively
express PPARalpha, in experiments designed to evaluate the role of this hormone
receptor in the regulation of T cell function. We report that activated CD4(+) T 
cells lacking PPARalpha produce increased levels of IFN-gamma, but significantly 
lower levels of IL-2 when compared with activated wild-type CD4(+) T cells.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that PPARalpha regulates the expression of these
cytokines by CD4(+) T cells in part, through its ability to negatively regulate
the transcription of T-bet. The induction of T-bet expression in CD4(+) T cells
was determined to be positively influenced by p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinase activation, and the presence of unliganded PPARalpha effectively
suppressed the phosphorylation of p38 MAP kinase. The activation of PPARalpha
with highly specific ligands relaxed its capacity to suppress p38 MAP kinase
phosphorylation and promoted T-bet expression. These results demonstrate a novel 
DNA-binding independent and agonist-controlled regulatory influence by the
nuclear hormone receptor PPARalpha.

PMID: 12816998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jun 24;100(13):7749-54. Epub 2003 Jun 11.

T-bet is required for optimal production of IFN-gamma and antigen-specific T cell
activation by dendritic cells.

Lugo-Villarino G(1), Maldonado-Lopez R, Possemato R, Penaranda C, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115-6017, USA.

IFN-gamma is well known as the signature cytokine of CD4+ T helper 1, CD8+, and
natural killer cells, but recent studies demonstrate that antigen-presenting
cells, in particular dendritic cells (DCs), are another potent source for this
proinflammatory cytokine. T-bet, a transcription factor that controls IFN-gamma
expression in CD4+ T cells, was reported recently to be expressed in human
monocytes and myeloid DCs. In this study we investigate the role of T-bet in this
important cell type. The development, differentiation, and activation of bone
marrow and splenic DCs were unimpaired in mice lacking T-bet. However, T-bet was 
essential for the optimal production of IFN-gamma by both CD8alpha+ and CD8alpha-
DCs. T-bet-deficient DCs were significantly impaired in their capacity to secrete
IFN-gamma after both stimulation with IL-12 alone or in combination with IL-18.
Further, T-bet-/- DCs were impaired in their ability to activate the T helper 1
program of adoptively transferred antigen-specific T cells in vivo. The rapid
up-regulation of T-bet by IFN-gamma in DCs coupled with a function for DC-derived
IFN-gamma in T cell activation may constitute a positive feedback loop to
maximize type 1 immunity.

PMCID: PMC164659
PMID: 12802010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Nat Immunol. 2003 Jul;4(7):687-93. Epub 2003 May 25.

CpG directly induces T-bet expression and inhibits IgG1 and IgE switching in B
cells.

Liu N(1), Ohnishi N, Ni L, Akira S, Bacon KB.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center Kyoto, Bayer Yakuhin Ltd., 6-5-1-3 Kunimidai, Kizu-cho,
Soraku-gun, Kyoto 619-0216, Japan. ningshu.liu.nl@bayer.co.jp

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2003 Nov;4(11):1041; author reply 1041.
    Nat Immunol. 2003 Jul;4(7):650-2.

CpG DNA has immunomodulatory effects, such as the suppression of allergic
responses mediated by type II T cell help (T(H)2). Here we report that CpG, but
not lipopolysaccharide (LPS), rapidly induces expression of T-bet mRNA in
purified B cells. Up-regulation of T-bet by CpG is abrogated in mice deficient in
Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) and MyD88, but remains intact in B cells deficient in
STAT1 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 1). Interleukin 12
(IL-12) alone does not up-regulate T-bet mRNA, but greatly enhances CpG-induced
T-bet expression. Furthermore, CpG inhibits immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) and IgE
switching induced by IL-4 and CD40 signaling in purified B cells, and this effect
correlates with up-regulation of T-bet. Thus, CpG triggers anti-allergic immune
responses by directly regulating T-bet expression via a signaling pathway in B
cells that is dependent upon TLR9, independent of interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma)-STAT1 and synergistic with IL-12.

PMID: 12766768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Immunol. 2003 May 15;170(10):4886-90.

Cutting edge: role of IL-27/WSX-1 signaling for induction of T-bet through
activation of STAT1 during initial Th1 commitment.

Takeda A(1), Hamano S, Yamanaka A, Hanada T, Ishibashi T, Mak TW, Yoshimura A,
Yoshida H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, and Department of Ophthalmology, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

WSX-1 is a member of the class I cytokine receptor family with homology to IL-12R
beta 2 and is essential for the initial mounting of Th1 responses. STAT1
interacts with tyrosine-phosphorylated WSX-1, and the conserved tyrosine residue 
of the cytoplasmic domain of WSX-1 is essential for transcriptional activation of
STAT1. IL-27 stimulation induced STAT1 phosphorylation in wild-type but not in
WSX-1-deficient naive CD4(+) T cells. Although IL-27 did not directly induce
IFN-gamma production by wild-type CD4(+) T cells, IL-12-dependent IFN-gamma
production was augmented by IL-27 stimulation in wild-type naive CD4(+) T cells
but was impaired in WSX-1-deficient naive CD4(+) T cells. Additionally, IL-27
stimulation induced T-bet and IL-12R beta 2 expression in wild-type, but not in
WSX-1-deficient, CD4(+) T cells. Thus, during the initiation of Th1
differentiation, the IL-27/WSX-1 signaling system plays a pivotal role by
STAT1-mediated T-bet induction before the IL-12R system.

PMID: 12734330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Immunity. 2003 Mar;18(3):415-28.

GATA-3 suppresses Th1 development by downregulation of Stat4 and not through
effects on IL-12Rbeta2 chain or T-bet.

Usui T(1), Nishikomori R, Kitani A, Strober W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Clinical Investigation, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. wstrober@niaid.nih.gov

To further understand the interaction among GATA-3, Stat4, and T-bet in helper T 
cell development, we first showed that retroviral expression of GATA-3 in
developing Th1 cells suppresses Th1 development through downregulation of Stat4
rather through downregulation of the IL-12Rbeta2 chain. Correspondingly, Stat4
levels are greatly suppressed during physiological Th2 development. Then, using
cells doubly infected with GFP- and YFP-expressing retroviruses, we showed that
retroviral GATA-3 expression in developing Th1 cells does not block Th1
development in cells coexpressing Stat4 but does so in cells coexpressing T-bet. 
Finally, we showed that retroviral Stat4 expression could facilitate Th2-->Th1
conversion in cells bearing an IL-12Rbeta2 transgene, even in cells lacking
T-bet. These findings reassert that Stat4 signaling is a central element of
Th1/Th2 development.

PMID: 12648458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003 Mar;111(3 Suppl):S813-8.

Basic and clinical immunology.

Chinen J(1), Shearer WT.

Collaborators: Shearer WT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Progress in immunology continues to grow exponentially every year. New
applications of this knowledge are being developed for a broad range of clinical 
conditions. Conversely, the study of primary and secondary immunodeficiencies is 
helping to elucidate the intricate mechanisms of the immune system. We have
selected a few of the most significant contributions to the fields of basic and
clinical immunology published between October 2001 and October 2002. Our choice
of topics in basic immunology included the description of T-bet as a determinant 
factor for T(H)1 differentiation, the role of the activation-induced cytosine
deaminase gene in B-cell development, the characterization of CD4(+)CD25(+)
regulatory T cells, and the use of dynamic imaging to study MHC class II
transport and T-cell and dendritic cell membrane interactions. Articles related
to clinical immunology that were selected for review include the description of
immunodeficiency caused by caspase 8 deficiency; a case series report on X-linked
agammaglobulinemia; the mechanism of action, efficacy, and complications of
intravenous immunoglobulin; mechanisms of autoimmunity diseases; and advances in 
HIV pathogenesis and vaccine development. We also reviewed two articles that
explore the possible alterations of the immune system caused by spaceflights, a
new field with increasing importance as human space expeditions become a reality 
in the 21st century.

PMID: 12618748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Immunol. 2003 Jan 1;170(1):300-7.

Activated STAT4 and a functional role for IL-12 in human Peyer's patches.

Monteleone G(1), Holloway J, Salvati VM, Pender SL, Fairclough PD, Croft N,
MacDonald TT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection, Inflammation, and Repair, University of Southampton
School of Medicine, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom.

T cells in the Peyer's patches (PP) of the human ileum are exposed to a myriad of
dietary and bacterial Ags from the gut lumen. Recall proliferative responses to
common dietary Ags are readily demonstrable by PP T cells from healthy
individuals, and the cytokine response is dominated by IFN-gamma. Consistent with
Th1 skewing, PP cells spontaneously secrete IL-12p70, and IL-12p40 protein can be
visualized underneath the PP dome epithelium. In this study, we have analyzed
IL-12 signaling in PP and investigated whether IL-12 plays a functional role.
CD3+ T lymphocytes isolated from PP and adjacent ileal mucosa spontaneously
secrete IFN-gamma with negligible IL-4 or IL-5. RNA transcripts for IL-12Rbeta2, 
the signaling component of the IL-12R, are present in purified CD4+ and CD8+ T PP
lymphocytes. Active STAT4, a transcription factor essential for IL-12-mediated
Th1 differentiation, is readily detectable in biopsies from PP and ileal mucosa
and STAT4-DNA binding activity is demonstrable by EMSA. Nuclear proteins from
CD3+ T PP lymphocytes contain STAT4 and T-bet, a transcription factor selectively
expressed in Th1 cells. Stimulation of freshly isolated PP cells with
staphylococcal enterotoxin B dramatically enhanced the production of IFN-gamma,
an effect which was largely inhibited by neutralizing anti-IL-12 Ab. These data
show that IL-12 in human PP is likely to be responsible for the Th1-dominated
cytokine response of the human mucosal immune system.

PMID: 12496413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2002 Dec;6(6):619-22.

T-bet as a possible therapeutic target in autoimmune disease.

Weigmann B(1), Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, I. Medical Clinic, University of Mainz,
Langenbeckstrasse 1, 55131 Mainz, Germany. neurath@1-med.klinik.uni-mainz.de

The prominent role of pro-inflammatory cytokines produced by T helper-1 (T(H1))
cells in regulating autoimmune responses in vitro and in vivo has been
demonstrated. Recent observations of T cell polarisation by regulatory
transcription factors--especially T-bet (T-box expressed in T cells)--raise the
question of their influence in controlling autoimmune diseases. Here, the authors
summarise recent observations of the role of T-bet in controlling chronic
inflammatory and autoimmune diseases and discuss the implications of these
findings for future therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 12472375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. EMBO J. 2002 Dec 2;21(23):6321-9.

Th2 cell-specific cytokine expression and allergen-induced airway inflammation
depend on JunB.

Hartenstein B(1), Teurich S, Hess J, Schenkel J, Schorpp-Kistner M, Angel P.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum Heidelberg, Department of Signal Transduction
and Growth Control, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Naïve CD4+ T cells differentiate into effector T helper 1 (Th1) or Th2 cells,
which are classified by their specific set of cytokines. Here we demonstrate that
loss of JunB in in vitro polarized Th2 cells led to a dysregulated expression of 
the Th2-specific cytokines IL-4 and IL-5. These cells produce IFN-gamma and
express T-bet, the key regulator of Th1 cells. In line with the essential role of
Th2 cells in the pathogenesis of allergic asthma, mice with JunB-deficient CD4+ T
cells exhibited an impaired allergen-induced airway inflammation. This study
demonstrates novel functions of JunB in the development of Th2 effector cells,
for a normal Th2 cytokine expression pattern and for a complete Th2-dependent
immune response in mice.

PMCID: PMC136952
PMID: 12456639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Nat Immunol. 2003 Jan;4(1):78-86. Epub 2002 Nov 25.

Memory and flexibility of cytokine gene expression as separable properties of
human T(H)1 and T(H)2 lymphocytes.

Messi M(1), Giacchetto I, Nagata K, Lanzavecchia A, Natoli G, Sallusto F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Via Vincenzo Vela 6, CH-6500
Bellinzona, Switzerland.

CD4+ T cell priming under T helper type I (T(H)1) or T(H)2 conditions gives rise 
to polarized cytokine gene expression. We found that in these conditions human
naive T cells acquired stable histone hyperacetylation at either the Ifng or Il4 
promoter. Effector memory T cells showed polarized cytokine gene acetylation
patterns in vivo, whereas central memory T cells had hypoacetylated cytokine
genes but acquired polarized acetylation and expression after appropriate
stimulation. However, hypoacetylation of the nonexpressed cytokine gene did not
lead to irreversible silencing because most T(H)1 and T(H)2 cells acetylated and 
expressed the alternative gene when stimulated under opposite T(H) conditions.
Such cytokine flexibility was absent in a subset of T(H)2 cells that failed to
up-regulate T-bet and to express interferon-gamma when stimulated under T(H)1
conditions. Thus, most human CD4+ T cells retain both memory and flexibility of
cytokine gene expression.

PMID: 12447360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Immunol. 2002 Oct 15;169(8):4205-12.

A minimal IFN-gamma promoter confers Th1 selective expression.

Soutto M(1), Zhang F, Enerson B, Tong Y, Boothby M, Aune TM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School
of Medicine, Medical Center North T3219, 21st and Garland, Nashville, TN 37232,
USA.

Th1 and Th2 cells differentiate from naive precursors to effector cells that
produce either IFN-gamma or IL-4, respectively. To identify transcriptional paths
leading to activation and silencing of the IFN-gamma gene, we analyzed transgenic
mice that express a reporter gene under the control of the 5' IFN-gamma promoter.
We found that as the length of the promoter is increased, -110 to -225 to -565
bp, the activity of the promoter undergoes a transition from Th1 nonselective to 
Th1 selective. This is due, at least in part, to a T box expressed in T
cells-responsive unit within the -565 to -410 region of the IFN-gamma promoter.
The -225 promoter is silent when compared with the -110 promoter and silencing
correlates with Yin Yang 1 binding to the promoter. The p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase signaling pathway, which also regulates IFN-gamma gene
transcription, regulates the -70- to -44-bp promoter element. Together, the
results demonstrate that a minimal IFN-gamma promoter contains a T box expressed 
in T cells responsive unit and is sufficient to confer Th1 selective expression
upon a reporter.

PMID: 12370350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Immunol. 2002 Oct 1;169(7):3700-9.

Altered IL-4 mRNA stability correlates with Th1 and Th2 bias and susceptibility
to hypersensitivity pneumonitis in two inbred strains of mice.

Butler NS(1), Monick MM, Yarovinsky TO, Powers LS, Hunninghake GW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Iowa College of Medicine and Veterans Administration
Medical Center, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. noah-butler@uiowa.edu

Previously, we have shown in a model of hypersensitivity pneumonitis that
Th1-biased C57BL/6 mice are susceptible and Th2-biased DBA/2 mice are resistant
to disease. We also showed that this was explained in part by differential
regulation of IL-12 by IL-4. For these reasons, we postulated that C57BL/6 and
DBA/2 mice differentially express IL-4. In this study, we show that C57BL/6
immune cells express Th2 but not Th1 cytokines at lower levels than DBA/2 cells. 
We also found that C57BL/6 splenocytes exhibit decreased mRNA stability of Th2
cytokines, relative to DBA/2 splenocytes. Stability of IL-2 and IFN-gamma were
similar in the two strains of mice. Differences in Th2 cytokine mRNA stability
between C57BL/6 and DBA/2 cells were not due to sequence polymorphism at specific
regions of the IL-4/IL-13 locus. Furthermore, expression of Th1- and Th2-specific
transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3, as well as the nuclear factor of
activated T cells transcription factor, NFATc, was not significantly different
between the two mice. Our data suggest that decreased mRNA stability of Th2
cytokines in C57BL/6 splenocytes may underlie the differential susceptibility to 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis between C57BL/6 and DBA/2 mice. Moreover, our
results indicate that regulation of mRNA stability may serve as an important
mechanism underlying Th1/Th2 immune polarization.

PMID: 12244163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Immunol. 2002 Oct 1;169(7):3600-5.

IL-21 up-regulates the expression of genes associated with innate immunity and
Th1 response.

Strengell M(1), Sareneva T, Foster D, Julkunen I, Matikainen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki,
Finland. mari.strengell@ktl.fi

IL-21 is a recently characterized T cell-derived cytokine that regulates NK and T
cell function. IL-21R shares the common gamma-chain (gamma(c)) with the receptors
for IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, and IL-15. Despite the same gamma(c), these cytokines
have different effects on diverse cells. In this study, we have studied IL-15-
and IL-21-induced gene expression in human primary NK and T cells and the NK-92
cell line. Both IL-15 and IL-21 rapidly induced mRNA synthesis for IFN-gamma,
T-bet, IL-2Ralpha, IL-12Rbeta2, IL-18R, and myeloid differentiation factor 88
(MyD88), the genes that are important in activating innate immunity and Th1
response. IL-15 induced STAT5 DNA binding to the IL-2Ralpha IFN-gamma-activated
sequence (GAS), MyD88 GAS, and c-cis-inducible elements, whereas IL-21 induced
STAT3 DNA binding to MyD88 GAS and c-sis-inducible elements. IL-21-induced STAT3 
activation was verified by immunoprecipitation and Western blotting with
anti-phosphotyrosine Ab. In addition, pretreatment of NK-92 cells with IL-15 or
IL-21 strongly enhanced IL-12-induced STAT4 DNA binding to IL-2Ralpha GAS. The
induction of IFN-gamma, T-bet, IL-12Rbeta2, and IL-18R gene expression in NK
cells, along with STAT3 activation, suggests that IL-21 is involved in the
activation of innate immune responses. Moreover, the enhanced transcription of
these genes in T cells establishes a significant role for IL-21 also in the Th1
response.

PMID: 12244150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Clin Invest. 2002 Sep;110(6):843-50.

Critical roles of c-Rel in autoimmune inflammation and helper T cell
differentiation.

Hilliard BA(1), Mason N, Xu L, Sun J, Lamhamedi-Cherradi SE, Liou HC, Hunter C,
Chen YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2002 Sep;110(6):741-2.

Different members of the Rel/NF-kappaB family may play different roles in
immunity and inflammation. We report here that c-Rel-deficient mice are resistant
to autoimmune encephalomyelitis and are defective in Th1, but not Th2 responses. 
The Th1 deficiency appears to be caused by selective blockade of IL-12 production
by c-Rel-deficient antigen-presenting cells, as well as by a complete abrogation 
of IFN-gamma expression in c-Rel-deficient T cells. Interestingly, c-Rel
deficiency does not affect T-bet expression, suggesting that c-Rel may act
downstream of T-bet during Th1 cell differentiation. Thus, unlike NF-kappaB1,
which selectively regulates Th2 cell differentiation, c-Rel is essential for Th1 
cell differentiation and Th1 cell-mediated autoimmune inflammation.

PMCID: PMC151124
PMID: 12235116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Clin Invest. 2002 Sep;110(6):741-2.

c-Rel delivers a one-two punch in Th1 cell differentiation.

Pai SY(1), Ho IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2002 Sep;110(6):843-50.

PMCID: PMC151138
PMID: 12235102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Infect Immun. 2002 Oct;70(10):5512-20.

Identification of two distinct subpopulations of Leishmania major-specific T
helper 2 cells.

Kropf P(1), Herath S, Tewari R, Syed N, Klemenz R, Müller I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Division of Investigative Science, Faculty of
Medicine, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, London, United
Kingdom.

It is widely accepted that a strong Th2 response is responsible for nonhealing
Leishmania major infections in BALB/c mice. This Th2 response has been thoroughly
documented by measuring the levels of Th2 cytokines produced by CD4(+) T cells
present in the lymphoid organs by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and PCR.
However, the cytokine profile of L. major-specific Th2 cells has never been
determined. In this study, we used the recently described Th2 marker T1/ST2 to
characterize Th2 cells during the course of nonhealing L. major infection. We
analyzed the intracellular cytokine profile of CD4(+) T1/ST2(+) T cells and
showed that they clearly displayed a Th2 phenotype, as they expressed interleukin
4 (IL-4), IL-10, and IL-5. In addition, we detected another population of Th2
cells among the CD4(+) T1/ST2(-) T cells that expressed IL-4 and IL-10 but
excluded IL-5. In summary, we show here that two type 2 subpopulations are
present in the lymphoid organs of L. major-infected BALB/c mice; Th2 cells from
both subsets expressed IL-4 and IL-10, but they could be distinguished by their
expression of IL-5 and T1/ST2.

PMCID: PMC128353
PMID: 12228277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Exp Zool. 2002 Aug 15;294(2):112-21.

Evolution of developmental functions by the Eomesodermin, T-brain-1, Tbx21
subfamily of T-box genes: insights from amphioxus.

Horton AC(1), Gibson-Brown JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63130-4899, 
USA.

We have identified an amphioxus T-box gene that is orthologous to the
Eomesodermin, T-brain-1, and Tbx21 genes of vertebrates, and we have
characterized its expression pattern during embryonic and larval development.
AmphiEomes/Tbr1/Tbx21 is maternally expressed in oocytes and cleavage stage
embryos. After the onset of zygotic transcription at the blastula stage, it is
expressed in invaginating mesendoderm cells during gastrulation, but it is
downregulated in presumptive ectoderm and neurectoderm. Expression is seen in
both axial and paraxial mesendoderm in neurulae and early larvae, but it is not
detected in differentiated endoderm, somites, or notochord. Expression persists
in mesendoderm cells of the tail bud in early larvae, but it disappears between 1
to 1.5 days post fertilization. Unlike orthologous genes in basal deuterostomes
or vertebrates, no anterior neural expression domain is detected at any stage of 
development. Integrating phylogenetic and developmental data, we have
reconstructed the evolutionary history of the Eomesodermin/Tbr1/Tbx21 subfamily
of T-box genes from a single ancestral locus that originated very early in
metazoan evolution, before the evolution of triploblasts from their diploblast
ancestor.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12210112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Immunol. 2002 Sep 1;169(5):2498-506.

Cytokine coexpression during human Th1/Th2 cell differentiation: direct evidence 
for coordinated expression of Th2 cytokines.

Cousins DJ(1), Lee TH, Staynov DZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, GKT School of Medicine, King's
College, London, United Kingdom. david.cousins@kcl.ac.uk

We have developed an in vitro differentiation assay in which human naive CD4(+)
cells are driven toward either the Th1 or Th2 phenotype. We have examined the
interrelationships among the expression of IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, IL-13,
GM-CSF, and IFN-gamma in individual cells using intracellular cytokine staining
at various times during the differentiation process. We provide direct evidence
that the Th2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13, unlike the other cytokines, are
regulated by a coordinated mechanism. We also show that IL-10 is expressed by a
different subset of cells that is prevalent at early stages of Th2
differentiation, but then diminishes. Additionally we demonstrate that while
naive cells can express IL-2 upon activation, they cannot express GM-CSF.
Commitment to GM-CSF expression occurs during differentiation in a Th1/Th2
subset-independent manner. Furthermore, we have examined the levels of GATA3,
c-Maf, T-bet, and Ets-related molecule during human Th1/Th2 differentiation and
suggest that differences in the levels of these critical transcription factors
are responsible for commitment toward the Th1 or Th2 lineage.

PMID: 12193719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Gut. 2002 Sep;51(3):301-3.

T-bet and mucosal Th1 responses in the gastrointestinal tract.

Weigmann B(1), Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, I Medical Clinic, University of Mainz, Germany.

T cells play an essential role in regulating mucosal immune responses in the
gastrointestinal tract. Recent observations on T helper cell differentiation and 
activation by regulatory transcription factors-especially T-bet-in chronic
inflammatory diseases have provided new perspectives for understanding mucosal
immunity. Here we summarise recent advances in the field of transcription factors
and discuss the implications of these findings for future therapeutic approaches 
in inflammatory bowel diseases. In particular, we have focused on the role of
T-bet in controlling mucosal Th1 responses in the gastrointestinal tract.

PMCID: PMC1773355
PMID: 12171942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Immunol. 2002 Aug 15;169(4):1801-9.

The Th1-specific costimulatory molecule, m150, is a posttranslational isoform of 
lysosome-associated membrane protein-1.

Prasad DV(1), Parekh VV, Joshi BN, Banerjee PP, Parab PB, Chattopadhyay S, Kumar 
A, Mishra GC.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre For Cell Science, Pune, India.

In an earlier report, we had shown a 150-kDa protein termed as M150, isolated
from the surface of activated macrophages, to possess costimulatory activity for 
CD4(+) T cells. Significantly, this protein was found to specifically elicit Th1 
responses. In this study, we characterize M150, which belongs to a unique subset 
of the lysosome-associated membrane protein-1 glycoprotein. Interestingly, the
costimulatory activity of M150 depends on its posttranslational modification,
which has a distinct glycosylation pattern restricted to macrophages.
Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that in addition to stimulating
Th1-specific responses, M150 is also capable of driving differentiation of naive 
CD4(+) T cells into the Th1 subset. This altered posttranslational modification
of housekeeping protein appears to represent a novel pathway by which APCs can
additionally regulate T cell responses.

PMID: 12165502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Int Immunol. 2002 Aug;14(8):943-51.

T(h)1/T(h)2 cell differentiation of developing CD4 single-positive thymocytes.

Kikkawa E(1), Yamashita M, Kimura M, Omori M, Sugaya K, Shimizu C, Katsumoto T,
Ikekita M, Taniguchi M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

In this study we investigate the stage at which developing T cells in the thymus 
acquire the ability to differentiate into T(h)1 and T(h)2 cells. We addressed
this question by using sorted heat-stable antigen (HSA)(+) and HSA(-) CD4
single-positive (SP) thymocytes prepared from ovalbumin-specific TCRalphabeta
transgenic mice and an in vitro T(h)1/T(h)2 differentiation culture system.
HSA(-) CD4 SP thymocytes show nearly full functional capacity to differentiate
into either T(h)1 or T(h)2 cells. A dramatic difference was observed, however,
between HSA(+) and HSA(-) CD4 SP thymocytes in the efficiency for T(h)1 cell
differentiation. TCR function of HSA(+) CD4 SP thymocytes appeared to be fully
developed because antigen-induced proliferation and IL-2 production were
essentially equivalent to that of HSA(-) CD4 SP thymocytes. However, the levels
in IL-12 receptor (IL-12R) beta2 chain expression following anti-TCR stimulation 
were dramatically low in the HSA(+) CD4 SP thymocytes. Decreased IL-12-induced
STAT4 phosphorylation was also observed. Moreover, IL-12-dependent
transcriptional up-regulation of T-bet and STAT4 was deficient in the HSA(+) CD4 
SP thymocytes. Thus, the poor capacity of HSA(+) CD4 SP thymocytes to proceed to 
T(h)1 cell differentiation appears to be at least partly due to underdeveloped
capacity in IL-12R expression and function.

PMID: 12147631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mech Dev. 2002 Aug;116(1-2):157-60.

Developmental expression of the T-box transcription factor T-bet/Tbx21 during
mouse embryogenesis.

Faedo A(1), Ficara F, Ghiani M, Aiuti A, Rubenstein JL, Bulfone A.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Institute (SCRI), Istituto Scientifico HS Raffaele, Via
Olgettina, 58 Milan, Italy. bulfone.alessandro@hsr.it

A novel type of DNA-binding domain, the 'T-box' domain, characterizes an
increasingly large family of transcription factors (Trends Genet. 15 (1999) 154).
We have identified and characterized the expression pattern of a new member of
the Tbr1 subfamily of T-box genes; this gene has been recently named T-bet/Tbx21 
(Genomics 70 (2000) 41; Cell 17 (2000) 655; Science 292 (2001) 1907; Science 295 
(2002) 338). The sequence and expression of Tbr1 and eomesodermin/Tbr2 are
closely related to T-bet/Tbx21. The expression of Tbr1 (Neuron 15 (1995) 63) and 
Tbr2 (Mech Dev 84 (1999) 133) have virtually identical onset, at around E10.5,
and expression domains in the mouse telencephalon. While Tbr1 is expressed in
postmitotic neurons, Tbr2 (which is also expressed during gastrulation is also
expressed in neural progenitors. We have used in situ hybridization to determine 
the temporal and spatial distribution of T-bet/Tbx21 expression during mouse
development. T-bet/Tbx21 expression is exclusively restricted to the olfactory
bulb and the thymus. To assess the distribution of T-BET/TBX21 expression in the 
haematopoietic compartment we used reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction and found its expression in several human blood cell lineages, including
progenitors/stem cells, immature B cells and peripheral T cells.

PMID: 12128215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Nat Immunol. 2002 Jul;3(7):643-51. Epub 2002 Jun 10.

T(H) cell differentiation is accompanied by dynamic changes in histone
acetylation of cytokine genes.

Avni O(1), Lee D, Macian F, Szabo SJ, Glimcher LH, Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Blood Research and the Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical
School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Naïve T cells differentiate into effector cells upon stimulation with antigen, a 
process that is accompanied by changes in the chromatin structure of effector
cytokine genes. Using histone acetylation to evaluate these changes, we showed
that T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation results in early activation of the genes
encoding both interleukin 4 and interferon-gamma. We found that continued culture
in the presence of polarizing cytokines established a selective pattern of
histone acetylation on both cytokine genes; this correlated with restricted
access of the transcription factor NFAT1 to these gene regulatory regions as well
as mutually exclusive gene expression by the differentiated T cells. Our data
point to a biphasic process in which cytokine-driven signaling pathways maintain 
and reinforce chromatin structural changes initiated by the TCR. This process
ensures that cytokine genes remain accessible to the relevant transcription
factors and promotes functional cooperation of the inducible transcription factor
NFAT with lineage-specific transcription factors such as GATA-3 and T-bet.

PMID: 12055628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Nat Immunol. 2002 Jul;3(7):652-8. Epub 2002 Jun 10.

Hlx is induced by and genetically interacts with T-bet to promote heritable T(H)1
gene induction.

Mullen AC(1), Hutchins AS, High FA, Lee HW, Sykes KJ, Chodosh LA, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6160, USA.

Type 1 helper T (T(H)1) cells are essential for cellular immunity, but their
ontogeny, maturation and durability remain poorly understood. By constructing a
dominant-negative form of T-bet, we were able to determine the role played by
this lineage-inducing trans-activator in the establishment and maintenance of
heritable T(H)1 gene expression. Optimal induction of interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) expression required genetic interaction between T-bet and its target,
the homeoprotein Hlx. In fully mature T(H)1 cells, reiteration of IFN-gamma
expression and stable chromatin remodeling became relatively independent of T-bet
activity and coincided with demethylation of DNA. In contrast, some lineage
attributes, such as expression of IL-12R beta 2 (interleukin 12 receptor beta 2),
required ongoing T-bet activity in mature T(H)1 cells and their progeny. These
findings suggest that heritable states of gene expression might be maintained by 
continued expression of the inducing factor or by a mechanism that confers a
stable imprint of the induced state.

PMID: 12055627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Exp Med. 2002 Jun 3;195(11):1499-505.

Mechanism of transforming growth factor beta-induced inhibition of T helper type 
1 differentiation.

Gorelik L(1), Constant S, Flavell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Regulation by transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta plays an important role in
immune homeostasis. TGF-beta inhibits T cell functions by blocking both
proliferation and differentiation. Here we show that TGF-beta blocks Th1
differentiation by inhibiting the expression of T-bet, the apparent
masterregulator of T helper (Th)1 differentiation. Restoration of T-bet
expression through retroviral transduction of T-bet into developing Th1 cells
abrogated the inhibitory effect of TGF-beta. In addition, we show that, contrary 
to prior suggestions, downregulation of interleukin 12 receptor beta2 chain is
not key to the TGF-beta-mediated effect. Furthermore, we show that the direct
inhibitory effect of TGF-beta on T cells is responsible, at least in part, for
the inability of BALB/c mice to mount a Leishmania-specific Th1 response and to
clear Leishmanial infection.

PMCID: PMC2193549
PMID: 12045248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Int Immunol. 2002 Jun;14(6):567-75.

A two-step model of T cell subset commitment: antigen-independent commitment of T
cells before encountering nominal antigen during pathogenic infections.

Kanoh M(1), Uetani T, Sakan H, Maruyama S, Liu F, Sumita K, Asano Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Host Defenses, Ehime University School of
Medicine, Shigenobu, Onsen-gun, Ehime 791-0295, Japan.

Pathogenic infections lead to activation of innate immunity followed by induction
of a type 1 T cell subset and, therefore, provide a good model to evaluate when T
cells commit to type 1 T cells. Here we show a two-step mechanism of T cell
subset commitment during pathogenic infection. The first step is mediated by the 
basal function of macrophage/dendritic cells and is antigen independent. This
step modulates the committed precursor frequency of T cell subsets and influences
the expression of T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) and GATA-3 genes. IL-12 and 
NK cells are not required for this step. The second step requires antigenic
stimulation of T cells together with IL-12 or IL-4, and influences on the
expression of T-bet and GATA-3. We propose a two-step T cell subset commitment
pathway based on these observations. Therefore, pathogenic infections influence
functional T cell commitment before T cells encounter nominal antigen.

PMID: 12039908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nat Immunol. 2002 Jun;3(6):506-8.

Regulation of T(H)1 differentiation--controlling the controllers.

O'Shea JJ, Paul WE.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2002 Jun;3(6):549-57.

PMID: 12032561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Curr Biol. 2002 Apr 30;12(9):R322-4.

Asthma: T-bet--a master controller?

Robinson DS(1), Lloyd CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy, National Heart and Lung Institute, Biomedical Sciences 
Division, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
d.s.robinson@ic.ac.uk

The transcription factors T-bet and GATA3 are important reciprocal determinants
of Th1 and Th2 T helper cell differentiation. Recent evidence suggests that these
factors may affect airway immunopathology in asthma.

PMCID: PMC3807785
PMID: 12007433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Nat Immunol. 2002 Jun;3(6):549-57. Epub 2002 May 13.

T-bet is a STAT1-induced regulator of IL-12R expression in naïve CD4+ T cells.

Afkarian M(1), Sedy JR, Yang J, Jacobson NG, Cereb N, Yang SY, Murphy TL, Murphy 
KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Washington University School of Medicine, Box 8118, 660 S. Euclid Ave., St.
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2002 Jun;3(6):506-8.

T helper type 1 (T(H)1) cell development involves interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)
signaling through signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and 
interleukin-12 (IL-12) signaling through STAT4 activation. We examined here T-bet
regulation and evaluated the actions of T-bet in STAT1- and STAT4-dependent T(H)1
development processes. We found that T-bet expression during T cell activation
was strongly dependent on IFN-gamma signaling and STAT1 activation, but was
independent of STAT4. Ectopic T-bet expression strongly increased IFN-gamma
production in T(H)2 cells activated by PMA-ionomycin, but weakly increased
IFN-gamma production in T(H)2 cells stimulated by IL-12 IL-18 or OVA peptide
antigen-presenting cell stimulation. In contrast, IL-12 IL-18 induced IFN-gamma
production remained STAT4-dependent despite ectopic T-bet expression. Ectopic
T-bet expression selectively induced expression of IL-12Rbeta2, but not
IL-18Ralpha, in wild-type and STAT1(-/-) T(H)2 cells, but did not extinguish
expression of GATA-3 and T(H)2 cytokines. Finally, ectopic T-bet did not directly
induce expression of endogenous T- bet independently of IFN-gamma or STAT1. Thus,
T-bet is induced by IFN-gamma and STAT1 signaling during T cell activation. In
addition, T-bet mediates STAT1-dependent processes of T(H)1 development,
including the induction of IL-12Rbeta2.

PMID: 12006974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Exp Med. 2002 May 6;195(9):1129-43.

The transcription factor T-bet regulates mucosal T cell activation in
experimental colitis and Crohn's disease.

Neurath MF(1), Weigmann B, Finotto S, Glickman J, Nieuwenhuis E, Iijima H,
Mizoguchi A, Mizoguchi E, Mudter J, Galle PR, Bhan A, Autschbach F, Sullivan BM, 
Szabo SJ, Glimcher LH, Blumberg RS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, I. Medical Clinic, University of Mainz, 55131 Mainz,
Germany. neurath@1-med.klinik.uni-mainz.de

Erratum in
    J Exp Med 2002 Jun 3;195(11):1513.

The balance between pro and antiinflammatory cytokines secreted by T cells
regulates both the initiation and perpetuation of inflammatory bowel diseases
(IBD). In particular, the balance between interferon (IFN)-gamma/interleukin
(IL)-4 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta activity controls chronic
intestinal inflammation. However, the molecular pathways that evoke these
responses are not well understood. Here, we describe a critical role for the
transcription factor T-bet in controlling the mucosal cytokine balance and
clinical disease. We studied the expression and function of T-bet in patients
with IBD and in mucosal T cells in various T helper (Th)1- and Th2-mediated
animal models of chronic intestinal inflammation by taking advantage of mice that
lack T-bet and retroviral transduction techniques, respectively. Whereas
retroviral transduction of T-bet in CD62L(+) CD4(+) T cells exacerbated colitis
in reconstituted SCID mice, T-bet-deficient T cells failed to induce colitis in
adoptive transfer experiments suggesting that overexpression of T-bet is
essential and sufficient to promote Th1-mediated colitis in vivo. Furthermore,
T-bet-deficient CD62L(-) CD4(+) T cells showed enhanced protective functions in
Th1-mediated colitis and exhibited increased TGF-beta signaling suggesting that a
T-bet driven pathway of T cell activation controls the intestinal balance between
IFN-gamma/IL-4 and TGF-beta responses and the development of chronic intestinal
inflammation in T cell-mediated colitis. Furthermore, TGF-beta was found to
suppress T-bet expression suggesting a reciprocal relationship between TGF-beta
and T-bet in mucosal T cells. In summary, our data suggest a key regulatory role 
of T-bet in the pathogenesis of T cell-mediated colitis. Specific targeting of
this pathway may be a promising novel approach for the treatment of patients with
Crohn's disease and other autoimmune diseases mediated by Th1 T lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC2193714
PMID: 11994418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cell. 2002 Apr;109 Suppl:S109-20.

Transcription: tantalizing times for T cells.

Ho IC(1), Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, 651 Huntington Avenue, FXB-2, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The T helper lymphocyte is responsible for orchestrating an appropriate immune
response to pathogens. To do so, it has evolved into two specialized subsets that
direct type 1 and type 2 immunity. Here, we discuss the genetic programs that
control lineage commitment of progenitor T helper cells along each of these
pathways.

PMID: 11983157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2002 Jan;24(1):34-7.

[Expression of transcription factor T-bet/GATA3 in lung cancer patients and its
interference by the traditional Chinese herbal medicine].

[Article in Chinese]

Wei H(1), Tian Z, Xu X, Feng J, Xiao W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Shandong Academy of Basic Medical Sciences, Shandong University
Medical School, Jinan 250062, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the relation between the expression of transcription factor
T-bet/GATA3 and Th1/Th2 type cytokines in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) from lung cancer patients and their interference by the traditional
Chinese herbal medicine.
METHODS: The gene expression of Th1/Th2 type cytokine IFN gamma, IL-2, IL-4,
IL-6, IL-10, transcription factor T-bet/GATA3 and tumor tissue specific mRNA CEA,
CK19 in PBMC from lung cancer patients were detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction RT-PCR. Meanwhile, the change of IFN
gamma, IL-4, T-bet and GATA3 in PBMC before and after being cultured with the
traditional Chinese herbal medicine-Astragulus and Tetramethylpyrazine was also
observed.
RESULTS: Predominant expression of Th2 type cytokines was detected in 42 lung
cancer patients. The positive rates of IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IFN gamma and IL-2 were
27/42, 24/42, 31/42, 4/42 and 5/42, respectively. But, the positive rates of
transcription factor T-bet and GATA3 were 16/42 and 34/42. Moreover, the
expression intensity of T-bet was lower in the CEA and CK19 positive patients
than the negative ones. On the contrary, the expression intensity of GATA3 was
significantly higher in the same patients.
CONCLUSION: Predominant expression of Th2 type cytokines may be related to lower 
expression of T-bet or higher expression of GATA3. This condition can be
interfered by the traditional Chinese herbal medicine-Astragulus and
Tetramethylpyrazine.

PMID: 11977633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 16;99(8):5545-50.

T-bet regulates IgG class switching and pathogenic autoantibody production.

Peng SL(1), Szabo SJ, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115-6017, USA.

A molecular understanding of the regulation of IgG class switching to
IL-4-independent isotypes, particularly to IgG2a, remains largely unknown. The
T-box transcription factor T-bet directly regulates Th1 lineage commitment by CD4
T cells, but its role in B lymphocytes has been largely unexplored. We show here 
a role for T-bet in the regulation of IgG class switching, especially to IgG2a.
T-bet-deficient B lymphocytes demonstrate impaired production of IgG2a, IgG2b,
and IgG3 and, most strikingly, are unable to generate germ-line or postswitch
IgG2a transcripts in response to IFN-gamma. Conversely, enforced expression of
T-bet initiates IgG2a switching in cell lines and primary cells. This function
contributes critically to the pathogenesis of murine lupus, where the absence of 
T-bet strikingly reduces B cell-dependent manifestations, including autoantibody 
production, hypergammaglobulinemia, and immune-complex renal disease and, in
particular, abrogates IFN-gamma-mediated IgG2a production. Classical T cell
manifestations persisted, including lymphadenopathy and cellular infiltrates of
skin and liver. These results identify T-bet as a selective transducer of
IFN-gamma-mediated IgG2a class switching in B cells and emphasize the importance 
of this regulation in the pathogenesis of humorally mediated autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC122806
PMID: 11960012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Nat Rev Immunol. 2002 Feb;2(2):71.

Making a commitment.

Bell E.

PMID: 11910897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. N Engl J Med. 2002 Mar 14;346(11):857-8.

A new element in the mechanism of asthma.

Schwartz RS.

PMID: 11893801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Immunol. 2002 Feb 15;168(4):1723-9.

Repeated antigen exposure is necessary for the differentiation, but not the
initial proliferation, of naive CD4(+) T cells.

Bajénoff M(1), Wurtz O, Guerder S.

Author information: 
(1)Center d'Immunologie de Marseille Luminy, Institut National de la Santé et de 
la Recherche Médicale/Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique/Université de 
la Méditérranée, Parc Scientifique de Luminy, Marseille, France.

The mechanisms that regulate CD4(+) T cells responses in vivo are still poorly
understood. We show here that initial Ag stimulation induces in CD4(+) T cells a 
program of proliferation that can develop, for at least seven cycles of division,
in the absence of subsequent Ag or cytokine requirement. Thereafter,
proliferation stops but can be reinitiated by novel Ag stimulation. This initial 
Ag stimulation does not however suffice to induce the differentiation of naive
CD4(+) T cells into effector Th1 cells which requires multiple contacts with
Ag-loaded APC. Thus, recurrent exposure to both Ag and polarizing cytokines
appears to be essential for the differentiation of IFN-gamma-producing cells. Ag 
and cytokine availability therefore greatly limits the differentiation, but not
the initial proliferation, of CD4(+) T cells into IFN-gamma-producing cells.

PMID: 11823503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Immunol. 2002 Feb 15;168(4):1566-71.

T-Bet expression and failure of GATA-3 cross-regulation lead to default
production of IFN-gamma by gammadelta T cells.

Yin Z(1), Chen C, Szabo SJ, Glimcher LH, Ray A, Craft J.

Author information: 
(1)Sections of. Rheumatology and Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department
of Medicine, and Section of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

gammadelta T cells predominantly produce IFN-gamma upon activation. To determine 
the basis for default production of IFN-gamma by gammadelta T cells, we analyzed 
the transcription factors T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) and GATA-3. T-bet,
absent in naive cells, was induced upon TCR signaling, with IFN-gamma production.
T-bet also regulated IL-4 synthesis, as gammadelta cells isolated from
T-bet-deficient mice displayed enhanced IL-4 levels with reduced IFN-gamma
production. Notably, T-bet expression after TCR signaling in gammadelta cells was
not down-regulated by IL-4, in conjunction with a higher ratio of T-bet:GATA-3
expression than that found in CD4(+) T cells. Indeed, overexpression of GATA-3
failed to inhibit IFN-gamma secretion in gammadelta cells to the degree seen in
CD4(+) T cells. These results indicate that T-bet enhances IFN-gamma secretion
and suppresses IL-4 secretion in gammadelta cells, and that GATA-3 fails to
counterbalance T-bet-mediated IFN-gamma production, accounting for the default
synthesis of IFN-gamma by these T lymphocytes.

PMID: 11823483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Lancet. 2002 Jan 12;359(9301):138.

Transcription factor shown to have a role in triggering asthma.

Venis S.

PMID: 11809263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Gut. 2002 Feb;50(2):186-90.

Interleukin 18 and associated markers of T helper cell type 1 activity in coeliac
disease.

Salvati VM(1), MacDonald TT, Bajaj-Elliott M, Borrelli M, Staiano A, Auricchio S,
Troncone R, Monteleone G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and European Laboratory for the Investigation of
Food-Induced Diseases, University Federico II, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Coeliac disease (CD) is caused by a T helper cell type 1 (Th1)
response in the small intestinal mucosa to dietary gluten. Paradoxically,
interleukin (IL)-12, the major Th1 inducing factor, is undetectable in the mucosa
of active CD. IL-18 is a recently described cytokine capable of promoting T cell 
interferon (IFN)-gamma production and facilitating Th1 cell polarisation.
AIM: To examine expression of IL-18 and IL-18-associated Th1 proteins in CD.
METHODS: IL-18 and IFN-gamma RNA transcripts were determined by quantitative
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). IL-18 and caspase-1
protein expression were assessed by western blotting. Caspase-1 activity was
determined using a commercially available assay. RNA transcripts for the IL-18
receptor subunits, IL-1 receptor related protein (IL-1 Rrp) and accessory
protein-like subunit (AcPL), and IL-18 induced Th1 specific T box transcription
factor (T-bet) were measured by RT-PCR and Southern blotting.
RESULTS: IL-18 RNA transcripts were found in all mucosal samples analysed, with
no difference between CD patients and controls. By western blot analysis, a large
protein of approximately 24 kDa, corresponding to the immature IL-18, was
detected in all mucosal samples from CD patients and controls. In contrast,
mature IL-18 was only seen in CD patients. Immunoreactivity corresponding to both
immature and mature caspase-1 was present in both CD and control samples. Tissue 
homogenates from CD patients and controls expressed similar levels of caspase-1
activity. IL-1Rrp and AcPL were seen in all samples but were expressed at greater
levels in the mucosa of CD patients. T-bet was also upregulated in CD.
CONCLUSIONS: Active IL-18 is expressed in CD as well as other markers of Th1
polarisation.

PMCID: PMC1773110
PMID: 11788557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Science. 2002 Jan 11;295(5553):338-42.

Distinct effects of T-bet in TH1 lineage commitment and IFN-gamma production in
CD4 and CD8 T cells.

Szabo SJ(1), Sullivan BM, Stemmann C, Satoskar AR, Sleckman BP, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2002 Jan 11;295(5553):253.

T-bet is a member of the T-box family of transcription factors that appears to
regulate lineage commitment in CD4 T helper (TH) lymphocytes in part by
activating the hallmark TH1 cytokine, interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). IFN-gamma is 
also produced by natural killer (NK) cells and most prominently by CD8 cytotoxic 
T cells, and is vital for the control of microbial pathogens. Although T-bet is
expressed in all these cell types, it is required for control of IFN-gamma
production in CD4 and NK cells, but not in CD8 cells. This difference is also
apparent in the function of these cell subsets. Thus, the regulation of a single 
cytokine, IFN-gamma, is controlled by distinct transcriptional mechanisms within 
the T cell lineage.

PMID: 11786644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Science. 2002 Jan 11;295(5553):336-8.

Development of spontaneous airway changes consistent with human asthma in mice
lacking T-bet.

Finotto S(1), Neurath MF, Glickman JN, Qin S, Lehr HA, Green FH, Ackerman K,
Haley K, Galle PR, Szabo SJ, Drazen JM, De Sanctis GT, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Critical Care and Pulmonary Division, Division of Gastroenterology, Department
of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2002 Jan 11;295(5553):253.

Human asthma is associated with airway infiltration by T helper 2 (TH2)
lymphocytes. We observed reduced expression of the TH1 transcription factor,
T-bet, in T cells from airways of patients with asthma compared with that in T
cells from airways of nonasthmatic patients, suggesting that loss of T-bet might 
be associated with asthma. Mice with a targeted deletion of the T-bet gene and
severe combined immunodeficient mice receiving CD4+ cells from T-bet knockout
mice spontaneously demonstrated multiple physiological and inflammatory features 
characteristic of asthma. Thus, T-bet deficiency, in the absence of allergen
exposure, induces a murine phenotype reminiscent of both acute and chronic human 
asthma.

PMID: 11786643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Science. 2002 Jan 11;295(5553):253.

Asthma research. Missing gene takes mice's breath away.

Vogel G.

Comment on
    Science. 2002 Jan 11;295(5553):336-8.
    Science. 2002 Jan 11;295(5553):338-42.

PMID: 11786617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 18;98(26):15137-42.

T-bet is rapidly induced by interferon-gamma in lymphoid and myeloid cells.

Lighvani AA(1), Frucht DM, Jankovic D, Yamane H, Aliberti J, Hissong BD, Nguyen
BV, Gadina M, Sher A, Paul WE, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National
Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Differentiation of naive CD4(+) T cells into IFN-gamma-producing T helper 1
(T(H)1) cells is pivotal for protective immune responses against intracellular
pathogens. T-bet, a recently discovered member of the T-box transcription factor 
family, has been reported to play a critical role in this process, promoting
IFN-gamma production. Although terminal T(H)1 differentiation occurs over days,
we now show that challenge of mice with a prototypical T(H)1-inducing stimulus,
Toxoplasma gondii soluble extract, rapidly induced IFN-gamma and T-bet; T-bet
induction was substantially lower in IFN-gamma-deficient mice. Naive T cells
expressed little T-bet, but this transcription factor was induced markedly by the
combination of IFN-gamma and cognate antigen. Human myeloid antigen-presenting
cells showed T-bet induction after IFN-gamma stimulation alone, and this
induction was antagonized by IL-4 and granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating
factor. Although T-bet was induced rapidly and directly by IFN-gamma, it was not 
induced by IFN-alpha, lipopolysaccharide, or IL-1, indicating that this action of
IFN-gamma was specific. Moreover, T-bet induction was dependent on Stat1 but not 
Stat4. These data argue for a model in which IFN-gamma gene regulation involves
an autocrine loop, whereby the cytokine regulates a transcription factor that
promotes its own production. These findings substantially alter the current view 
of T-bet in IFN-gamma regulation and promotion of cell-mediated immune responses.

PMCID: PMC64996
PMID: 11752460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Curr Biol. 2001 Oct 30;11(21):1695-9.

Cell cycle controlling the silencing and functioning of mammalian activators.

Mullen AC(1), Hutchins AS, Villarino AV, Lee HW, High FA, Cereb N, Yang SY, Hua
X, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Naïve CD4(+) helper T (T(H)) cells respond to stimulation by terminally
differentiating into two mature classes, T(H)1 cells, which express interferon
gamma (IFN-gamma), and T(H)2 cells, which express interleukin 4 (IL-4). The
transcriptional activators T-bet and Gata-3 mediate commitment to the T(H)1 and
T(H)2 fates, respectively, including chromatin remodeling of signature genes. The
cytokine IL-12 fosters growth of committed T(H)1 cells, while IL-4 fosters growth
of committed T(H)2 cells. IL-12 and IL-4 also play critical roles in commitment
by promoting transcriptional silencing of Gata-3 and T-bet, respectively. We now 
show that both T-bet and Gata-3 are induced in a cell cycle-independent manner in
bipotent progenitor cells. In contrast, both lineage-restricted gene induction by
the activator proteins and heritable silencing of the transcription of each
activator, the hallmarks of terminal differentiation, are cell cycle dependent.
We found that cells that cannot cycle remain uncommitted and bipotent in response
to the most polarizing signals for maturation. These results provide mechanistic 
insight into a mammalian model of terminal differentiation by illustrating that
cell cycle-coupled epigenetic effects, as originally described in yeast, may
represent an evolutionarily conserved strategy for organizing signaling and cell 
fate.

PMID: 11696328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Science. 2001 Jun 8;292(5523):1907-10.

Role of T-bet in commitment of TH1 cells before IL-12-dependent selection.

Mullen AC(1), High FA, Hutchins AS, Lee HW, Villarino AV, Livingston DM, Kung AL,
Cereb N, Yao TP, Yang SY, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6160, USA.

How cytokines control differentiation of helper T (TH) cells is controversial. We
show that T-bet, without apparent assistance from interleukin 12 (IL-12)/STAT4,
specifies TH1 effector fate by targeting chromatin remodeling to individual
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) alleles and by inducing IL-12 receptor beta2
expression. Subsequently, it appears that IL-12/STAT4 serves two essential
functions in the development of TH1 cells: as growth signal, inducing survival
and cell division; and as trans-activator, prolonging IFN-gamma synthesis through
a genetic interaction with the coactivator, CREB-binding protein. These results
suggest that a cytokine does not simply induce TH fate choice but instead may act
as an essential secondary stimulus that mediates selective survival of a lineage.

PMID: 11397944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Apr;31(4):1055-65.

IL-12-induced reversal of human Th2 cells is accompanied by full restoration of
IL-12 responsiveness and loss of GATA-3 expression.

Smits HH(1), van Rietschoten JG, Hilkens CM, Sayilir R, Stiekema F, Kapsenberg
ML, Wierenga EA.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Department of Cell Biology
and Histology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

IL-12 is a potent inducer of IFN-gamma production and drives the development of
Th1 cells. Human polarized Th2 cells do not express the signaling beta2-subunit
of the IL-12R and, therefore, do not signal in response to IL-12. The question
was raised as to what extent the loss of the IL-12Rbeta2 chain in Th2 cells has
bearing on the stability of the human Th2 phenotype. In the present report, we
show that restimulation of human fully polarized Th2 cells in the presence of
IL-12 primes for a shift towards Th0/Th1 phenotypes, accompanied by suppression
of GATA-3 expression and induction of T-bet expression. These reversed cells are 
further characterized by a marked IL-12Rbeta2 chain expression and fully restored
IL-12-inducible STAT4 activation. The IL-12-induced phenotypic shift proved to be
stable as a subsequent restimulation in the presence of IL-4 and in the absence
of IL-12 could not undo the accomplished changes. Identical results were obtained
with cells from atopic patients, both with polyclonal Th2 cell lines and
allergen-specific Th2 cell clones. These findings suggest the possibility of
restoring IL-12 responsiveness in established Th2 cells of atopic patients by
stimulation in the presence of IL-12, and that IL-12-promoting immunotherapy can 
be beneficial for Th2-mediated immune disorders, targeting both naive and memory 
effector T cells.

PMID: 11298330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Immunity. 2001 Mar;14(3):205-15.

Early transcription and silencing of cytokine genes underlie polarization of T
helper cell subsets.

Grogan JL(1), Mohrs M, Harmon B, Lacy DA, Sedat JW, Locksley RM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Francisco,
94143, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Naive CD4+ T cells activated through TCR/CD28 under Th1 or Th2 conditions
expressed canonical cytokine patterns irrespective of cell division. Only cells
that had divided fewer than four times were capable of reexpressing alternative
cytokines when restimulated under opposing conditions. Although T cells
transcribed both IFN-gamma and IL-4 within hours in a Stat4-/Stat6-independent
manner, neither T-bet nor GATA-3 was induced optimally without Stat signals, and 
polarized cytokine expression was not sustained. Cytokine genes were positioned
apart from heterochromatin in resting T cell nuclei, consistent with rapid
expression. After polarization, the majority of silenced cytokine alleles were
repositioned to heterochromatin. Naive T cells transit through sequential stages 
of cytokine activation, commitment, silencing, and physical stabilization during 
polarization into differentiated effector subsets.

PMID: 11290331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1999;64:573-84.

Tissue-specific regulation of cytokine gene expression.

Ho IC(1), Kim JI, Szabo SJ, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115-6017, USA.

PMID: 11232334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Genomics. 2000 Nov 15;70(1):41-8.

Cloning and characterization of a new member of the T-box gene family.

Zhang WX(1), Yang SY.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunogenetics Laboratory, New York Medical College, Hawthorne, New 
York 10532, USA.

The T-box is a strongly conserved protein domain, 174 to 186 amino acids in
length, that binds DNA. Many genes from many species have been shown to encode
T-box domain-containing proteins. Here we report the cloning and characterization
of a novel T-box gene, TBX21. The human cDNA contains an open reading frame
encoding a 535-amino-acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 58.3 kDa.
Except for the T-box sequence, database searches revealed no significant homology
to any known sequences at the nucleotide or protein level. In addition to the
human cDNA sequence, we report the cDNA sequence of the murine homologue, the
structure and organization of the murine Tbx21 gene, and its localization to
mouse chromosome 11. TBX21 expression was detected in peripheral blood
lymphocytes, spleen, lung, and natural killer cells.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11087660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Immunogenetics. 2000 Aug;51(10):771-8.

Tbt-1, a new T-box transcription factor induced in activated Th1 and CD8+ T
cells.

Shier P(1), Hofstra CL, Ma XJ, Wu Y, Ngo K, Fung-Leung WP.

Author information: 
(1)The RW Johnson Pharmaceutical Research Institute, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

Differentiation of CD4+ T cells into T helper (Th) 1 or Th2 cells requires the
cytokines interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-4, respectively. However, transcription
factors that regulate expression of Th1 or Th2 cell-specific genes remain largely
unclear. In the present study, a new Th1-specific transcription factor, named
Tbt-1 (T-box protein expressed in T lymphocytes), was identified. Tbt-1 is a
novel member of the T-box family, which is characterized by a conserved T-box
DNA-binding domain. Unlike other known T-box proteins that regulate embryo
development and organogenesis, Tbt-1 expression is restricted to adult lymphoid
organs. Tbt-1 mRNA is only detected in peripheral lymphoid tissues such as
spleen, lymph nodes, and blood leukocytes, but not in thymus or bone marrow.
Tbt-1 mRNA is not detected in resting T cells but is strongly induced in
differentiating Thl cells and CD8+ cytotoxic effector cells. In contrast, Tbt-1
expression was not observed in the entire process of Th2 cell differentiation. In
addition, phylogenetic analyses indicate that Tbt-1 co-evolved with adaptive
immune responses. Thus, Tbt-1 is the first T-box transcription factor shown to be
specific for Th1 cell differentiation.

PMID: 10970091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Nature. 2000 Apr 13;404(6779):719-20.

Immunology. Commit ye helpers.

O'Garra A.

PMID: 10783873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cell. 2000 Mar 17;100(6):655-69.

A novel transcription factor, T-bet, directs Th1 lineage commitment.

Szabo SJ(1), Kim ST, Costa GL, Zhang X, Fathman CG, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Naive T helper cells differentiate into two subsets, Th1 and Th2, each with
distinct functions and cytokine profiles. Here, we report the isolation of T-bet,
a Th1-specific T box transcription factor that controls the expression of the
hallmark Th1 cytokine, IFNgamma. T-bet expression correlates with IFNgamma
expression in Th1 and NK cells. Ectopic expression of T-bet both transactivates
the IFNgamma gene and induces endogenous IFNgamma production. Remarkably,
retroviral gene transduction of T-bet into polarized Th2 and Tc2 primary T cells 
redirects them into Th1 and Tc1 cells, respectively, as evidenced by the
simultaneous induction of IFNgamma and repression of IL-4 and IL-5. Thus, T-bet
initiates Th1 lineage development from naive Thp cells both by activating Th1
genetic programs and by repressing the opposing Th2 programs.

PMID: 10761931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


