
1. Mol Cell Biochem. 2016 Apr;415(1-2):103-109. Epub 2016 Mar 12.

The transcription factor TBX2 regulates melanogenesis in melanocytes by
repressing Oca2.

Chen Y(1), Pan L(1), Su Z(1), Wang J(1), Li H(1), Ma X(1), Liu Y(1), Lu F(2), Qu 
J(2), Hou L(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Cell Biology and Disease, School of Ophthalmology 
and Optometry and Eye Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325003,
China. (2)State Key Laboratory Cultivation Base and Key Laboratory of Vision
Science of Ministry of Health and Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of
Ophthalmology, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325003, China. (3)Laboratory 
of Developmental Cell Biology and Disease, School of Ophthalmology and Optometry 
and Eye Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325003, China.
lhou88@aliyun.com. (4)State Key Laboratory Cultivation Base and Key Laboratory of
Vision Science of Ministry of Health and Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of
Ophthalmology, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325003, China.
lhou88@aliyun.com.

The T-box transcription factor TBX2 is known for its role as a critical regulator
of melanoma cell proliferation, but its role in regulating melanogenesis has not 
been widely studied. Here we use a series of experiments to show in primary and
immortalized mouse melanocytes that TBX2 acts as regulator of melanogenesis by
repressing the expression of the gene encoding the melanosomal protein OCA2. We
find that a-MSH or forskolin, both of which stimulate melanogenesis, also reduce 
TBX2 expression, and that specific knockdown of TBX2 increases melanogenesis.
This effect primarily involves an increase in Oca2 expression as the combined
knockdown of both Tbx2 and Oca2 interferes with the Tbx2 knockdown-mediated
increase in melanogenesis. Standard chromatin immunoprecipitation and reporter
assays suggest that TBX2 represses Oca2 at least in part directly. Hence, the
results suggest that TBX2 may act as a nexus linking cell proliferation and
melanogenesis.

PMID: 26971330  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Curr Pharm Des. 2016;22(5):616-38.

Cadherins: The Superfamily Critically Involved in Breast Cancer.

Ashaie MA, Chowdhury EH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University,
Australia. md.ezharul.hoque@monash.edu.

Breast cancer, one of the leading causes of mortality and morbidity among
females, is regulated in part by diverse classes of adhesion molecules one of
which is known as cadherins. Located at adherens junctions, the members of this
superfamily are responsible for upholding proper cell-cell adhesion. Cadherins
possess diverse structures and functions and any alteration in their structures
or functions causes impeding of normal mammary cells development and maintenance,
thus leading to breast malignancy. E-, N-, P-, VE-, Proto-, desmosomal and FAT
cadherins have been found to regulate breast cancer in positive as well as
negative fashion, whereby both Ecadherin (CDH1) and N-cadherin (CDH2) contribute 
significantly towards transitioning from epithelial state to mesenchymal state
(EMT) and enacting the abnormal cells to invade and metastasize nearby and
distant tissues. Aberration in gene expression of cadherins can be either due to 
somatic or epigenetic silencing or via transcriptional factors. Besides other
cadherins, E-cadherin which serves as hallmark of EMT is associated with several 
regulatory factors such as Snail, Slug, Twist, Zeb, KLF4, NFI, TBX2, SIX, b-Myb, 
COX-2, Arf6, FOXA2, GATA3 and SMAR1, which modulate E-cadherin gene transcription
to promote or represses tumor invasion and colonization. Signaling molecules such
as Notch, TGF-ß, estrogen receptors, EGF and Wnt initiate numerous signaling
cascades via these vital factors of cell programming, controlling expression of
E-cadherin at transcriptional (mRNA) and protein level. Thus, interactions of
cadherins with their roles in tumor suppression and oncogenic transformation can 
be beneficial in providing valuable insights for breast cancer diagnosis and
therapeutics development.

PMID: 26825466  [PubMed - in process]


3. Oncogene. 2015 Dec 21. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.486. [Epub ahead of print]

TBX2 represses PTEN in rhabdomyosarcoma and skeletal muscle.

Zhu B(1), Zhang M(1), Williams EM(2), Keller C(3), Mansoor A(2), Davie JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Simmons Cancer Institute,
Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Carbondale, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Oregon Health and Sciences University, Portland, OR, 
USA. (3)Children's Cancer Therapy Development Institute, Fort Collins, CO, USA.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most frequent soft tissue sarcoma in children that 
shares many features of developing skeletal muscle. TBX2, a T-box family member, 
is highly upregulated in tumor cells of both major RMS subtypes where it
functions as an oncogene. TBX2 is a repressor that is often overexpressed in
cancer cells and functions in bypassing cell growth control, including the
repression of the cell cycle regulators p14 and p21. We have found that TBX2
directly represses the tumor-suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) in 
both RMS and normal muscle. Exogenous expression of TBX2 in normal muscle cells
downregulates PTEN, and depletion or interference with TBX2 in RMS cells
upregulates PTEN. Human RMS tumors show high levels of TBX2 and correspondingly
low levels of PTEN. The expression of PTEN in clinical RMS samples is relatively 
uncharacterized, and we establish that suppression of PTEN is a frequent event in
both subtypes of RMS. TBX2 represses PTEN by directly binding to the promoter and
recruiting the histone deacetylase, HDAC1. RMS cells have high levels of
activated AKT owing to the deregulation of phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)
signaling, and depletion or interference with TBX2, which upregulates PTEN,
results in a reduction of phospho-AKT. We have also found that the highly related
T-box family member TBX3 does not repress PTEN in the muscle lineage. This work
suggests that TBX2 is a central component of the PTEN/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway 
deregulation in RMS cells and that targeting TBX2 in RMS tumors may offer a novel
therapeutic approach for RMS.Oncogene advance online publication, 21 December
2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.486.

PMID: 26686089  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Mar;170(3):622-33. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37493. Epub 2015
Dec 14.

Rare copy number variants implicated in posterior urethral valves.

Boghossian NS(1,)(2), Sicko RJ(3), Kay DM(3), Rigler SL(2), Caggana M(3), Tsai
MY(4), Yeung EH(2), Pankratz N(4), Cole BR(4), Druschel CM(5,)(6), Romitti PA(7),
Browne ML(5,)(6), Fan R(2), Liu A(2), Brody LC(8), Mills JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Arnold School of Public Health, 
University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina. (2)Division of Intramural
Population Health Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. 
(3)Department of Health, Division of Genetics, Wadsworth Center, Albany, New
York. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota
Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota. (5)Department of Health, Congenital
Malformations Registry, Albany, New York. (6)University at Albany School of
Public Health, Rensselaer, New York. (7)Department of Epidemiology, College of
Public Health, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa. (8)Genome Technology
Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland.

The cause of posterior urethral valves (PUV) is unknown, but genetic factors are 
suspected given their familial occurrence. We examined cases of isolated PUV to
identify novel copy number variants (CNVs). We identified 56 cases of isolated
PUV from all live-births in New York State (1998-2005). Samples were genotyped
using Illumina HumanOmni2.5 microarrays. Autosomal and sex-linked CNVs were
identified using PennCNV and cnvPartition software. CNVs were prioritized for
follow-up if they were absent from in-house controls, contained =10 consecutive
probes, were =20<U+2009>Kb in size, had =20% overlap with variants detected in other
birth defect phenotypes screened in our lab, and were rare in population
reference controls. We identified 47 rare candidate PUV-associated CNVs in 32
cases; one case had a 3.9<U+2009>Mb deletion encompassing BMP7. Mutations in BMP7 have
been associated with severe anomalies in the mouse urethra. Other interesting
CNVs, each detected in a single PUV case included: a deletion of PIK3R3 and
TSPAN1, duplication/triplication in FGF12, duplication of FAT1-a gene essential
for normal growth and development, a large deletion (>2<U+2009>Mb) on chromosome 17q
that involves TBX2 and TBX4, and large duplications (>1<U+2009>Mb) on chromosomes 3q and
6q. Our finding of previously unreported novel CNVs in PUV suggests that genetic 
factors may play a larger role than previously understood. Our data show a
potential role of CNVs in up to 57% of cases examined. Investigation of genes in 
these CNVs may provide further insights into genetic variants that contribute to 
PUV. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26663319  [PubMed - in process]


5. Oncol Lett. 2015 Sep;10(3):1689-1693. Epub 2015 Jun 26.

T-box 2 expression predicts poor prognosis in gastric cancer.

Yu H(1), Liu BO(1), Liu A(1), Li K(1), Zhao H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan
Hospital, Jinan, Shandong 250014, P.R. China.

T-Box 2 (TBX2) plays a critical role in embryonic development. Previously, TBX2
has been suggested to be involved in malignancies. However, the role of TBX2 in
gastric cancer (GC) remains unclear. In the present study, TBX2 expression was
found to be evidently upregulated in GC compared with the expression in the
corresponding adjacent non-cancerous tissues at the mRNA and protein levels.
Using immunohistochemical analysis on the tissue samples obtained from 266
patients with GC, TBX2 expression was found to be significantly associated with
the clinical stage and incidence of vascular invasion and metastasis. Patients
with GC that expressed TBX2 demonstrated a shorter overall survival time compared
with the patients without TBX2 expression. Multivariate analysis revealed that
TBX2 expression was an independent prognostic factor for overall survival (hazard
ratio, 3.930; 95% confidence interval, 2.041-7.917; P=0.009). These results
indicated that TBX2 is a prognostic marker for patients with GC.

PMCID: PMC4533639
PMID: 26622733  [PubMed]


6. Front Oncol. 2015 Oct 29;5:244. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00244. eCollection 2015.

Putative Breast Cancer Driver Mutations in TBX3 Cause Impaired Transcriptional
Repression.

Fischer K(1), Pflugfelder GO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, Mainz University , Mainz , Germany.

The closely related T-box transcription factors TBX2 and TBX3 are frequently
overexpressed in melanoma and various types of human cancers, in particular,
breast cancer. The overexpression of TBX2 and TBX3 can have several cellular
effects, among them suppression of senescence, promotion of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and invasive cell motility. In contrast, loss 
of function of TBX3 and most other human T-box genes causes developmental
haploinsufficiency syndromes. Stephens and colleagues (1), by exome sequencing of
breast tumor samples, identified five different mutations in TBX3, all affecting 
the DNA-binding T-domain. One in-frame deletion of a single amino acid,
p.N212delN, was observed twice. Due to the clustering of these mutations to the
T-domain and for statistical reasons, TBX3 was inferred to be a driver gene in
breast cancer. Since mutations in the T-domain generally cause loss of function
and because the tumorigenic action of TBX3 has generally been attributed to
overexpression, we determined whether the putative driver mutations had loss- or 
gain-of-function properties. We tested two in-frame deletions, one missense, and 
one frameshift mutant protein for DNA-binding in vitro, and for target gene
repression in cell culture. In addition, we performed an in silico analysis of
somatic TBX mutations in breast cancer, collected in The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA). Both the experimental and the in silico analysis indicate that the
observed mutations predominantly cause loss of TBX3 function.

PMCID: PMC4625211
PMID: 26579496  [PubMed]


7. Cell Prolif. 2015 Dec;48(6):631-42. doi: 10.1111/cpr.12227. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor/T-box factor-2 axis acts through
Cyclin D1 to regulate melanocyte proliferation.

Pan L(1,)(2), Ma X(1,)(2), Wen B(1), Su Z(1), Zheng X(1), Liu Y(1), Li H(1), Chen
Y(1), Wang J(1), Lu F(2), Qu J(2), Hou L(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Cell Biology and Disease, School of Ophthalmology 
and Optometry and Eye Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325003,
China. (2)State Key Laboratory Cultivation Base and Key Laboratory of Vision
Science of Ministry of Health and Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of
Ophthalmology, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325003, China.

OBJECTIVES: Control of cell proliferation is critical for accurate cell
differentiation and tissue formation, during development and regeneration. Here, 
we have analysed the role of microphthalmia-associated transcription factor MITF 
and its direct target, T-box factor TBX2, in regulating proliferation of
mammalian neural crest-derived melanocytes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to examine spatial and
temporal expression of TBX2 in melanocytes in vivo. RNAi and cell proliferation
analysis were used to investigate functional roles of TBX2. Furthermore,
quantitative RT-PCR, western blot analysis and flow cytometry were used to
further scrutinize molecular mechanisms underlying TBX2-dependent cell
proliferation.
RESULTS: TBX2 was found to be co-expressed with MITF in melanocytes of mouse hair
follicles. Specific Tbx2 knockdown in primary neural crest cells led to
inhibition MITF-positive melanoblast proliferation. Tbx2 knockdown in melan-a
cells led to reduction in Cyclin D1 expression and G1-phase cell cycle arrest.
TBX2 directly activated Ccnd1 transcription by binding to a specific sequence in 
the Ccnd1 promoter, and the defect in cell proliferation could be rescued
partially by overexpression of Cyclin D1 in Tbx2 knockdown melanocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that the Mitf-Tbx2-Cyclin D1 pathway played an
important role in regulation of melanocyte proliferation, and provided novel
insights into the complex physiology of melanocytes.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26486273  [PubMed - in process]


8. Nat Genet. 2015 Nov;47(11):1282-93. doi: 10.1038/ng.3405. Epub 2015 Sep 21.

Trans-ancestry genome-wide association study identifies 12 genetic loci
influencing blood pressure and implicates a role for DNA methylation.

Kato N, Loh M, Takeuchi F, Verweij N, Wang X, Zhang W, Kelly TN, Saleheen D,
Lehne B, Mateo Leach I, Drong AW, Abbott J, Wahl S, Tan ST, Scott WR, Campanella 
G, Chadeau-Hyam M, Afzal U, Ahluwalia TS, Bonder MJ, Chen P, Dehghan A, Edwards
TL, Esko T, Go MJ, Harris SE, Hartiala J, Kasela S, Kasturiratne A, Khor CC,
Kleber ME, Li H, Mok ZY, Nakatochi M, Sapari NS, Saxena R, Stewart AF, Stolk L,
Tabara Y, Teh AL, Wu Y, Wu JY, Zhang Y, Aits I, Da Silva Couto Alves A, Das S,
Dorajoo R, Hopewell JC, Kim YK, Koivula RW, Luan J, Lyytikäinen LP, Nguyen QN,
Pereira MA, Postmus I, Raitakari OT, Bryan MS, Scott RA, Sorice R, Tragante V,
Traglia M, White J, Yamamoto K, Zhang Y, Adair LS, Ahmed A, Akiyama K, Asif R,
Aung T, Barroso I, Bjonnes A, Braun TR, Cai H, Chang LC, Chen CH, Cheng CY, Chong
YS, Collins R, Courtney R, Davies G, Delgado G, Do LD, Doevendans PA, Gansevoort 
RT, Gao YT, Grammer TB, Grarup N, Grewal J, Gu D, Wander GS, Hartikainen AL,
Hazen SL, He J, Heng CK, Hixson JE, Hofman A, Hsu C, Huang W, Husemoen LL, Hwang 
JY, Ichihara S, Igase M, Isono M, Justesen JM, Katsuya T, Kibriya MG, Kim YJ,
Kishimoto M, Koh WP, Kohara K, Kumari M, Kwek K, Lee NR, Lee J, Liao J, Lieb W,
Liewald DC, Matsubara T, Matsushita Y, Meitinger T, Mihailov E, Milani L, Mills
R, Mononen N, Müller-Nurasyid M, Nabika T, Nakashima E, Ng HK, Nikus K, Nutile T,
Ohkubo T, Ohnaka K, Parish S, Paternoster L, Peng H, Peters A, Pham ST,
Pinidiyapathirage MJ, Rahman M, Rakugi H, Rolandsson O, Rozario MA, Ruggiero D,
Sala CF, Sarju R, Shimokawa K, Snieder H, Sparsø T, Spiering W, Starr JM, Stott
DJ, Stram DO, Sugiyama T, Szymczak S, Tang WH, Tong L, Trompet S, Turjanmaa V,
Ueshima H, Uitterlinden AG, Umemura S, Vaarasmaki M, van Dam RM, van Gilst WH,
van Veldhuisen DJ, Viikari JS, Waldenberger M, Wang Y, Wang A, Wilson R, Wong TY,
Xiang YB, Yamaguchi S, Ye X, Young RD, Young TL, Yuan JM, Zhou X, Asselbergs FW, 
Ciullo M, Clarke R, Deloukas P, Franke A, Franks PW, Franks S, Friedlander Y,
Gross MD, Guo Z, Hansen T, Jarvelin MR, Jørgensen T, Jukema JW, Kähönen M, Kajio 
H, Kivimaki M, Lee JY, Lehtimäki T, Linneberg A, Miki T, Pedersen O, Samani NJ,
Sørensen TI, Takayanagi R, Toniolo D; BIOS-consortium; CARDIo GRAMplusCD;
LifeLines Cohort Study; InterAct Consortium, Ahsan H, Allayee H, Chen YT, Danesh 
J, Deary IJ, Franco OH, Franke L, Heijman BT, Holbrook JD, Isaacs A, Kim BJ, Lin 
X, Liu J, März W, Metspalu A, Mohlke KL, Sanghera DK, Shu XO, van Meurs JB,
Vithana E, Wickremasinghe AR, Wijmenga C, Wolffenbuttel BH, Yokota M, Zheng W,
Zhu D, Vineis P, Kyrtopoulos SA, Kleinjans JC, McCarthy MI, Soong R, Gieger C,
Scott J, Teo YY, He J, Elliott P, Tai ES, van der Harst P, Kooner JS, Chambers
JC.

We carried out a trans-ancestry genome-wide association and replication study of 
blood pressure phenotypes among up to 320,251 individuals of East Asian, European
and South Asian ancestry. We find genetic variants at 12 new loci to be
associated with blood pressure (P = 3.9 × 10(-11) to 5.0 × 10(-21)). The sentinel
blood pressure SNPs are enriched for association with DNA methylation at multiple
nearby CpG sites, suggesting that, at some of the loci identified, DNA
methylation may lie on the regulatory pathway linking sequence variation to blood
pressure. The sentinel SNPs at the 12 new loci point to genes involved in
vascular smooth muscle (IGFBP3, KCNK3, PDE3A and PRDM6) and renal (ARHGAP24,
OSR1, SLC22A7 and TBX2) function. The new and known genetic variants predict
increased left ventricular mass, circulating levels of NT-proBNP, and
cardiovascular and all-cause mortality (P = 0.04 to 8.6 × 10(-6)). Our results
provide new evidence for the role of DNA methylation in blood pressure
regulation.

PMCID: PMC4719169
PMID: 26390057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Prenat Diagn. 2015 Dec;35(13):1278-86. doi: 10.1002/pd.4687. Epub 2015 Oct 30.

Increased nuchal translucency origins from abnormal lymphatic development and is 
independent of the presence of a cardiac defect.

Burger NB(1), Bekker MN(2), Kok E(3), De Groot CJ(1), Martin JF(4), Shou W(5),
Scambler PJ(6), Lee Y(7), Christoffels VM(3), Haak MC(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Anatomy,
Embryology and Physiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. (5)Riley Heart Research Center, Division of Pediatric
Cardiology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Medicine, UCL Institute of Child Health, London,
United Kingdom. (7)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. (8)Department of Obstetrics, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether cardiac failure, because of cardiac defects, and
abnormal jugular lymphatic development are involved in nuchal edema (NE) - the
morphological equivalent of increased nuchal translucency - in various euploid
mutant mouse models.
METHOD: Mouse embryos with lymphatic abnormalities and NE (Ccbe1(-/-) ), with
cardiac defects and NE (Fkbp12(-/-) , Tbx1(-/-) , Chd7(fl/fl) ;Mesp1Cre,
Jarid2(-/-NE+) ) and with cardiac malformations without NE (Tbx2(-/-) ,
Pitx2(-/-) , Fgf10(-/-) , Jarid2(-/-NE-) ) were examined. Embryos were analyzed
from embryonic day 11.5 to 15.5. Markers for lymphatic vessels, endothelium,
smooth muscle cells and nerves were used to study the nuchal region.
Hematoxylin-Azophloxine staining was performed to examine cardiac morphology.
RESULTS: Mouse embryos with lymphatic abnormalities and NE (Ccbe1(-/-) ) showed
no formation of the jugular lymphatic sac but normal cardiac morphology. In mouse
embryos with cardiac defects and NE (Fkbp12(-/-) , Tbx1(-/-) , Chd7(fl/fl)
;Mesp1Cre, Jarid2(-/-NE+) ) enlarged jugular lymphatic sacs or large nuchal
cavities within the NE were found. In mouse embryos with a cardiac malformation
without NE (Tbx2(-/-) , Pitx2(-/-) , Fgf10(-/-) , Jarid2(-/-NE-) ) normal jugular
lymphatic sacs were observed.
CONCLUSION: NE consistently coincides with abnormal jugular lymphatic development
in euploid mouse embryos, independent of cardiac anatomy. NE is unlikely to be
caused by temporary cardiac failure solely because of a cardiac defect. © 2015
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26338284  [PubMed - in process]


10. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 May 7;96(5):695-708. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.02.018. Epub
2015 Apr 9.

Genome-wide Analysis of Body Proportion Classifies Height-Associated Variants by 
Mechanism of Action and Implicates Genes Important for Skeletal Development.

Chan Y(1), Salem RM(2), Hsu YH(2), McMahon G(3), Pers TH(2), Vedantam S(4), Esko 
T(5), Guo MH(2), Lim ET(2); GIANT Consortium, Franke L(6), Smith GD(7), Strachan 
DP(8), Hirschhorn JN(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Broad
Institute of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Divisions of Endocrinology and Genetics and Center for 
Basic and Translational Obesity Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 
02115, USA; Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: rigel@broadinstitute.org.
(2)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Broad
Institute of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Divisions of Endocrinology and Genetics and Center for 
Basic and Translational Obesity Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 
02115, USA. (3)School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol,
Oakfield House, Oakfield Grove, Bristol BS8 2BN, UK. (4)Broad Institute of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA; Divisions of Endocrinology and Genetics and Center for Basic and
Translational Obesity Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. (5)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Broad Institute of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Divisions of Endocrinology and Genetics and
Center for Basic and Translational Obesity Research, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu 51010, 
Estonia. (6)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical
Centre Groningen, Groningen 9700 AB, the Netherlands. (7)School of Social and
Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Oakfield House, Oakfield Grove,
Bristol BS8 2BN, UK; MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol,
Bristol BS8 2PR, UK. (8)Population Health Research Institute, St George's,
University of London, London SW17 0RE, UK. (9)Department of Genetics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Broad Institute of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA;
Divisions of Endocrinology and Genetics and Center for Basic and Translational
Obesity Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic
address: joelh@broadinstitute.org.

Human height is a composite measurement, reflecting the sum of leg, spine, and
head lengths. Many common variants influence total height, but the effects of
these or other variants on the components of height (body proportion) remain
largely unknown. We studied sitting height ratio (SHR), the ratio of sitting
height to total height, to identify such effects in 3,545 African Americans and
21,590 individuals of European ancestry. We found that SHR is heritable: 26% and 
39% of the total variance of SHR can be explained by common variants in European 
and African Americans, respectively, and global European admixture is negatively 
correlated with SHR in African Americans (r(2)  0.03). Six regions reached
genome-wide significance (p < 5 × 10(-8)) for association with SHR and overlapped
biological candidate genes, including TBX2 and IGFBP3. We found that 130 of 670
height-associated variants are nominally associated (p < 0.05) with SHR, more
than expected by chance (p = 5 × 10(-40)). At these 130 loci, the
height-increasing alleles are associated with either a decrease (71 loci) or
increase (59 loci) in SHR, suggesting that different height loci
disproportionally affect either leg length or spine/head length. Pathway analyses
via DEPICT revealed that height loci affecting SHR, and especially those
affecting leg length, show enrichment of different biological pathways (e.g.,
bone/cartilage/growth plate pathways) than do loci with no effect on SHR (e.g.,
embryonic development). These results highlight the value of using a pair of
related but orthogonal phenotypes, in this case SHR with height, as a prism to
dissect the biology underlying genetic associations in polygenic traits and
diseases.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4570286
PMID: 25865494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Dec 15;7(12):5394-402. eCollection 2014.

Association of TBX2 and P21 expression with clinicopathological features and
survival of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Huang Y(1), Li Z(1), Zhong Q(1), Li G(1), Zhang Y(1), Huang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing Tongren Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Key Laboratory of Otolaryngology Head and Neck
Surgery (Capital Medical University), Ministry of Education Beijing 100730, China
; Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, People's Hospital of
Taizhou Taizhou 225300, Jiangsu, China ; Department of Head and Neck Surgery and 
Epidemiology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: The expression of P21 and TBX2 in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma
(LSCC) and their corresponding adjacent normal laryngeal tissues, as well as
their association with clinical pathological features and survival remain
unclear.
METHOD: we used the RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry to detect their mRNA and
protein levels in 75 LSCC patients. We also use log-rank test and Cox models to
compare survival among different groups.
RESULTS: The mRNA expression level of TBX2 was up-regulated, while P21 was
down-regulated in LSCC compared with their matched adjacent laryngeal tissues
(All P < 0.001). The expression of P21 was correlated with tumor stage, lymph
node metastasis and smoking; and TBX2 expression was associated with lymph node
metastasis, differentiation degree and smoking (All P < 0.05). Patients with high
TBX2 and low P21 expression had significantly worse survival than those with low 
TBX2 and high P21 expression, respectively (All P < 0.05). A significant
correlation between expression of TBX2 and P21 (Pearson, P < 0.05) was observed. 
Furthermore, multivariable analysis showed that patients with low TBX2 and high
P21 expression alone had a significantly reduced risk for overall death compared 
with those with low TBX2 and high P21 expression. The risk for overall death was 
even lower for patients with both low and high expression of both genes than any 
other co-expression status of both genes (HR, 0.1; 95% CI, 0.0-0.9).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that abnormal expression of P21 and TBX2 in
tumors may jointly, or individually, predict poor prognosis of LSCC.

PMCID: PMC4307495
PMID: 25664048  [PubMed]


12. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Mar 15;183:117-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.01.049. Epub
2015 Jan 27.

Signaling molecules, transcription growth factors and other regulators revealed
from in-vivo and in-vitro models for the regulation of cardiac development.

Meganathan K(1), Sotiriadou I(1), Natarajan K(1), Hescheler J(1), Sachinidis
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology and
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Germany.
(2)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology and
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Germany.
Electronic address: A.Sachinidis@uni-koeln.de.

Several in-vivo heart developmental models have been applied to decipher the
cardiac developmental patterning encompassing early, dorsal, cardiac and visceral
mesoderm as well as various transcription factors such as Gata, Hand, Tin, Dpp,
Pnr. The expression of cardiac specific transcription factors, such as Gata4,
Tbx5, Tbx20, Tbx2, Tbx3, Mef2c, Hey1 and Hand1 are of fundamental significance
for the in-vivo cardiac development. Not only the transcription factors, but also
the signaling molecules involved in cardiac development were conserved among
various species. Enrichment of the bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) in the
anterior lateral plate mesoderm is essential for the initiation of myocardial
differentiation and the cardiac developmental process. Moreover, the expression
of a number of cardiac transcription factors and structural genes initiate
cardiac differentiation in the medial mesoderm. Other signaling molecules such as
TGF-beta, IGF-1/2 and the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) play a significant role 
in cardiac repair/regeneration, ventricular heart development and specification
of early cardiac mesoderm, respectively. The role of the Wnt signaling in cardiac
development is still controversial discussed, as in-vitro results differ
dramatically in relation to the animal models. Embryonic stem cells (ESC) were
utilized as an important in-vitro model for the elucidation of the cardiac
developmental processes since they can be easily manipulated by numerous
signaling molecules, growth factors, small molecules and genetic manipulation.
Finally, in the present review the dynamic role of the long noncoding RNA and
miRNAs in the regulation of cardiac development are summarized and discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25662074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mod Pathol. 2015 Apr;28(4):515-22. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2014.145. Epub 2014 Nov
14.

Stratification based on methylation of TBX2 and TBX3 into three molecular grades 
predicts progression in patients with pTa-bladder cancer.

Beukers W(1), Kandimalla R(1), Masius RG(1), Vermeij M(1), Kranse R(2), van
Leenders GJ(1), Zwarthoff EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Dutch
Cancer Registry, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The potential risk of recurrence and progression in patients with
non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer necessitates followup by cystoscopy. The risk 
of progression to muscle-invasive bladder cancer is estimated based on the
European Organisation of Research and Treatment of Cancer score, a combination of
several clinicopathological variables. However, pathological assessment is not
objective and reproducibility is insufficient. The use of molecular markers could
contribute to the estimation of tumor aggressiveness. We recently demonstrated
that methylation of GATA2, TBX2, TBX3, and ZIC4 genes could predict progression
in Ta tumors. In this study, we aimed to validate the markers in a large patient 
set using DNA from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue. PALGA: the Dutch 
Pathology Registry was used for patient selection. We included 192 patients with 
pTaG1/2 bladder cancer of whom 77 experienced progression. Methylation analysis
was performed and log-rank analysis was used to calculate the predictive value of
each methylation marker for developing progression over time. This analysis
showed better progression-free survival in patients with low methylation rates
compared with the patients with high methylation rates for all markers (P<0.001) 
during a followup of ten-years. The combined predictive effect of the methylation
markers was analyzed with the Cox-regression method. In this analysis, TBX2,
TBX3, and ZIC4 were independent predictors of progression. On the basis of
methylation status of TBX2 and TBX3, patients were divided into three new
molecular grade groups. Survival analysis showed that only 8% of patients in the 
low molecular grade group progressed within 5 years. This was 29 and 63% for the 
intermediate- and high-molecular grade groups. In conclusion, this new
molecular-grade based on the combination of TBX2 and TBX3 methylation is an
excellent marker for predicting progression to muscle-invasive bladder cancer in 
patients with primary pTaG1/2 bladder cancer.

PMID: 25394776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 19;289(51):35633-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.596411. Epub
2014 Nov 4.

The anti-proliferative function of the TGF-ß1 signaling pathway involves the
repression of the oncogenic TBX2 by its homologue TBX3.

Li J(1), Ballim D(1), Rodriguez M(2), Cui R(3), Goding CR(2), Teng H(1), Prince
S(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University
of Cape Town, Observatory, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa. (2)Ludwig Institute for
Cancer Research, Oxford University, Headington, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom,
and. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118. (4)From the
Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town,
Observatory, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa, sharon.prince@uct.ac.za.

A growing body of work has shown that the highly homologous T-box transcription
factors TBX2 and TBX3 play critical but distinct roles in embryonic development
and cancer progression. For example, TBX2 and TBX3 are up-regulated in several
cancers and recent evidence suggests that whereas TBX2 functions as a
pro-proliferative factor, TBX3 inhibits cell proliferation but promotes cancer
cell migration and invasion. While the molecular mechanisms regulating these
functions of TBX2 and TBX3 are poorly understood we recently reported that the
TGF-ß1 signaling pathway up-regulates TBX3 expression to mediate, in part, its
well described anti-proliferative and pro-migratory roles. The TBX3 targets
responsible for these functions were however not identified. Here we reveal for
the first time that the TGF-ß1 signaling pathway represses TBX2 transcriptionally
and we provide a detailed mechanism to show that this is mediated by TBX3.
Furthermore, we implicate the down-regulation of TBX2 in the anti-proliferative
function of the TGF-ß1-TBX3 axis. These findings have important implications for 
our understanding of the regulation of TBX2 and TBX3 and shed light on the
mechanisms involved in the anti-proliferative and pro-migratory roles of TGF-ß1.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4271245
PMID: 25371204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Oncotarget. 2014 Dec 15;5(23):11998-2015.

The orthologous Tbx transcription factors Omb and TBX2 induce epithelial cell
migration and extrusion in vivo without involvement of matrix metalloproteinases.

Shen J(1), Lu J(1), Sui L(1), Wang D(1), Yin M(2), Hoffmann I(3), Legler A(3),
Pflugfelder GO(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Carbon Fiber and Functional Polymers, Beijing Laboratory of 
Biomedical Materials, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China. 
(3)Institute of Genetics, Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany.

The transcription factors TBX2 and TBX3 are overexpressed in various human
cancers. Here, we investigated the effect of overexpressing the orthologous Tbx
genes Drosophila optomotor-blind (omb) and human TBX2 in the epithelium of the
Drosophila wing imaginal disc and observed two types of cell motility. Omb/TBX2
overexpressing cells could move within the plane of the epithelium. Invasive
cells migrated long-distance as single cells retaining or regaining normal cell
shape and apico-basal polarity in spite of attenuated apical DE-cadherin
concentration. Inappropriate levels of DE-cadherin were sufficient to drive cell 
migration in the wing disc epithelium. Omb/TBX2 overexpression and reduced
DE-cadherin-dependent adhesion caused the formation of actin-rich lateral cell
protrusions. Omb/TBX2 overexpressing cells could also delaminate basally,
penetrating the basal lamina, however, without degradation of extracellular
matrix. Expression of Timp, an inhibitor of matrix metalloproteases, blocked
neither intraepithelial motility nor basal extrusion. Our results reveal an
MMP-independent mechanism of cell invasion and suggest a conserved role of
Tbx2-related proteins in cell invasion and metastasis-related processes.

PMCID: PMC4322970
PMID: 25344916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Adolesc Health. 2015 Jan;56(1):66-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2014.07.020.
Epub 2014 Oct 3.

Associations between menarche-related genetic variants and pubertal growth in
male and female adolescents.

Tu W(1), Wagner EK(2), Eckert GJ(1), Yu Z(1), Hannon T(3), Pratt JH(4), He C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana. (2)Department of Epidemiology, Richard M. Fairbanks School
of Public Health, Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(4)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana; The Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Richard M. Fairbanks School of Public Health,
Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana; Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center,
Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana. Electronic address: chunhe@iu.edu.

PURPOSE: Previous studies have identified novel genetic variants associated with 
age at menarche in females of European descent. The pubertal growth effects of
these variants have not been carefully evaluated in non-European descent groups. 
We aimed to examine the effects of 31 newly identified menarche-related
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on growth outcomes in African-American
(AA) and European-American (EA) children in a prospective cohort.
METHODS: We analyzed longitudinal data collected from 263 AAs and 338 EAs
enrolled between ages 5 and 17 years; the subjects were followed semiannually for
an average of 6 years. The associations between the SNPs and growth-related
outcomes, including weight, height, and body mass index (BMI), were examined
using mixed-effect models.
RESULTS: Longitudinal analyses revealed that 4 (near or in genes VGLL3, PEX2,
CA10, and SKOR2) of the 14 menarche-only-related SNPs were associated with
changes in weight and BMI in EA and AA (p = .0032), but none of them was
associated with changes in height. Of the eight menarche-timing and BMI-related
SNPs, none was associated with changes in height, but three (in or near genes
NEGR1, ETV5, and FTO) were associated with more rapid increases in weight and/or 
BMI in EA (p = .0059). Among the nine menarche-timing and height-related SNPs,
four (in or near genes ZBTB38, LOC728666, TBX2, and CABLES) were associated with 
changes in weight or height in EA and AA (p = .0042).
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variants related to age at menarche were found to be
associated with various growth parameters in healthy adolescents. The identified 
associations were often race and sex specific.

Copyright © 2015 Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4275397
PMID: 25287989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Dec;1846(2):380-91. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2014.08.004. 
Epub 2014 Aug 19.

T-box transcription factors in cancer biology.

Wansleben S(1), Peres J(1), Hare S(1), Goding CR(2), Prince S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, 7925 Cape Town, South Africa. (2)Ludwig Institute for Cancer
Research, Oxford University, Old Road Campus, Headington, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK.
(3)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, 7925 Cape Town, South Africa. Electronic address:
sharon.prince@uct.ac.za.

The evolutionarily conserved T-box family of transcription factors have critical 
and well-established roles in embryonic development. More recently, T-box factors
have also gained increasing prominence in the field of cancer biology where a
wide range of cancers exhibit deregulated expression of T-box factors that
possess tumour suppressor and/or tumour promoter functions. Of these the best
characterised is TBX2, whose expression is upregulated in cancers including
breast, pancreatic, ovarian, liver, endometrial adenocarcinoma, glioblastomas,
gastric, uterine cervical and melanoma. Understanding the role and regulation of 
TBX2, as well as other T-box factors, in contributing directly to tumour
progression, and especially in suppression of senescence and control of
invasiveness suggests that targeting TBX2 expression or function alone or in
combination with currently available chemotherapeutic agents may represent a
therapeutic strategy for cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25149433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 22;9(7):e102796. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102796.
eCollection 2014.

Directed differentiation of patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells
identifies the transcriptional repression and epigenetic modification of NKX2-5, 
HAND1, and NOTCH1 in hypoplastic left heart syndrome.

Kobayashi J(1), Yoshida M(2), Tarui S(1), Hirata M(1), Nagai Y(3), Kasahara S(1),
Naruse K(3), Ito H(2), Sano S(1), Oh H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of
Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan. (2)Department
of Cardiovascular Medicine, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan. (3)Department of
Cardiovascular Physiology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan. (4)Department of
Regenerative Medicine, Center for Innovative Clinical Medicine, Okayama
University Hospital, Okayama, Japan.

The genetic basis of hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) remains unknown, and 
the lack of animal models to reconstitute the cardiac maldevelopment has hampered
the study of this disease. This study investigated the altered control of
transcriptional and epigenetic programs that may affect the development of HLHS
by using disease-specific induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. Cardiac
progenitor cells (CPCs) were isolated from patients with congenital heart
diseases to generate patient-specific iPS cells. Comparative gene expression
analysis of HLHS- and biventricle (BV) heart-derived iPS cells was performed to
dissect the complex genetic circuits that may promote the disease phenotype. Both
HLHS- and BV heart-derived CPCs were reprogrammed to generate disease-specific
iPS cells, which showed characteristic human embryonic stem cell signatures,
expressed pluripotency markers, and could give rise to cardiomyocytes. However,
HLHS-iPS cells exhibited lower cardiomyogenic differentiation potential than
BV-iPS cells. Quantitative gene expression analysis demonstrated that
HLHS-derived iPS cells showed transcriptional repression of NKX2-5, reduced
levels of TBX2 and NOTCH/HEY signaling, and inhibited HAND1/2 transcripts
compared with control cells. Although both HLHS-derived CPCs and iPS cells showed
reduced SRE and TNNT2 transcriptional activation compared with BV-derived cells, 
co-transfection of NKX2-5, HAND1, and NOTCH1 into HLHS-derived cells resulted in 
synergistic restoration of these promoters activation. Notably, gain- and
loss-of-function studies revealed that NKX2-5 had a predominant impact on NPPA
transcriptional activation. Moreover, differentiated HLHS-derived iPS cells
showed reduced H3K4 dimethylation as well as histone H3 acetylation but increased
H3K27 trimethylation to inhibit transcriptional activation on the NKX2-5
promoter. These findings suggest that patient-specific iPS cells may provide
molecular insights into complex transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms, at
least in part, through combinatorial expression of NKX2-5, HAND1, and NOTCH1 that
coordinately contribute to cardiac malformations in HLHS.

PMCID: PMC4106834
PMID: 25050861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Neoplasma. 2014;61(4):476-80.

High TBX2 expression predicts poor prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer.

Zhang Z, Guo Y.

Deregulated expression of T-box2 (TBX2) has been implicated in malignancies.
However, the expression pattern and the role of TBX2 in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) remain unclear. The aim of this study was to explore the clinical 
value of TBX2 in patients with NSCLC. We examined TBX2 expression in 40 NSCLC
tissues and matched adjacent noncancerous tissues by quantitative RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR) and Western blotting. Furthermore, the TBX2 protein expression was
analyzed by immunohistochemistry in 416 NSCLC samples. Kaplan-Meier method and
multivariate Cox regression model were used to evaluate the prognostic value of
TBX2 expression in NSCLC for disease survival. The expression of TBX2 was
significantly elevated in NSCLC tissues as compared with adjacent non-cancerous
tissues (P<0.001). The high expression of TBX2 in NSCLC was significantly
correlated with lymph node metastasis and tumor node metastasis (TNM) stage.
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis revealed that high expression of TBX2 correlated
with poor prognosis of NSCLC patients (P<0.01). Multivariate analysis showed that
TBX2 expression was an independent prognostic marker for overall survival of
NSCLC patients (HR=2.21, 95%CI=1.349-3.905, P=0.0015). Our results suggest that
high TBX2 expression is associated with poor prognosis of NSCLC patients, and
TBX2 may be a prognostic biomarker for NSCLC.

PMID: 25027744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Dairy Sci. 2014 Jul;97(7):4322-8. doi: 10.3168/jds.2013-7771. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Short communication: Expression of T-box 2 and 3 in the bovine mammary gland.

Hoffman ML(1), McFadden KK(1), Hoagland TA(1), Kazmer GW(1), Govoni KE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Connecticut, Storrs 06269.
(2)Department of Animal Science, University of Connecticut, Storrs 06269.
Electronic address: kristen.govoni@uconn.edu.

To increase our understanding of the mechanisms by which growth hormone (GH) and 
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I influence bovine mammary gland development,
the potential roles of T-box2 (TBX2) and T-box3 (TBX3) were investigated.
Although no information regarding expression of either transcription factor in
the bovine mammary gland exists, it is known that TBX3 and its closely related
family member, TBX2, are required for mammary gland development in humans and
mice. Additionally, TBX3 mutations in humans and mice lead to ulnar mammary
syndrome. Evidence is present in bone that TBX3 is required for proliferation and
its expression is regulated by GH, an important regulator of mammary gland
development and milk production. We hypothesized that TBX2 and TBX3 are expressed
in the bovine mammary gland and that GH, IGF-I, or both increase TBX2 and TBX3
expression in bovine mammary epithelial cells (MEC). Bovine mammary gland tissue,
MAC-T cells, primary MEC, and fibroblasts were obtained and TBX2 and TBX3
expression was determined by real-time reverse transcription PCR. In addition,
TBX2 and TBX3 expression was examined in cells treated with 100 or 500 ng/mL of
GH or 100 or 200 ng/mL of IGF-I for 24 or 48 h. Both TBX2 and TBX3 were expressed
in bovine mammary tissue. Surprisingly, expression of TBX2 was only detected in
mammary fibroblast cells, whereas TBX3 was expressed in all 3 cell types. Growth 
hormone did not alter TBX3 expression in MAC-T cells or MEC. However, IGF-I
increased TBX3 expression in MAC-T, but not in primary MEC. We did not observe a 
change in TBX2 or TBX3 expression in fibroblasts treated with GH and IGF.
Therefore, we concluded that (1) TBX2 and TBX3 are expressed in bovine mammary
gland, (2) their expression is cell-type specific, and (3) IGF-I stimulates TBX3 
expression in MAC-T cells.

Copyright © 2014 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 24767885  [PubMed - in process]


21. Oncotarget. 2014 Mar 30;5(6):1609-20.

TBX2 represses CST6 resulting in uncontrolled legumain activity to sustain breast
cancer proliferation: a novel cancer-selective target pathway with therapeutic
opportunities.

D'Costa ZC(1), Higgins C, Ong CW, Irwin GW, Boyle D, McArt DG, McCloskey K,
Buckley NE, Crawford NT, Thiagarajan L, Murray JT, Kennedy RD, Mulligan KA,
Harkin DP, Waugh DJ, Scott CJ, Salto-Tellez M, Williams R, Mullan PB.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast,
Belfast, UK.

TBX2 is an oncogenic transcription factor known to drive breast cancer
proliferation. We have identified the cysteine protease inhibitor Cystatin 6
(CST6) as a consistently repressed TBX2 target gene, co-repressed through a
mechanism involving Early Growth Response 1 (EGR1). Exogenous expression of CST6 
in TBX2-expressing breast cancer cells resulted in significant apoptosis whilst
non-tumorigenic breast cells remained unaffected. CST6 is an important tumor
suppressor in multiple tissues, acting as a dual protease inhibitor of both
papain-like cathepsins and asparaginyl endopeptidases (AEPs) such as Legumain
(LGMN). Mutation of the CST6 LGMN-inhibitory domain completely abrogated its
ability to induce apoptosis in TBX2-expressing breast cancer cells, whilst
mutation of the cathepsin-inhibitory domain or treatment with a pan-cathepsin
inhibitor had no effect, suggesting that LGMN is the key oncogenic driver enzyme.
LGMN activity assays confirmed the observed growth inhibitory effects were
consistent with CST6 inhibition of LGMN. Knockdown of LGMN and the only other
known AEP enzyme (GPI8) by siRNA confirmed that LGMN was the enzyme responsible
for maintaining breast cancer proliferation. CST6 did not require secretion or
glycosylation to elicit its cell killing effects, suggesting an intracellular
mode of action. Finally, we show that TBX2 and CST6 displayed reciprocal
expression in a cohort of primary breast cancers with increased TBX2 expression
associating with increased metastases. We have also noted that tumors with
altered TBX2/CST6 expression show poor overall survival. This novel
TBX2-CST6-LGMN signaling pathway, therefore, represents an exciting opportunity
for the development of novel therapies to target TBX2 driven breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC4057604
PMID: 24742492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Neoplasma. 2014 Apr 9. doi: 10.4149/neo_2014_059. [Epub ahead of print]

High TBX2 expression predicts poor prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer.

Zhang Z, Guo Y.

Deregulated expression of T-box2 (TBX2) has been implicated in malignancies.
However, the expression pattern and the role of TBX2 in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) remain unclear. The aim of this study was to explore the clinical 
value of TBX2 in patients with NSCLC. We examined TBX2 expression in 40 NSCLC
tissues and matched adjacent noncancerous tissues by quantitative RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR) and Western blotting. Furthermore, the TBX2 protein expression was
analyzed by immunohistochemistry in 416 NSCLC samples. Kaplan-Meier method and
multivariate Cox regression model were used to evaluate the prognostic value of
TBX2 expression in NSCLC for disease survival. The expression of TBX2 was
significantly elevated in NSCLC tissues as compared with adjacent non-cancerous
tissues (P<0.001). The high expression of TBX2 in NSCLC was significantly
correlated with lymph node metastasis and tumor node metastasis (TNM) stage.
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis revealed that high expression of TBX2 correlated
with poor prognosis of NSCLC patients (P<0.01). Multivariate analysis showed that
TBX2 expression was an independent prognostic marker for overall survival of
NSCLC patients (HR=2.21, 95%CI=1.349-3.905, P=0.0015). Our results suggest that
high TBX2 expression is associated with poor prognosis of NSCLC patients, and
TBX2 may be a<U+202F>prognostic biomarker for NSCLC. Keywords: TBX2, non-small cell lung
cancer, prognosis, biomarker.

PMID: 24712844  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. Dev Biol. 2014 Jun 15;390(2):191-207. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.03.008. Epub 2014
Mar 27.

AcvR1-mediated BMP signaling in second heart field is required for arterial pole 
development: implications for myocardial differentiation and regional identity.

Thomas PS(1), Rajderkar S(1), Lane J(1), Mishina Y(1), Kaartinen V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan - Ann
Arbor, 1011 N. University Ave, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (2)Department of
Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan - Ann Arbor, 1011 N.
University Ave, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. Electronic address: vesak@umich.edu.

BMP signaling plays an essential role in second heart field-derived heart and
arterial trunk development, including myocardial differentiation, right
ventricular growth, and interventricular, outflow tract and aortico-pulmonary
septation. It is mediated by a number of different BMP ligands, and receptors,
many of which are present simultaneously. The mechanisms by which they regulate
morphogenetic events and degree of redundancy amongst them have still to be
elucidated. We therefore assessed the role of BMP Type I receptor AcvR1 in
anterior second heart field-derived cell development, and compared it with that
of BmpR1a. By removing Acvr1 using the driver Mef2c[AHF]-Cre, we show that AcvR1 
plays an essential role in arterial pole morphogenesis, identifying defects in
outflow tract wall and cushion morphology that preceded a spectrum of septation
defects from double outlet right ventricle to common arterial trunk in mutants.
Its absence caused dysregulation in gene expression important for myocardial
differentiation (Isl1, Fgf8) and regional identity (Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx20, Tgfb2).
Although these defects resemble to some degree those in the equivalent Bmpr1a
mutant, a novel gene knock-in model in which Bmpr1a was expressed in the Acvr1
locus only partially restored septation in Acvr1 mutants. These data show that
both BmpR1a and AcvR1 are needed for normal heart development, in which they play
some non-redundant roles, and refine our understanding of the genetic and
morphogenetic processes underlying Bmp-mediated heart development important in
human congenital heart disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4057048
PMID: 24680892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 10;9(3):e90804. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090804. eCollection
2014.

Genome-wide screen of DNA methylation changes induced by low dose X-ray radiation
in mice.

Wang J(1), Zhang Y(2), Xu K(1), Mao X(1), Xue L(1), Liu X(1), Yu H(1), Chen L(1),
Chu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing Clinical School of
Southern Medical University, Nanjing, P.R. China. (2)Department of Medical
Oncology, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing Clinical School of Southern Medical
University, Nanjing, P.R. China; Department of Medical Oncology, Yangzhou No. 1
People's Hospital, The Second Clinical School of Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,
P.R. China.

Epigenetic mechanisms play a key role in non-targeted effects of radiation. The
purpose of this study was to investigate global hypomethylation and promoter
hypermethylation of particular genes induced by low dose radiation (LDR). Thirty 
male BALB/c mice were divided into 3 groups: control, acutely exposed (0.5 Gy
X-rays), and chronic exposure for 10 days (0.05Gy/d×10d). High-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) and MeDIP-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)
were used to study methylation profiles. DNMT1 and MBD2 expression was determined
by qPCR and western blot assays. Methylation and expression of Rad23b and Ddit3
were determined by bisulfate sequencing primers (BSP) and qPCR, respectively. The
results show that LDR induced genomic hypomethylation in blood 2 h
postirraditaion, but was not retained at 1-month. DNMT1 and MBD2 were
downregulated in a tissue-specific manner but did not persist. Specific
hypermethylation was observed for 811 regions in the group receiving chronic
exposure, which covered almost all key biological processes as indicated by GO
and KEGG pathway analysis. Eight hypermethylated genes (Rad23b, Tdg, Ccnd1,
Ddit3, Llgl1, Rasl11a, Tbx2, Scl6a15) were verified by MeDIP-qPCR. Among them,
Rad23b and Ddit3 gene displayed tissue-specific methylation and downregulation,
which persisted for 1-month postirradiation. Thus, LDR induced global
hypomethylation and tissue-specific promoter hypermethylation of particular
genes. Promoter hypermethylation, rather than global hypomethylation, was
relatively stable. Dysregulation of methylation might be correlated with
down-regulation of DNMT1 and MBD2, but much better understanding the molecular
mechanisms involved in this process will require further study.

PMCID: PMC3948688
PMID: 24614869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2014 Feb;34(2):228-31.

[Genome-wide screening of CpG island methylation changes induced by low-dose
X-ray radiation in mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Mao X, Zhang Y, Xue L, Liu X, Geng J, Ren L, Yu H, Chen L, Chu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Nanjing Clinical School Affiliated to Southern
Medical University, Nanjing General Hospital of Nanjing Military Command, Nanjing
210002, China.E-mail: 84089248@qq.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the methylation changes in promoter CpG islands induced by
low-dose X-ray radiation (LDR).
METHODS: Twenty male BALB/c mice were randomly divided into control and
fractionated radiation group exposed to 6 MV X-ray for 10 days (0.05 Gy/day). All
the mice were sacrificed 2 h after the last radiation on day 10, and blood
samples were collected for detecting DNA methylation changes using
Roche-NimbleGen mouse DNA methylation 3×720K Promoter Plus CpG Island Array.
MeDIP-qPCR was used to further validate the methylation status of specific genes.
RESULTS: A total of 811 genes were found to show specific hypermethylation in
fractional radiation group as compared with the control group, involving almost
all the main biological processes by GO analysis. Eight candidate genes (Rad23b, 
Tdg, Ccnd1, Ddit3, Llgl1, Rasl11a, Tbx2, and Slc6a15) were confirmed to be
hypermethylated in LDR samples by MeDIP-qPCR, consistent with the results of the 
methylation chip study.
CONCLUSION: LDR induces promoter hypermethylation on specific genes, which may
contribute to radiation-induced pathogenesis.

PMID: 24589602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Mol Histol. 2014 Aug;45(4):421-6. doi: 10.1007/s10735-014-9569-0. Epub 2014 Feb
16.

Prognostic significance of TBX2 expression in non-small cell lung cancer.

Hu B(1), Mu HP, Zhang YQ, Su CY, Song JT, Meng C, Liu DX.

Author information: 
(1)Emergency Department, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, 324 Jing Wu Road, Jinan, 250021, Shandong, China.

T-box2 (TBX2) expression has been reported to be related to aggressive tumor
features. However, the role of TBX2 in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
tumorigenesis has never been elucidated. So we aimed at investigating the
potential role of TBX2 in NSCLC. TBX2 expression was evaluated by qRT-PCR and
Western blotting in 50 paired fresh lung cancer tissues as well as
immunohistochemistry on 212 paraffin-embedded sections. We showed that the
expression level of TBX2 was significantly increased in NSCLC as compared with
the adjacent noncancerous tissue. Positive expression level of TBX2 was
associated with histological type, lymph node metastasis and distant metastasis. 
Kaplan-Meier survival curves showed that positive expression level of TBX2 was
associated with poor overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival of NSCLC
patients. Results showed that TBX2 positivity was an independent prognostic
factor for OS (HR 1.87, 95% CI 1.004-3.153, p = 0.012). On the basis of these
results, we suggested that TBX2 protein expression may be an unfavorable
independent prognostic parameter for NSCLC.

PMID: 24531749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Dermatoendocrinol. 2013 Jun 1;5(3):352-7. doi: 10.4161/derm.26739. Epub 2013 Nov 
5.

Elevated T-box 2 in infantile hemangioma stem cells maintains an adipogenic
differentiation-competent state.

Todorovich SM(1), Khan ZA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology; Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry; University
of Western Ontario; London, ON Canada. (2)Department of Pathology; Schulich
School of Medicine & Dentistry; University of Western Ontario; London, ON Canada 
; Metabolism and Diabetes Program; Lawson Health Research Institute; London, ON
Canada.

Infantile hemangioma is a benign vascular tumor that affects 4 to 10% of
neonates. A unique feature of hemangiomas is the natural lifecycle, whereby the
tumor rapidly grows and then spontaneously regresses to a fibrofatty residuum. We
have shown that hemangiomas are derived from mutlipotential stem cells (hemSCs), 
which differentiate into endothelial cells during the early proliferating phase
and into adipocytes during the later involutive phase. T-box 2 (TBX2) is a
transcription factor involved in controlling cell-fate decisions, and is highly
expressed during the proliferating phase of hemangioma development. We
hypothesize that TBX2 expression would be high in hemSCs derived from human
hemangiomas and inhibiting TBX2 would result in changes in hemSC differentiation 
potential. To test our hypothesis, we analyzed hemSCs for TBX2 mRNA and protein
expression. We then used RNA interference and TBX2 overexpression to determine
the effect of altering TBX2 levels on hemSC growth and differentiation. Our
studies show that TBX2 is highly expressed in hemSCs compared with a panel of
normal stem/progenitor cells and mature vascular cells. TBX2 knockdown completely
abolished adipogenic differentiation of hemSCs without significantly altering
growth. Furthermore, overexpression of TBX2 led to enhanced adipogenic
differentiation ability possibly through induction of C/EBPß. From these
findings, we believe that TBX2 is active in hemSCs and that TBX2 maintains
adipogenic differentiation-competent state of hemSCs. These findings may be
important in the development of better treatment options for hemangiomas to
accelerate involution.

PMCID: PMC3908965
PMID: 24516689  [PubMed]


28. Int J Cancer. 2014 Aug 15;135(4):785-97. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28721. Epub 2014 Jan
27.

TBX2 blocks myogenesis and promotes proliferation in rhabdomyosarcoma cells.

Zhu B(1), Zhang M, Byrum SD, Tackett AJ, Davie JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Simmons Cancer Institute,
Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Carbondale, IL.

Rhabdomyosarcomas (RMSs) are the most frequent soft tissue sarcomas in children
that share many features of developing skeletal muscle. We have discovered that a
T-box family member, TBX2, is highly upregulated in tumor cells of both major RMS
subtypes. TBX2 is a repressor that is often overexpressed in cancer cells and is 
thought to function in bypassing cell growth control, including repression of p14
and p21. The cell cycle regulator p21 is required for the terminal
differentiation of skeletal muscle cells and is silenced in RMS cells. We have
found that TBX2 interacts with the myogenic regulatory factors MyoD and myogenin 
and inhibits the activity of these factors. TBX2 is expressed in primary
myoblasts and C2C12 cells, but is strongly downregulated upon differentiation.
TBX2 recruits the histone deacetylase HDAC1 and is a potent inhibitor of the
expression of muscle-specific genes and the cell cycle regulators, p21 and p14.
TBX2 promotes the proliferation of RMS cells and either depletions of TBX2 or
dominant negative TBX2 upregulate p21- and muscle-specific genes. Significantly, 
depletion or interference with TBX2 completely inhibits tumor growth in a
xenograft assay, highlighting the oncogenic role of TBX2 in RMS cells. Thus, the 
data demonstrate that elevated expression of TBX2 contributes to the pathology of
RMS cells by promoting proliferation and repressing differentiation-specific gene
expression. These results show that deregulated TBX2 serves as an oncogene in
RMS, suggesting that TBX2 may serve as a new diagnostic marker or therapeutic
target for RMS tumors.

Copyright © 2014 UICC.

PMCID: PMC4051830
PMID: 24470334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Autophagy. 2014 Apr;10(4):572-87. doi: 10.4161/auto.27649. Epub 2014 Jan 14.

Autophagy is essential for cardiac morphogenesis during vertebrate development.

Lee E(1), Koo Y(2), Ng A(3), Wei Y(4), Luby-Phelps K(5), Juraszek A(6), Xavier
RJ(3), Cleaver O(2), Levine B(7), Amatruda JF(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine; University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center; Dallas, TX USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biology; University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA. (3)Center for Computational &
Integrative Biology; Massachusetts General Hospital; Boston, MA USA;
Gastrointestinal Unit; Massachusetts General Hospital; Boston, MA USA; Broad
Institute of Harvard and MIT; Cambridge, MA USA. (4)Department of Internal
Medicine; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA; Center
for Autophagy Research; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, 
TX USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute; University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center; Dallas, TX USA. (5)Department of Cell Biology; UT Southwestern Medical
Center; Dallas, TX USA. (6)Department of Pediatrics; University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA. (7)Department of Internal Medicine; 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA; Center for
Autophagy Research; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX
USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute; University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center; Dallas, TX USA; Department of Microbiology; University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA. (8)Department of Internal Medicine; 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA; Department of
Molecular Biology; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX
USA; Department of Pediatrics; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center;
Dallas, TX USA.

Genetic analyses indicate that autophagy, an evolutionarily conserved lysosomal
degradation pathway, is essential for eukaryotic differentiation and development.
However, little is known about whether autophagy contributes to morphogenesis
during embryogenesis. To address this question, we examined the role of autophagy
in the early development of zebrafish, a model organism for studying vertebrate
tissue and organ morphogenesis. Using zebrafish that transgenically express the
fluorescent autophagy reporter protein, GFP-LC3, we found that autophagy is
active in multiple tissues, including the heart, during the embryonic period.
Inhibition of autophagy by morpholino knockdown of essential autophagy genes
(including atg5, atg7, and becn1) resulted in defects in morphogenesis, increased
numbers of dead cells, abnormal heart structure, and reduced organismal survival.
Further analyses of cardiac development in autophagy-deficient zebrafish revealed
defects in cardiac looping, abnormal chamber morphology, aberrant valve
development, and ectopic expression of critical transcription factors including
foxn4, tbx5, and tbx2. Consistent with these results, Atg5-deficient mice
displayed abnormal Tbx2 expression and defects in valve development and chamber
septation. Thus, autophagy plays an essential, conserved role in cardiac
morphogenesis during vertebrate development.

PMCID: PMC4091146
PMID: 24441423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Zoolog Sci. 2014 Jan;31(1):6-13. doi: 10.2108/zsj.31.6.

Conservation of position-specific gene expression in axolotl limb skin.

Satoh A(1), Makanae A.

Author information: 
(1)1 Okayama University, Research Core for Interdisciplinary Sciences (RCIS),
3-1-1, Tsushima-naka, Kita-ku, Okayama 700-8530, Japan.

Urodele amphibians can regenerate their limbs after amputation. After amputation,
undifferentiated cells appear on the amputation plane and form regeneration
blastema. A limb blastema recreates a complete replica of the original limb. It
is well known that disturbance of the location of limb tissues prior to
amputation perturbs limb patterning, suggesting that different intact limb
tissues carry different location information despite their identical appearance. 
The cause of such differences in intact tissues remains unknown. In this study,
we found that Lmx1b, Tbx2, and Tbx3 genes, which are expressed in developing limb
in a region specific manner, remained detectable in a mature axolotl limb.
Furthermore, those position-specific gene expression patterns were conserved in
mature limbs. Treatment with retinoic acid (RA), which is known to have
ventralizing activity, changed Lmx1b expression in intact dorsal skin and dorsal 
character to ventral, indicating that conserved Lmx1b expression was due to the
dorsal character and not leaky gene expression. Furthermore, we found that such
conserved gene expression was rewritable in regeneration blastemas. These results
suggest that axolotl limb cells can recognize their locations and maintain
limbness via conserved expression profiles of developmental genes.

PMID: 24410490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2014 May;63(5):434-40. doi: 10.1097/FJC.0000000000000068.

Effect of NRG-1/ErbB signaling intervention on the differentiation of bone marrow
stromal cells into sinus node-like cells.

Li Y(1), Li B, Zhang C, Zhang J, Zeng M, Zheng Z.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanchang University,
Nanchang, China; and Department of Vascular Surgery, Linyi People's Hospital,
Shandong, China.

The neuregulin-1 (NRG-1)/ErbB signaling pathway is a crucial regulator of cardiac
development and plays an important role in the formation of the cardiac special
conduction system. To establish a rat bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC)
cardiomyocyte (CM)-like differentiation model, BMSCs were treated with
5-azacytidine and fibroblast growth factor basic (FGF-basic) for 24 hours and
then cocultured with neonatal rat CMs in a Transwell culture system. The
feasibility of regulating the differentiation of BMSCs into sinoatrial node cells
by manipulating the NRG-1/ErbB pathway was investigated. Three weeks after
induction, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed that
inhibition of NRG-1/ErbB signaling (using AG1478) greatly enhanced the expression
of HCN4, Tbx3, and Tbx2. Additionally, Tbx3 protein levels were higher than in
the control group and even produced distinct nodal-type action potentials. The
expression of Nkx2.5 in the NRG-1 group (treated with exogenous NRG-1) was higher
than the other 2 groups. The expression of phospho-Akt was also increased in the 
NRG-1 group but decreased in the AG1478 group. Together, these data demonstrate
that inhibiting the endogenous NRG-1/ErbB signaling pathway when rat BMSCs
differentiate into CMs can greatly enhance the pacemaker phenotype. Akt signaling
may be one of the underlying molecular mechanisms responsible for these results.

PMID: 24390172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Pediatr Surg Int. 2014 Feb;30(2):143-9. doi: 10.1007/s00383-013-3455-9.

Altered Tbx1 gene expression is associated with abnormal oesophageal development 
in the adriamycin mouse model of oesophageal atresia/tracheo-oesophageal fistula.

Mc Laughlin D(1), Murphy P, Puri P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Natural Sciences, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

INTRODUCTION: Oesophageal atresia/tracheo-oesophageal atresia (OA/TOF) frequently
arises with associated anomalies and has been clinically linked with 22q11
deletion syndromes, a group of conditions due to Tbx1 gene mutation which include
Di George syndrome. Tbx1 and Tbx2 genes modulate pharyngeal and cardiac
development, but are also expressed in the developing foregut and are known to
interact with key signalling pathways described in oesophageal formation
including bone morphogenic proteins. The adriamycin mouse model (AMM) reliably
displays OA/TOF-like foregut malformations providing a powerful system for
investigating the disturbances in gene regulation and morphology involved in
tracheo-oesophageal malformations. We hypothesised that foregut abnormalities
observed in the AMM are associated with altered Tbx1 and Tbx2 gene expression.
METHODS: Time-mated CBA/Ca mice received intra-peritoneal injection of adriamycin
(for treated) or saline (for controls) on embryonic days (E)7 and 8. Untreated
Cd1 embryos were used to establish normal expression patterns. Embryos harvested 
on E9-E11 underwent whole-mount in situ hybridization with labelled RNA probes
for Tbx1 and Tbx2. Optical projection tomography was used to visualise expression
in whole embryos by 3D imaging.
RESULTS: Tbx1 expression was visualised in a highly specific pattern in the
proximal oesophageal endoderm in normal and control embryos. In the AMM,
extensive ectopic expression of Tbx1 was detected in the dorsal foregut and
adjacent to the TOF. The focally restricted oesophageal expression pattern
persisted in the AMM, but was posteriorly displaced in relation to the tracheal
bifurcation. Tbx2 was widely expressed in the ventral foregut mesoderm of
controls, lacking specific endoderm localisation. In the AMM, altered Tbx2
expression in the foregut was only seen in severely affected embryos.
CONCLUSION: Highly specific Tbx1 expression in the proximal oesophageal endoderm 
suggests that Tbx1 may be an important regulator of normal oesophageal
development. Altered Tbx1 expression in dorsal foregut and adjacent to the TOF in
the AMM suggests that Tbx1 gene disruption may contribute to the pathogenesis of 
tracheo-oesophageal malformations.

PMID: 24356861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Aug 29;1(3):248-65. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.08.002.
eCollection 2013.

TBX3 Directs Cell-Fate Decision toward Mesendoderm.

Weidgang CE(1), Russell R, Tata PR, Kühl SJ, Illing A, Müller M, Lin Q, Brunner
C, Boeckers TM, Bauer K, Kartikasari AE, Guo Y, Radenz M, Bernemann C, Weiß M,
Seufferlein T, Zenke M, Iacovino M, Kyba M, Schöler HR, Kühl M, Liebau S, Kleger 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm, Germany ;
International Graduate School in Molecular Medicine, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm,
Germany.

Erratum in
    Stem Cell Reports. 2014 May 8;2(5):747.

Cell-fate decisions and pluripotency are dependent on networks of key
transcriptional regulators. Recent reports demonstrated additional functions of
pluripotency-associated factors during early lineage commitment. The T-box
transcription factor TBX3 has been implicated in regulating embryonic stem cell
self-renewal and cardiogenesis. Here, we show that TBX3 is dynamically expressed 
during specification of the mesendoderm lineages in differentiating embryonic
stem cells (ESCs) in vitro and in developing mouse and Xenopus embryos in vivo.
Forced TBX3 expression in ESCs promotes mesendoderm specification by directly
activating key lineage specification factors and indirectly by enhancing
paracrine Nodal/Smad2 signaling. TBX3 loss-of-function analyses in the Xenopus
underline its requirement for mesendoderm lineage commitment. Moreover, we
uncovered a functional redundancy between TBX3 and Tbx2 during Xenopus
gastrulation. Taken together, we define further facets of TBX3 actions and map
TBX3 as an upstream regulator of the mesendoderm transcriptional program during
gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC3849240
PMID: 24319661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Hernia. 2014 Aug;18(4):513-7. doi: 10.1007/s10029-013-1199-z. Epub 2013 Dec 6.

Genetic analysis of the TBX2 gene promoter in indirect inguinal hernia.

Zhang Y(1), Han Q, Fan H, Li W, Xing Q, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hand and Foot Surgery, Jining Medical University Affiliated
Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining, 272029, Shandong, China.

PURPOSE: Inguinal hernia is a common disease, majority of which are indirect
inguinal hernia (IIH). A positive family history indicates that genetic factors
play important roles in the IIH development. To date, genetic causes for IIH
remain unknown. T-box transcription factor 2 (TBX2) is a major regulator in the
morphogenesis and organogenesis. The human TBX2 gene is widely expressed in fetal
and adult tissues, including muscle and connective tissues. Therefore, we
speculated that altered TBX2 gene expression may be involved in the IIH
formation.
METHODS: IIH patients (n = 129) and ethnic-matched healthy subjects (n = 198)
were recruited for this study. The human TBX2 gene promoters were generated with 
PCR and directly sequenced to identify DNA sequence variants (DSVs). Furthermore,
biological functions of the DSVs were examined with reporter gene constructs in
cultured cells.
RESULTS: Total six DSVs within the TBX2 gene promoter were identified. A
heterozygous DSV (g.59476307G>C) was identified in an IIH patient, but in none of
controls, which significantly decreased the TBX2 gene promoter activities.
Another heterozygous DSV (g.59476704G>C) was only found in one control, which did
not affect TBX2 gene promoter activities. Four DSVs, g.59476316C>A (rs73991913), 
g.59476415T>C (rs1476781), g.59476510G>C (rs4455026) and g.59476892C>T
(rs2286524), all of which were single nucleotide polymorphisms, were found in
both IIH patients and controls with similar frequencies.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggested that the DSV within the TBX2 gene promoter was
implicated in the IIH development as a rare cause.

PMID: 24309999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 29;8(10):e76641. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076641.
eCollection 2013.

Phospholipase A2 in experimental allergic bronchitis: a lesson from mouse and rat
models.

Mruwat R(1), Yedgar S, Lavon I, Ariel A, Krimsky M, Shoseyov D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hebrew University Medical School, Jerusalem,
Israel.

BACKGROUND: Phospholipases A2 (PLA2) hydrolyzes phospholipids, initiating the
production of inflammatory lipid mediators. We have previously shown that in
rats, sPLA2 and cPLA2 play opposing roles in the pathophysiology of ovalbumin
(OVA)-induced experimental allergic bronchitis (OVA-EAB), an asthma model: Upon
disease induction sPLA2 expression and production of the broncho-constricting
CysLTs are elevated, whereas cPLA2 expression and the broncho-dilating PGE2
production are suppressed. These were reversed upon disease amelioration by
treatment with an sPLA2 inhibitor. However, studies in mice reported the
involvement of both sPLA2 and cPLA2 in EAB induction.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the relevance of mouse and rat models to understanding
asthma pathophysiology.
METHODS: OVA-EAB was induced in mice using the same methodology applied in rats. 
Disease and biochemical markers in mice were compared with those in rats.
RESULTS: As in rats, EAB in mice was associated with increased mRNA of sPLA2,
specifically sPLA2gX, in the lungs, and production of the broncho-constricting
eicosanoids CysLTs, PGD2 and TBX2 in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). In contrast,
EAB in mice was associated also with elevated cPLA2 mRNA and PGE2 production.
Yet, treatment with an sPLA2 inhibitor ameliorated the EAB concomitantly with
reverting the expression of both cPLA2 and sPLA2, and eicosanoid production.
CONCLUSIONS: In both mice and rats sPLA2 is pivotal in OVA-induced EAB. Yet,
amelioration of asthma markers in mouse models, and human tissues, was observed
also upon cPLA2 inhibition. It is plausible that airway conditions, involving
multiple cell types and organs, require the combined action of more than one,
essential, PLA2s.

PMCID: PMC3812210
PMID: 24204651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 10;8(10):e77171. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077171.
eCollection 2013.

Tbx2a is required for specification of endodermal pouches during development of
the pharyngeal arches.

Thi Thu HN(1), Haw Tien SF, Loh SL, Bok Yan JS, Korzh V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore, Singapore ; Department of 
Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore ;
Department of Surgery, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

Tbx2 is a member of the T-box family of transcription factors essential for
embryo- and organogenesis. A deficiency in the zebrafish paralogue tbx2a causes
abnormalities of the pharyngeal arches in a p53-independent manner. The
pharyngeal arches are formed by derivatives of all three embryonic germ layers:
endodermal pouches, mesenchymal condensations and neural crest cells. While tbx2a
expression is restricted to the endodermal pouches, its function is required for 
the normal morphogenesis of the entire pharyngeal arches. Given the similar
function of Tbx1 in craniofacial development, we explored the possibility of an
interaction between Tbx1 and Tbx2a. The use of bimolecular fluorescence
complementation revealed the interaction between Tbx2a and Tbx1, thus providing
support for the idea that functional interaction between different, co-expressed 
Tbx proteins could be a common theme across developmental processes in cell
lineages and tissues. Together, this work provides mechanistic insight into the
role of TBX2 in human disorders affecting the face and neck.

PMCID: PMC3795029
PMID: 24130849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Oct 10;4:e846. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.365.

A novel role for the anti-senescence factor TBX2 in DNA repair and cisplatin
resistance.

Wansleben S(1), Davis E, Peres J, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, Cape Town 7925, South Africa.

The emergence of drug resistant tumours that are able to escape cell death pose a
major problem in the treatment of cancers. Tumours develop resistance to
DNA-damaging chemotherapeutic agents by acquiring the ability to repair their
DNA. Combination therapies that induce DNA damage and disrupt the DNA damage
repair process may therefore prove to be more effective against such tumours. The
developmentally important transcription factor TBX2 has been suggested as a novel
anticancer drug target, as it is overexpressed in several cancers and possesses
strong anti-senescence and pro-proliferative functions. Importantly, we recently 
showed that when TBX2 is silenced, we are able to reverse several features of
transformation in both breast cancer and melanoma cells. Overexpression of TBX2
has also been linked to drug resistance and we have shown that its ectopic
expression results in genetically unstable polyploidy cells with resistance to
cisplatin. Whether the overexpression of endogenous TBX2 levels is associated
with cisplatin resistance in TBX2-driven cancers has, however, not been shown. To
address this we have silenced TBX2 in a cisplatin-resistant breast cancer cell
line and we show that knocking down TBX2 sensitises the cells to cisplatin by
disrupting the ATM-CHK2-p53 signalling pathway. Cell cycle analyses demonstrate
that when TBX2 is knocked down there is an abrogation of an S-phase arrest but a 
robust G2/M arrest that correlates with a reduction in phosphorylated CHK2 and
p53 levels. This prevents DNA repair resulting in TBX2-deficient cells entering
mitosis with damaged DNA and consequently undergoing mitotic catastrophe. These
results suggest that targeting TBX2 in combination with chemotherapeutic drugs
such as cisplatin could improve the efficacy of current anticancer treatments.

PMCID: PMC3824674
PMID: 24113180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Sep 3;7:85. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-85.

Systems analysis reveals a transcriptional reversal of the mesenchymal phenotype 
induced by SNAIL-inhibitor GN-25.

Azmi AS(1), Bollig-Fischer A, Bao B, Park BJ, Lee SH, Yong-Song G, Dyson G, Reddy
CK, Sarkar FH, Mohammad RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, John R, HWCRC 732, Detroit, MI, 4100, USA.
azmia@karmanos.org.

BACKGROUND: HMLEs (HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE, Kras-HMLE-SNAIL pairs) serve as
excellent model system to interrogate the effect of SNAIL targeted agents that
reverse epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We had earlier developed a
SNAIL-p53 interaction inhibitor (GN-25) that was shown to suppress SNAIL
function. In this report, using systems biology and pathway network analysis, we 
show that GN-25 could cause reversal of EMT leading to mesenchymal-to-epithelial 
transition (MET) in a well-recognized HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE-SNAIL models.
RESULTS: GN-25 induced MET was found to be consistent with growth inhibition,
suppression of spheroid forming capacity and induction of apoptosis. Pathway
network analysis of mRNA expression using microarrays from GN-25 treated
Kras-HMLE-SNAIL cells showed an orchestrated global re-organization of EMT
network genes. The expression signatures were validated at the protein level
(down-regulation of mesenchymal markers such as TWIST1 and TWIST2 that was
concurrent with up-regulation of epithelial marker E-Cadherin), and RNAi studies 
validated SNAIL dependent mechanism of action of the drug. Most importantly,
GN-25 modulated many major transcription factors (TFs) such as inhibition of
oncogenic TFs Myc, TBX2, NR3C1 and led to enhancement in the expression of tumor 
suppressor TFs such as SMAD7, DD1T3, CEBPA, HOXA5, TFEB, IRF1, IRF7 and XBP1,
resulting in MET as well as cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: Our systems and network investigations provide convincing
pre-clinical evidence in support of the clinical application of GN-25 for the
reversal of EMT and thereby reducing cancer cell aggressiveness.

PMCID: PMC3848843
PMID: 24004452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Med Oncol. 2013 Dec;30(4):688. doi: 10.1007/s12032-013-0688-3. Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Increased expression of TBX2 is a novel independent prognostic biomarker of a
worse outcome in colorectal cancer patients after curative surgery and a
potential therapeutic target.

Han Y(1), Tu WW, Wen YG, Yan DW, Qiu GQ, Peng ZH, Zhou CZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai First People's Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 85 Wujin Road, Shanghai, 20080, China.

T-box2 (TBX2) plays a critical role in embryonic development. Recently,
deregulated expression of TBX2 has been implicated in several malignancies.
However, the expression and the role of TBX2 in colorectal cancer (CRC) remain
unclear. In this study, we found that TBX2 was obviously up-regulated in CRC in
comparison with the corresponding normal mucosa at transcriptional and protein
level. Up-expression of TBX2 was significantly associated with depth of tumor
invasion (P = 0.006), distant metastasis (P = 0.038), advanced AJCC stage (P =
0.008), and relapse (P = 0.003). TBX2 was a significantly prognostic factor for
decreased survival and increased disease recurrence independent of tumor
stage(II, III stage) and functioned as a biomarker to identify prognosis of
patients with CRC (OS: HR 2.154; 95% CI 1.019-4.551; P = 0.044, DFS: HR 2.253;
95% CI 1.109-4.575; P = 0.025). Furthermore, TBX2 could serve as a potential
target of cancer drug therapy.

PMID: 23959449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Nov;383(1-2):161-71. doi: 10.1007/s11010-013-1764-x. Epub 
2013 Jul 23.

Genetic isolation of stem cell-derived pacemaker-nodal cardiac myocytes.

Hashem SI(1), Claycomb WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, 1901 Perdido Street, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.

Dysfunction of the cardiac pacemaker tissues due to genetic defects, acquired
diseases, or aging results in arrhythmias. When arrhythmias occur, artificial
pacemaker implants are used for treatment. However, the numerous limitations of
electronic implants have prompted studies of biological pacemakers that can
integrate into the myocardium providing a permanent cure. Embryonic stem (ES)
cells cultured as three-dimensional (3D) spheroid aggregates termed embryoid
bodies possess the ability to generate all cardiac myocyte subtypes. Here, we
report the use of a SHOX2 promoter and a Cx30.2 enhancer to genetically identify 
and isolate ES cell-derived sinoatrial node (SAN) and atrioventricular node (AVN)
cells, respectively. The ES cell-derived Shox2 and Cx30.2 cardiac myocytes
exhibit a spider cell morphology and high intracellular calcium loading
characteristic of pacemaker-nodal myocytes. These cells express abundant levels
of pacemaker genes such as endogenous HCN4, Cx45, Cx30.2, Tbx2, and Tbx3. These
cells were passaged, frozen, and thawed multiple times while maintaining their
pacemaker-nodal phenotype. When cultured as 3D aggregates in an attempt to create
a critical mass that simulates in vivo architecture, these cell lines exhibited
an increase in the expression level of key regulators of cardiovascular
development, such as GATA4 and GATA6 transcription factors. In addition, the
aggregate culture system resulted in an increase in the expression level of
several ion channels that play a major role in the spontaneous diastolic
depolarization characteristic of pacemaker cells. We have isolated pure
populations of SAN and AVN cells that will be useful tools for generating
biological pacemakers.

PMID: 23877224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Nov 1;22(21):2915-26. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0123. Epub 2013 
Jul 26.

Shox2 regulates the pacemaker gene program in embryoid bodies.

Hashem SI(1), Lam ML, Mihardja SS, White SM, Lee RJ, Claycomb WC.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center , New Orleans, Louisiana.

The pacemaker tissues of the heart are a complex set of specialized cells that
initiate the rhythmic heartbeat. The sinoatrial node (SAN) serves as the primary 
pacemaker, whereas the atrioventricular node can serve as a subsidiary pacemaker 
in cases of SAN failure or block. The elucidation of genetic networks regulating 
the development of these tissues is crucial for understanding the mechanisms
underlying arrhythmias and for the design of targeted therapies. Here we report
temporal and spatial self-organized formation of the pacemaker and contracting
tissues in three-dimensional aggregate cultures of mouse embryonic stem cells
termed embryoid bodies (EBs). Using genetic marker expression and
electrophysiological analyses we demonstrate that in EBs the pacemaker potential 
originates from a localized population of cells and propagates into the adjacent 
contracting region forming a functional syncytium. When Shox2, a major
determinant of the SAN genetic pathway, was ablated we observed substantial
slowing of spontaneous contraction rates and an altered gene expression pattern
including downregulation of HCN4, Cx45, Tbx2, Tbx3, and bone morphogenetic
protein 4 (BMP4); and upregulation of Cx40, Cx43, Nkx2.5, and Tbx5. This
phenotype could be rescued by adding BMP4 to Shox2 knockout EBs in culture from
days 6 to 16 of differentiation. When wild-type EBs were treated with Noggin, a
potent BMP4 inhibitor, we observed a phenotype consistent with the Shox2 knockout
EB. Altogether, we have generated a reproducible in vitro model that will be an
invaluable tool for studying the molecular pathways regulating the development of
cardiac pacemaker tissues.

PMID: 23767866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Biochimie. 2013 Sep;95(9):1807-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2013.05.007. Epub 2013
May 28.

Novel and functional sequence variants within the TBX2 gene promoter in
ventricular septal defects.

Pang S(1), Liu Y, Zhao Z, Huang W, Chen D, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment,
Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical University,
79 Guhuai Road, Jining, Shandong 272029, China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defects in humans. To
date, genetic causes for CHD remain largely unknown. T-box transcription factor 2
(TBX2) gene is expressed in the myocardium of atrioventricular canal, outflow
tract and inflow tract and plays a critical role in heart chamber formation.
Genomic deletion and duplication of TBX2 gene have been associated with cardiac
defects. As TBX2 acts in a dose-dependent manner, we hypothesized that DNA
sequence variants (DSVs) within TBX2 gene promoter may mediate CHD development by
changing TBX2 levels. In this study, TBX2 gene promoter was genetically analyzed 
in large cohorts of patients with ventricular septal defect (VSD) (n = 324) and
ethnic-matched healthy controls (n = 328). Four novel and heterozygous DSVs,
g.59477201C > T, g.59477347G > A, g.59477353delG and g.59477371G > A were
identified in VSD patients, but in none of controls. Functional analyses revealed
that all of the four DSVs significantly decreased transcriptional activities of
TBX2 gene promoter. Therefore, our data suggested that the DSVs within TBX2 gene 
promoter identified in VSD patients may contribute to VSD etiology.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23727221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Development. 2013 Jul;140(13):2697-702. doi: 10.1242/dev.088393. Epub 2013 May
29.

Msx1 and Tbx2 antagonistically regulate Bmp4 expression during the bud-to-cap
stage transition in tooth development.

Saadi I(1), Das P, Zhao M, Raj L, Ruspita I, Xia Y, Papaioannou VE, Bei M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative and Developmental Biology, The Forsyth Institute,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Bmp4 expression is tightly regulated during embryonic tooth development, with
early expression in the dental epithelial placode leading to later expression in 
the dental mesenchyme. Msx1 is among several transcription factors that are
induced by epithelial Bmp4 and that, in turn, are necessary for the induction and
maintenance of dental mesenchymal Bmp4 expression. Thus, Msx1(-/-) teeth arrest
at early bud stage and show loss of Bmp4 expression in the mesenchyme. Ectopic
expression of Bmp4 rescues this bud stage arrest. We have identified Tbx2
expression in the dental mesenchyme at bud stage and show that this can be
induced by epithelial Bmp4. We also show that endogenous Tbx2 and Msx1 can
physically interact in mouse C3H10T1/2 cells. In order to ascertain a functional 
relationship between Msx1 and Tbx2 in tooth development, we crossed Tbx2 and Msx1
mutant mice. Our data show that the bud stage tooth arrest in Msx1(-/-) mice is
partially rescued in Msx1(-/-);Tbx2(+/-) compound mutants. This rescue is
accompanied by formation of the enamel knot (EK) and by restoration of
mesenchymal Bmp4 expression. Finally, knockdown of Tbx2 in C3H10T1/2 cells
results in an increase in Bmp4 expression. Together, these data identify a novel 
role for Tbx2 in tooth development and suggest that, following their induction by
epithelial Bmp4, Msx1 and Tbx2 in turn antagonistically regulate odontogenic
activity that leads to EK formation and to mesenchymal Bmp4 expression at the key
bud-to-cap stage transition.

PMCID: PMC3678339
PMID: 23720046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Development. 2013 Jun;140(11):2422-33. doi: 10.1242/dev.094227.

Tbx2/3 is an essential mediator within the Brachyury gene network during Ciona
notochord development.

José-Edwards DS(1), Oda-Ishii I, Nibu Y, Di Gregorio A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, Box 60, New York, NY 10065, USA.

T-box genes are potent regulators of mesoderm development in many metazoans. In
chordate embryos, the T-box transcription factor Brachyury (Bra) is required for 
specification and differentiation of the notochord. In some chordates, including 
the ascidian Ciona, members of the Tbx2 subfamily of T-box genes are also
expressed in this tissue; however, their regulatory relationships with Bra and
their contributions to the development of the notochord remain uncharacterized.
We determined that the notochord expression of Ciona Tbx2/3 (Ci-Tbx2/3) requires 
Ci-Bra, and identified a Ci-Tbx2/3 notochord CRM that necessitates multiple
Ci-Bra binding sites for its activity. Expression of mutant forms of Ci-Tbx2/3 in
the developing notochord revealed a role for this transcription factor primarily 
in convergent extension. Through microarray screens, we uncovered numerous
Ci-Tbx2/3 targets, some of which overlap with known Ci-Bra-downstream notochord
genes. Among the Ci-Tbx2/3 notochord targets are evolutionarily conserved genes, 
including caspases, lineage-specific genes, such as Noto4, and newly identified
genes, such as MLKL. This work sheds light on a large section of the notochord
regulatory circuitry controlled by T-box factors, and reveals new components of
the complement of genes required for the proper formation of this structure.

PMCID: PMC3653562
PMID: 23674602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Development. 2013 Jun;140(11):2299-309. doi: 10.1242/dev.094524.

Inhibition of Sox2-dependent activation of Shh in the ventral diencephalon by
Tbx3 is required for formation of the neurohypophysis.

Trowe MO(1), Zhao L, Weiss AC, Christoffels V, Epstein DJ, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30625
Hannover, Germany.

Tbx2 and Tbx3 are two highly related members of the T-box transcription factor
gene family that regulate patterning and differentiation of a number of tissue
rudiments in the mouse. Both genes are partially co-expressed in the ventral
diencephalon and the infundibulum; however, a functional requirement in murine
pituitary development has not been reported. Here, we show by genetic lineage
tracing that Tbx2(+) cells constitute the precursor population of the
neurohypophysis. However, Tbx2 is dispensable for neurohypophysis development as 
revealed by normal formation of this organ in Tbx2-deficient mice. By contrast,
loss of Tbx3 from the ventral diencephalon results in a failure to establish the 
Tbx2(+) domain in this region, and a lack of evagination of the infundibulum and 
formation of the neurohypophysis. Rathke's pouch is severely hypoplastic,
exhibits defects in dorsoventral patterning, and degenerates after E12.5. In
Tbx3-deficient embryos, the ventral diencephalon is hyperproliferative and
displays an abnormal cellular architecture, probably resulting from a failure to 
repress transcription of Shh. We further show that Tbx3 and Tbx2 repress Shh by
sequestering the SRY box-containing transcription factor Sox2 away from a Shh
forebrain enhancer (SBE2), thus preventing its activation. These data suggest
that Tbx3 is required in the ventral diencephalon to establish a Shh(-) domain to
allow formation of the infundibulum.

PMCID: PMC3653555
PMID: 23674600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e63234. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063234. Print 2013.

Beyond the binding site: in vivo identification of tbx2, smarca5 and wnt5b as
molecular targets of CNBP during embryonic development.

Armas P(1), Margarit E, Mouguelar VS, Allende ML, Calcaterra NB.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR), Consejo Nacional
de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET)-Facultad de Ciencias
Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad Nacional de Rosario (UNR), Ocampo y
Esmeralda, (S2000FHQ) Rosario, Argentina.

CNBP is a nucleic acid chaperone implicated in vertebrate craniofacial
development, as well as in myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2) and sporadic inclusion
body myositis (sIBM) human muscle diseases. CNBP is highly conserved among
vertebrates and has been implicated in transcriptional regulation; however, its
DNA binding sites and molecular targets remain elusive. The main goal of this
work was to identify CNBP DNA binding sites that might reveal target genes
involved in vertebrate embryonic development. To accomplish this, we used a
recently described yeast one-hybrid assay to identify DNA sequences bound in vivo
by CNBP. Bioinformatic analyses revealed that these sequences are G-enriched and 
show high frequency of putative G-quadruplex DNA secondary structure. Moreover,
an in silico approach enabled us to establish the CNBP DNA-binding site and to
predict CNBP putative targets based on gene ontology terms and synexpression with
CNBP. The direct interaction between CNBP and candidate genes was proved by EMSA 
and ChIP assays. Besides, the role of CNBP upon the identified genes was
validated in loss-of-function experiments in developing zebrafish. We
successfully confirmed that CNBP up-regulates tbx2b and smarca5, and
down-regulates wnt5b gene expression. The highly stringent strategy used in this 
work allowed us to identify new CNBP target genes functionally important in
different contexts of vertebrate embryonic development. Furthermore, it
represents a novel approach toward understanding the biological function and
regulatory networks involving CNBP in the biology of vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC3646763
PMID: 23667590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Circ Res. 2013 Jul 5;113(2):137-41. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.301565. Epub 2013
May 9.

Reduced sodium channel function unmasks residual embryonic slow conduction in the
adult right ventricular outflow tract.

Boukens BJ(1), Sylva M, de Gier-de Vries C, Remme CA, Bezzina CR, Christoffels
VM, Coronel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

RATIONALE: In patients with Brugada syndrome, arrhythmias typically originate in 
the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT). The RVOT develops from the slowly
conducting embryonic outflow tract.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesize that this embryonic phenotype is maintained in the
fetal and adult RVOT and leads to conduction slowing, especially after sodium
current reduction.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We determined expression patterns in the embryonic
myocardium and performed activation mapping in fetal and adult hearts, including 
hearts from adult mice heterozygous for a mutation associated with Brugada
syndrome (Scn5a1798insD/+). The embryonic RVOT was characterized by expression of
Tbx2, a repressor of differentiation, and absence of expression of both Hey2, a
ventricular transcription factor, and Gja1, encoding the principal gap-junction
subunit for ventricular fast conduction. Also, conduction velocity was lower in
the RVOT than in the right ventricular free wall. Later in the development, Gja1 
and Scn5a expression remained lower in the subepicardial myocardium of the RVOT
than in RV myocardium. Nevertheless, conduction velocity in the adult RVOT was
similar to that of the right ventricular free wall. However, in hearts of
Scn5a1798insD/+ mice and in normal hearts treated with ajmaline, conduction was
slower in the RVOT than in the right ventricular wall.
CONCLUSIONS: The slowly conducting embryonic phenotype is maintained in the fetal
and adult RVOT and is unmasked when cardiac sodium channel function is reduced.

PMID: 23661717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(4):e1003467. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003467. Epub 2013 Apr 
25.

Tbx2 terminates shh/fgf signaling in the developing mouse limb bud by direct
repression of gremlin1.

Farin HF(1), Lüdtke TH, Schmidt MK, Placzko S, Schuster-Gossler K, Petry M,
Christoffels VM, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover,
Germany.

Vertebrate limb outgrowth is driven by a positive feedback loop that involves
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and Gremlin1 (Grem1) in the posterior limb bud mesenchyme
and Fibroblast growth factors (Fgfs) in the overlying epithelium. Proper
spatio-temporal control of these signaling activities is required to avoid limb
malformations such as polydactyly. Here we show that, in Tbx2-deficient
hindlimbs, Shh/Fgf4 signaling is prolonged, resulting in increased limb bud size 
and duplication of digit 4. In turn, limb-specific Tbx2 overexpression leads to
premature termination of this signaling loop with smaller limbs and reduced digit
number as phenotypic manifestation. We show that Tbx2 directly represses Grem1 in
distal regions of the posterior limb mesenchyme allowing Bone morphogenetic
protein (Bmp) signaling to abrogate Fgf4/9/17 expression in the overlying
epithelium. Since Tbx2 itself is a target of Bmp signaling, our data identify a
growth-inhibiting positive feedback loop (Bmp/Tbx2/Grem1). We propose that
proliferative expansion of Tbx2-expressing cells mediates self-termination of
limb bud outgrowth due to their refractoriness to Grem1 induction.

PMCID: PMC3636256
PMID: 23633963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jun;164A(6):1347-71. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35896. Epub 2013 
Apr 30.

Development of the human heart.

Sylva M(1), van den Hoff MJ, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology & Physiology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Molecular and genetic studies around the turn of this century have revolutionized
the field of cardiac development. We now know that the primary heart tube, as
seen in the early embryo contains little more than the precursors for the left
ventricle, whereas the precursor cells for the remainder of the cardiac
components are continuously added, to both the venous and arterial pole of the
heart tube, from a single center of growth outside the heart. While the primary
heart tube is growing by addition of cells, it does not show significant cell
proliferation, until chamber differentiation and expansion starts locally in the 
tube, by which the chambers balloon from the primary heart tube. The
transcriptional repressors Tbx2 and Tbx3 locally repress the chamber-specific
program of gene expression, by which these regions are allowed to differentiate
into the distinct components of the conduction system. Molecular genetic lineage 
analyses have been extremely valuable to assess the distinct developmental origin
of the various component parts of the heart, which currently can be unambiguously
identified by their unique molecular phenotype. Despite the enormous advances in 
our knowledge on cardiac development, even the most common congenital cardiac
malformations are only poorly understood. The challenge of the newly developed
molecular genetic techniques is to unveil the basic gene regulatory networks
underlying cardiac morphogenesis.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23633400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2013 Jun;18(2):143-7. doi:
10.1007/s10911-013-9282-8. Epub 2013 Apr 28.

The T-box transcription factors TBX2 and TBX3 in mammary gland development and
breast cancer.

Douglas NC(1), Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Reproductive
Endocrinology and Infertility, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032, USA.

TBX2 and TBX3, closely related members of the T-box family of transcription
factor genes, are expressed in mammary tissue in both humans and mice. Ulnar
mammary syndrome (UMS), an autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in
TBX3, underscores the importance of TBX3 in human breast development, while
abnormal mammary gland development in Tbx2 or Tbx3 mutant mice provides models
for experimental investigation. In addition to their roles in mammary
development, aberrant expression of TBX2 and TBX3 is associated with breast
cancer. TBX2 is preferentially amplified in BRCA1/2-associated breast cancers and
TBX3 overexpression has been associated with advanced stage disease and
estrogen-receptor-positive breast tumors. The regulation of Tbx2 and Tbx3 and the
downstream targets of these genes in development and disease are not as yet fully
elucidated. However, it is clear that the two genes play unique,
context-dependent roles both in mammary gland development and in mammary
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3692603
PMID: 23624936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jun;164A(6):1372-83. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35881. Epub 2013 
Apr 23.

Development of the human aortic arch system captured in an interactive
three-dimensional reference model.

Rana MS(1), Sizarov A, Christoffels VM, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Department of Anatomy, Embryology and
Physiology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Variations and mutations in the human genome, such as 22q11.2 microdeletion, can 
increase the risk for congenital defects, including aortic arch malformations.
Animal models are increasingly expanding our molecular and genetic insights into 
aortic arch development. However, in order to justify animal-to-human
extrapolations, a human morphological, and molecular reference model would be of 
great value, but is currently lacking. Here, we present interactive
three-dimensional reconstructions of the developing human aortic arch system,
supplemented with the protein distribution of developmental markers for
patterning and growth, including T-box transcription factor TBX1, a major
candidate for the phenotypes found in patients with the 22q11.2 microdeletion.
These reconstructions and expression data facilitate unbiased interpretations,
and reveal previously unappreciated aspects of human aortic arch development.
Based on our reconstructions and on reported congenital anomalies of the
pulmonary trunk and tributaries, we postulate that the pulmonary arteries
originate from the aortic sac, rather than from the sixth pharyngeal arch
arteries. Similar to mouse, TBX1 is expressed in pharyngeal mesenchyme and
epithelia. The endothelium of the pharyngeal arch arteries is largely negative
for TBX1 and family member TBX2 but expresses neural crest marker AP2a, which
gradually decreases with ongoing development of vascular smooth muscle. At early 
stages, the pharyngeal arch arteries, aortic sac, and the dorsal aortae in
particular were largely negative for proliferation marker Ki67, potentially an
important parameter during aortic arch system remodeling. Together, our data
support current animal-to-human extrapolations and future genetic and molecular
analyses using animal models of congenital heart disease. © 2013 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23613216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Nov;70(21):4157-68. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1336-y. Epub 
2013 Apr 18.

Function of the C. elegans T-box factor TBX-2 depends on SUMOylation.

Huber P(1), Crum T, Clary LM, Ronan T, Packard AV, Okkema PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Laboratory for Molecular Biology,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

T-box transcription factors are critical developmental regulators in all
multi-cellular organisms, and altered T-box factor activity is associated with a 
variety of human congenital diseases and cancers. Despite the biological
significance of T-box factors, their mechanism of action is not well understood. 
Here we examine whether SUMOylation affects the function of the C. elegans Tbx2
sub-family T-box factor TBX-2. We have previously shown that TBX-2 interacts with
the E2 SUMO-conjugating enzyme UBC-9, and that loss of TBX-2 or UBC-9 produces
identical defects in ABa-derived pharyngeal muscle development. We now show that 
TBX-2 is SUMOylated in mammalian cell assays, and that both UBC-9 interaction and
SUMOylation depends on two SUMO consensus sites located in the T-box DNA binding 
domain and near the TBX-2 C-terminus, respectively. In co-transfection assays, a 
TBX-2:GAL4 fusion protein represses expression of a 5xGal4:tk:luciferase
construct. However, this activity does not require SUMOylation, indicating SUMO
is not generally required for TBX-2 repressor activity. In C. elegans, reducing
SUMOylation enhances the phenotype of a temperature-sensitive tbx-2 mutant and
results in ectopic expression of a gene normally repressed by TBX-2,
demonstrating that SUMOylation is important for TBX-2 function in vivo. Finally, 
we show mammalian orthologs of TBX-2, Tbx2, and Tbx3, can also be SUMOylated,
suggesting SUMOylation may be a conserved mechanism controlling T-box factor
activity.

PMCID: PMC3802552
PMID: 23595631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Med Genet. 2013 Aug;50(8):500-6. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101152. Epub 2013 
Apr 16.

TBX4 mutations (small patella syndrome) are associated with childhood-onset
pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Kerstjens-Frederikse WS(1), Bongers EM, Roofthooft MT, Leter EM, Douwes JM, Van
Dijk A, Vonk-Noordegraaf A, Dijk-Bos KK, Hoefsloot LH, Hoendermis ES, Gille JJ,
Sikkema-Raddatz B, Hofstra RM, Berger RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. w.s.kerstjens@umcg.nl

BACKGROUND: Childhood-onset pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is rare and
differs from adult-onset disease in clinical presentation, with often unexplained
mental retardation and dysmorphic features (MR/DF). Mutations in the major PAH
gene, BMPR2, were reported to cause PAH in only 10-16% of childhood-onset
patients. We aimed to identify more genes associated with childhood-onset PAH.
METHODS: We studied 20 consecutive cases with idiopathic or heritable PAH. In
patients with accompanying MR/DF (n=6) array-comparative genomic hybridisation
analysis was performed, with the aim of finding common deletion regions
containing candidate genes for PAH. Three patients had overlapping deletions of
17q23.2. TBX2 and TBX4 were selected from this area as candidate genes and
sequenced in all 20 children. After identifying TBX4 mutations in these children,
we subsequently sequenced TBX4 in a cohort of 49 adults with PAH. Because TBX4
mutations are known to cause small patella syndrome (SPS), all patients with
newly detected TBX4 mutations were screened for features of SPS. We also screened
a third cohort of 23 patients with SPS for PAH.
RESULTS: TBX4 mutations (n=3) or TBX4-containing deletions (n=3) were detected in
6 out of 20 children with PAH (30%). All living patients and two parents with
TBX4 mutations appeared to have previously unrecognised SPS. In the adult
PAH-cohort, one TBX4 mutation (2%) was detected. Screening in the cohort of
(predominantly adult) SPS patients revealed no PAH.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that TBX4 mutations are associated with
childhood-onset PAH, but that the prevalence of PAH in adult TBX4 mutation
carriers is low.

PMCID: PMC3717587
PMID: 23592887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Int J Dev Biol. 2013;57(1):73-83. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.120056ca.

Brachyury, Tbx2/3 and sall expression during embryogenesis of the indirectly
developing polychaete Hydroides elegans.

Arenas-Mena C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Staten Island and Graduate Center, The City 
University of New York, NY, USA. cesar.arenasmena@csi.cuny.edu

Expression of the transcription factor genes brachyury, Tbx2/3 and sall is
characterized in detail for the first time in an indirectly developing spiralian 
with a feeding trochophore. In Hydroides elegans, gut formation proceeds by
invagination during embryogenesis and is followed by feeding-dependent posterior 
growth during larval stages. Posterior growth gives rise to the reproductive and 
segmented portion of the adult and derives primarily from multipotent dorsal
blastomeres. Dorsal fate becomes morphologically evident at the 60-cell stage
during spiral cleavage, although the timing of dorsal specification remains
uncertain. Expression of brachyury anticipates the morphogenetic events
associated with both gastrulation by invagination in the endoderm and ventral
midline convergent extension in the ectoderm. The absence of brachyury expression
in endoderm precursors previously reported in annelids that do not have feeding
larvae suggests evolutionarily conserved roles associated with morphogenesis
rather than endoderm specification. Synexpression of brachyury and FoxA in the
blastopore of eumetazoans as well as in the secondarily formed anus of some
protostomes and the mouth of deuterostomes suggests shared regulatory circuits
during the formation of both oral and anal openings in protostomes and
deuterostomes. Expression of sall during gastrulation, in the protonephridium,
and in posterior growth zone precursors, also suggests evolutionarily conserved
roles. The dorsal sides of the Hydroides and sea urchin embryos express Tbx2/3 in
all three germ layer precursors, suggesting evolutionarily conserved dorsal
regionalization functions. The results suggest specific gene usage during tubular
gut formation, endoderm specification, dorsoventral specification and
anteroposterior body elongation in the context of development by feeding larva.

PMID: 23585355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cancers (Basel). 2012 Dec 1;4(4):1050-1066. Epub 2012 Oct 18.

Mouse Lymphoblastic Leukemias Induced by Aberrant Prdm14 Expression Demonstrate
Widespread Copy Number Alterations Also Found in Human ALL.

Simko SJ(1), Voicu H, Carofino BL, Justice MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Cancer 
and Hematology Centers, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Aberrant expression and activation of oncogenes in somatic cells has been
associated with cancer initiation. Required for reacquisition of pluripotency in 
the developing germ cell, PRDM14 initiates lymphoblastic leukemia when
misexpressed in murine bone marrow. Activation of pluripotency in somatic cells
can lead to aneuploidy and copy number alterations during iPS cell generation,
and we hypothesized that PRDM14-induced lymphoblastic leukemias would demonstrate
significant chromosomal damage. High-resolution oligo array comparative genomic
hybridization demonstrated infrequent aneuploidy but frequent amplification and
deletion, with amplifications occurring in a 5:1 ratio with deletions. Many
deletions (i.e., Cdkn2a, Ebf1, Pax5, Ikzf1) involved B-cell development genes and
tumor suppressor genes, recapitulating deletions occurring in human leukemia.
Pathways opposing senescence were frequently deactivated via Cdkn2a deletion or
Tbx2 amplification, with corollary gene expression. Additionally, gene expression
studies of abnormal pre-leukemic B-precursors showed downregulation of genes
involved in chromosomal stability (i.e., Xrcc6) and failure to upregulate DNA
repair pathways. We propose a model of leukemogenesis, triggered by pluripotency 
genes like Prdm14, which involves ongoing DNA damage and failure to activate
non-homologous end-joining secondary to aberrant gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3593237
PMID: 23487523  [PubMed]


56. J Virol. 2013 Apr;87(8):4461-74. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01803-12. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

The transcription factors TBX2 and TBX3 interact with human papillomavirus 16
(HPV16) L2 and repress the long control region of HPVs.

Schneider MA(1), Scheffer KD, Bund T, Boukhallouk F, Lambert C, Cotarelo C,
Pflugfelder GO, Florin L, Spoden GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Hygiene, University Medical Center of Johannes 
Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

The minor capsid protein L2 of human papillomaviruses (HPVs) has multiple
functions during the viral life cycle. Although L2 is required for effective
invasion and morphogenesis, only a few cellular interaction partners are known so
far. Using yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified the transcription factor
TBX2 as a novel interaction partner of HPV type 16 (HPV16) L2.
Coimmunoprecipitations and immunofluorescence analyses confirmed the L2-TBX2
interaction and revealed that L2 also interacts with TBX3, another member of the 
T-box family. Transcription of the early genes during HPV infection is under the 
control of an upstream enhancer and early promoter region, the long control
region (LCR). In promoter-reporter gene assays, we observed that TBX2 and TBX3
repress transcription from the LCR and that this effect is enhanced by L2.
Repression of the HPV LCR by TBX2/3 seems to be a conserved mechanism, as it was 
also observed with the LCRs of different HPV types. Finally, interaction of TBX2 
with the LCR was detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation, and we found a strong
colocalization of L2 and TBX2 in HPV16-positive cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN) I-II tissue sections. These results suggest that TBX2/3 might
play a role in the regulation of HPV gene expression during the viral life cycle.

PMCID: PMC3624339
PMID: 23388722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(1):e1003189. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003189. Epub 2013 Jan 
17.

Tbx2 controls lung growth by direct repression of the cell cycle inhibitor genes 
Cdkn1a and Cdkn1b.

Lüdtke TH(1), Farin HF, Rudat C, Schuster-Gossler K, Petry M, Barnett P,
Christoffels VM, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover,
Germany.

Vertebrate organ development relies on the precise spatiotemporal orchestration
of proliferation rates and differentiation patterns in adjacent tissue
compartments. The underlying integration of patterning and cell cycle control
during organogenesis is insufficiently understood. Here, we have investigated the
function of the patterning T-box transcription factor gene Tbx2 in lung
development. We show that lungs of Tbx2-deficient mice are markedly hypoplastic
and exhibit reduced branching morphogenesis. Mesenchymal proliferation was
severely decreased, while mesenchymal differentiation into fibrocytes was
prematurely induced. In the epithelial compartment, proliferation was reduced and
differentiation of alveolar epithelial cells type 1 was compromised. Prior to the
observed cellular changes, canonical Wnt signaling was downregulated, and Cdkn1a 
(p21) and Cdkn1b (p27) (two members of the Cip/Kip family of cell cycle
inhibitors) were strongly induced in the Tbx2-deficient lung mesenchyme. Deletion
of both Cdkn1a and Cdkn1b rescued, to a large degree, the growth deficits of
Tbx2-deficient lungs. Prolongation of Tbx2 expression into adulthood led to
hyperproliferation and maintenance of mesenchymal progenitor cells, with
branching morphogenesis remaining unaffected. Expression of Cdkn1a and Cdkn1b was
ablated from the lung mesenchyme in this gain-of-function setting. We further
show by ChIP experiments that Tbx2 directly binds to Cdkn1a and Cdkn1b loci in
vivo, defining these two genes as direct targets of Tbx2 repressive activity in
the lung mesenchyme. We conclude that Tbx2-mediated regulation of Cdkn1a and
Cdkn1b represents a crucial node in the network integrating patterning
information and cell cycle regulation that underlies growth, differentiation, and
branching morphogenesis of this organ.

PMCID: PMC3547831
PMID: 23341776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Dev Biol. 2013 Feb 1;374(1):234-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.11.017. Epub 2012
Nov 27.

Pitx1 broadly associates with limb enhancers and is enriched on hindlimb
cis-regulatory elements.

Infante CR(1), Park S, Mihala AG, Kingsley DM, Menke DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Coverdell Building, Room 250A, 
500 DW Brooks Drive, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

Extensive functional analyses have demonstrated that the pituitary homeodomain
transcription factor Pitx1 plays a critical role in specifying hindlimb
morphology in vertebrates. However, much less is known regarding the target genes
and cis-regulatory elements through which Pitx1 acts. Earlier studies suggested
that the hindlimb transcription factors Tbx4, HoxC10, and HoxC11 might be
transcriptional targets of Pitx1, but definitive evidence for direct regulatory
interactions has been lacking. Using ChIP-Seq on embryonic mouse hindlimbs, we
have pinpointed the genome-wide location of Pitx1 binding sites during mouse
hindlimb development and identified potential gene targets for Pitx1. We
determined that Pitx1 binding is significantly enriched near genes involved in
limb morphogenesis, including Tbx4, HoxC10, and HoxC11. Notably, Pitx1 is bound
to the previously identified HLEA and HLEB hindlimb enhancers of the Tbx4 gene
and to a newly identified Tbx2 hindlimb enhancer. Moreover, Pitx1 binding is
significantly enriched on hindlimb relative to forelimb-specific cis-regulatory
features that are differentially marked by H3K27ac. However, our analysis
revealed that Pitx1 also strongly associates with many functionally verified limb
enhancers that exhibit similar levels of activity in the embryonic mesenchyme of 
forelimbs and hindlimbs. We speculate that Pitx1 influences hindlimb morphology
both through the activation of hindlimb-specific enhancers as well as through the
hindlimb-specific modulation of enhancers that are active in both sets of limbs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3640454
PMID: 23201014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. BMC Cancer. 2012 Oct 19;12:481. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-481.

Tbx3 represses PTEN and is over-expressed in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Burgucu D(1), Guney K, Sahinturk D, Ozbudak IH, Ozel D, Ozbilim G, Yavuzer U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Akdeniz University, Antalya
07058, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Despite advances in diagnostic and treatment strategies, head and
neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC) constitutes one of the worst cancer types in
terms of prognosis. PTEN is one of the tumour suppressors whose expression and/or
activity have been found to be reduced in HNSCC, with rather low rates of
mutations within the PTEN gene (6-8%). We reasoned that low expression levels of 
PTEN might be due to a transcriptional repression governed by an oncogene. Tbx2
and Tbx3, both of which are transcriptional repressors, have been found to be
amplified or over-expressed in various cancer types. Thus, we hypothesize that
Tbx3 may be over expressed in HNSCC and may repress PTEN, thus leading to cancer 
formation and/or progression.
METHODS: Using immunohistochemistry and quantitative PCR (qPCR), protein and mRNA
levels of PTEN and Tbx3 were identified in samples excised from cancerous and
adjacent normal tissues from 33 patients who were diagnosed with HNSCC. In
addition, HeLa and HEK cell lines were transfected with a Tbx3 expressing plasmid
and endogenous PTEN mRNA and protein levels were determined via qPCR and flow
cytometry. Transcription assays were performed to demonstrate effects of Tbx3 on 
PTEN promoter activity. Mann-Whitney, Spearman's Correlation and Wilcoxon
signed-rank tests were used to analyze the data.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that in HNSCC samples, Tbx3 mRNA levels are increased
with respect to their normal tissue counterparts (p<0.001), whereas PTEN mRNA
levels are significantly reduced in cancer tissues. Moreover, Tbx3 protein is
also increased in HNSCC tissue sections. Over-expression of Tbx3 in HeLa and HEK 
cell lines causes reduction in endogenous PTEN mRNA and protein levels. In
addition, transcription activity assays reveal that Tbx3 is capable of repressing
both the basal and induced promoter activity of PTEN.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that Tbx3 is up-regulated in tissue samples of HNSCC
patients and that Tbx3 represses PTEN transcription. Thus, our data not only
reveals a new mechanism that may be important in cancer formation, but also
suggests that Tbx3 can be used as a potential biomarker in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3517435
PMID: 23082988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Apr;1833(4):783-94. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.10.004.
Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Evolution and development of the building plan of the vertebrate heart.

Jensen B(1), Wang T, Christoffels VM, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology and Physiology, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Early cardiac development involves the formation of a heart tube, looping of the 
tube and formation of chambers. These processes are highly similar among all
vertebrates, which suggest the existence of evolutionary conservation of the
building plan of the heart. From the jawless lampreys to man, T-box transcription
factors like Tbx5 and Tbx20 are fundamental for heart formation, whereas Tbx2 and
Tbx3 repress chamber formation on the sinu-atrial and atrioventricular borders.
Also, electrocardiograms from different vertebrates are alike, even though the
fish heart only has two chambers whereas the mammalian heart has four chambers
divided by septa and in addition has much higher heart rates. We conclude that
most features of the high-performance hearts of mammals and birds can be traced
back to less developed traits in the hearts of ectothermic vertebrates. This
article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Cardiomyocyte biology: Cardiac
pathways of differentiation, metabolism and contraction.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2013 Jan;26(1):67-77. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12029. Epub
2012 Nov 21.

TBX2 expression is regulated by PAX3 in the melanocyte lineage.

Liu F(1), Cao J, Lv J, Dong L, Pier E, Xu GX, Wang RA, Xu Z, Goding C, Cui R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA,
USA.

The paired box homeotic gene 3 (PAX3) is a crucial regulator for the maintenance 
of melanocytic progenitor cells and has a poorly defined role in melanoma. To
understand how PAX3 affects melanocyte and melanoma proliferation, we identified 
potential PAX3 downstream targets through gene expression profiling. Here, we
identify T-box 2 (TBX2), a key developmental regulator of cell identity and an
antisenescence factor in melanoma, as a directly regulated PAX3 target. We also
found that TBX2 is involved in the survival of melanoma cells and is
overexpressed in some melanoma specimens. The identification of TBX2 as a target 
for PAX3 provides a key insight into how PAX3 may contribute to melanoma
evolution and may provide opportunities for prosenescence therapeutic
intervention aimed at disrupting the ability of PAX3 to regulate TBX2.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3527652
PMID: 23020925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Hum Reprod. 2012 Dec;18(12):585-92. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gas034. Epub 2012 Aug
19.

Molecular studies of the congenital malformation induced by Largehead
Atractylodes Rhizome, the most commonly used Chinese medicine for threatened
miscarriage.

Tang LY(1), Li L, Borchert A, Lau CB, Leung PC, Wang CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong.

Largehead Atractylodes Rhizome (LAR) is the most commonly used Chinese herbal
medicine for threatened miscarriage. Potential reproductive toxicity of LAR was
identified in early pregnancy in animals. Skeletal anomalies including loss of
ulna and distal digits, shortening of humerus and radius were observed in higher 
clinical dose groups. Here, we aimed to study the molecular mechanism of the
congenital malformation induced by LAR. In vitro whole mouse embryo culture was
used to confirm the embryotoxicity effects of LAR on developing limb buds during 
early organogenesis. A pregnant mouse model was employed to study the
developmental gene expression by quantitative PCR and whole hybridization and
apoptosis by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling
staining, in the forelimbs and hindlimbs during development in vivo. Severe
growth retardation, multiple embryonic malformations and delayed limb bud
development were observed. Limb-specific Tbx gene expressions in both developing 
forelimbs and hindlimbs were significantly decreased. Increased developmental
apoptosis in apical ectodermal ridge and mesenchymal mesoderm of the developing
limb buds was identified. Overexpressions of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in embryos in vitro
rescued LAR-induced abnormal limb development and reduced apoptosis in the
developing forelimb buds. In conclusion, LAR affects limb development by
suppressing the expression of limb developmental genes and disturbing programmed 
cell death during limb formation in mice.

PMID: 22907872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41355. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041355. Epub 2012 Jul 23.

The T box transcription factor TBX2 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition
and invasion of normal and malignant breast epithelial cells.

Wang B(1), Lindley LE, Fernandez-Vega V, Rieger ME, Sims AH, Briegel KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Braman Family Breast Cancer 
Institute, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America.

The T box transcription factor TBX2, a master regulator of organogenesis, is
aberrantly amplified in aggressive human epithelial cancers. While it has been
shown that overexpression of TBX2 can bypass senescence, a failsafe mechanism
against cancer, its potential role in tumor invasion has remained obscure. Here
we demonstrate that TBX2 is a strong cell-autonomous inducer of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a latent morphogenetic program that is
key to tumor progression from noninvasive to invasive malignant states. Ectopic
expression of TBX2 in normal HC11 and MCF10A mammary epithelial cells was
sufficient to induce morphological, molecular, and behavioral changes
characteristic of EMT. These changes included loss of epithelial adhesion and
polarity gene (E-cadherin, ß-catenin, ZO1) expression, and abnormal gain of
mesenchymal markers (N-cadherin, Vimentin), as well as increased cell motility
and invasion. Conversely, abrogation of endogenous TBX2 overexpression in the
malignant human breast carcinoma cell lines MDA-MB-435 and MDA-MB-157 led to a
restitution of epithelial characteristics with reciprocal loss of mesenchymal
markers. Importantly, TBX2 inhibition abolished tumor cell invasion and the
capacity to form lung metastases in a Xenograft mouse model. Meta-analysis of
gene expression in over one thousand primary human breast tumors further showed
that high TBX2 expression was significantly associated with reduced
metastasis-free survival in patients, and with tumor subtypes enriched in EMT
gene signatures, consistent with a role of TBX2 in oncogenic EMT. ChIP analysis
and cell-based reporter assays further revealed that TBX2 directly represses
transcription of E-cadherin, a tumor suppressor gene, whose loss is crucial for
malignant tumor progression. Collectively, our results uncover an unanticipated
link between TBX2 deregulation in cancer and the acquisition of EMT and invasive 
features of epithelial tumor cells.

PMCID: PMC3402503
PMID: 22844464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39380. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039380. Epub 2012 Jun 28.

A homolog of Subtilisin-like Proprotein Convertase 7 is essential to anterior
neural development in Xenopus.

Senturker S(1), Thomas JT, Mateshaytis J, Moos M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Gene Therapies, Center for Biologics, Evaluation and 
Research, United States Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland, United 
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Subtilisin-like Proprotein Convertase 7 (SPC7) is a member of the
subtilisin/kexin family of pro-protein convertases. It cleaves many pro-proteins 
to release their active proteins, including members of the bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) family of signaling molecules. Other SPCs are known to be required 
during embryonic development but corresponding data regarding SPC7 have not been 
reported previously.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We demonstrated that Xenopus SPC7 (SPC7) was
expressed predominantly in the developing brain and eye, throughout the neural
plate initially, then more specifically in the lens and retina primordia as
development progressed. Since no prior functional information has been reported
for SPC7, we used gain- and loss-of-function experiments to investigate the
possibility that it may also convey patterning or tissue specification
information similarly to Furin, SPC4, and SPC6. Overexpression of SPC7 was
without effect. In contrast, injection of SPC7 antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides (MO) into a single blastomere at the 2- or 4-cell stage produced
marked disruption of head structures; anophthalmia was salient. Bilateral
injections suppressed head and eye formation completely. In parallel with
suppression of eye and brain development by SPC7 knockdown, expression of early
anterior neural markers (Sox2, Otx2, Rx2, and Pax6) and late eye-specific markers
(ß-Crystallin and Opsin), and of BMP target genes such as Tbx2 and Tbx3, was
reduced or eliminated. Taken together, these findings suggest a critical role for
SPC7-perhaps, at least in part, due to activation of one or more BMPs-in early
patterning of the anterior neural plate and its derivatives.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: SPC7 is required for normal development of the eye and
brain, possibly through processing BMPs, though other potential substrates cannot
be excluded.

PMCID: PMC3386266
PMID: 22761776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Exp Mol Med. 2012 Aug 31;44(8):503-12. doi: 10.3858/emm.2012.44.8.057.

Genome-scale DNA methylation pattern profiling of human bone marrow mesenchymal
stem cells in long-term culture.

Choi MR(1), In YH, Park J, Park T, Jung KH, Chai JC, Chung MK, Lee YS, Chai YG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Life Sciences, Hanyang University, Ansan 426-791, 
Korea.

Human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) expanded in vitro exhibit not
only a tendency to lose their proliferative potential, homing ability and
telomere length but also genetic or epigenetic modifications, resulting in
senescence. We compared differential methylation patterns of genes and miRNAs
between early-passage [passage 5 (P5)] and late-passage (P15) cells and estimated
the relationship between senescence and DNA methylation patterns. When we
examined hypermethylated genes (methylation peak = 2) at P5 or P15, 2,739 genes, 
including those related to fructose and mannose metabolism and calcium signaling 
pathways, and 2,587 genes, including those related to DNA replication, cell cycle
and the PPAR signaling pathway, were hypermethylated at P5 and P15, respectively.
There was common hypermethylation of 1,205 genes at both P5 and P15. In addition,
genes that were hypermethylated at P5 (CPEB1, GMPPA, CDKN1A, TBX2, SMAD9 and
MCM2) showed lower mRNA expression than did those hypermethylated at P15, whereas
genes that were hypermethylated at P15 (MAML2, FEN1 and CDK4) showed lower mRNA
expression than did those that were hypermethylated at P5, demonstrating that
hypermethylation at DNA promoter regions inhibited gene expression and that
hypomethylation increased gene expression. In the case of hypermethylation on
miRNA, 27 miRNAs were hypermethylated at P5, whereas 44 miRNAs were
hypermethylated at P15. These results show that hypermethylation increases at
genes related to DNA replication, cell cycle and adipogenic differentiation due
to long-term culture, which may in part affect MSC senescence.

PMCID: PMC3429814
PMID: 22684242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Oct;132(10):2440-50. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.161. Epub 2012
May 24.

Side population cells from human melanoma tumors reveal diverse mechanisms for
chemoresistance.

Luo Y(1), Ellis LZ, Dallaglio K, Takeda M, Robinson WA, Robinson SE, Liu W, Lewis
KD, McCarter MD, Gonzalez R, Norris DA, Roop DR, Spritz RA, Ahn NG, Fujita M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colorado
80045, USA.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Oct;132(10):2317-9.

Side population (SP) cells are identified as cells capable of excluding the
fluorescent Hoechst dye and anticancer drugs, and it represents hematopoietic
stem cells and chemoresistant cells from several solid tumors. In this study, we 
confirmed the presence of SP cells in tumors from melanoma patients. Melanoma SP 
cells overexpressed ATP-binding-cassette (ABC) transporters, ABCB1 and ABCB5. We 
generated a direct in vivo xenograft model, and demonstrated that SP cells were
resistant to paclitaxel, a substrate of ABCB1, both in vitro and in vivo.
However, melanoma SP cells were also resistant to temozolomide, which is not a
substrate for ABC transporters, through IL-8 upregulation. In addition, gene
profiling studies identified three signaling pathways (NF-<U+03BA>B, a6-ß4-integrin, and
IL-1) as differentially upregulated in melanoma SP cells, and there was a
significant increase of PCDHB11 and decrease of FUK and TBX2 in these cells.
Therefore, we provide evidence that SP is an enriched source of chemoresistant
cells in human melanomas, and suggest that the selected genes and signaling
pathways of SP cells may be a potential target for effective melanoma therapies. 
To our knowledge, this is a previously unreported study to isolate SP cells from 
melanoma patients and to investigate the gene expression profiling of these
cells.

PMCID: PMC3434242
PMID: 22622430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Med Sci (Paris). 2012 Mar;28(3):248-50. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2012283007. Epub 2012
Apr 6.

[A new player in PML-mediated cellular senescence: TBX2 gets into the loop].

[Article in French]

Martin N, Dejean A, Bischof O.

PMID: 22480643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dongwuxue Yanjiu. 2012 Apr;33(2):158-64. doi: 10.3724/SP.J.1141.2012.02158.

[Cloning and expression of Tbx3 gene in Siberian sturgeon, Acipenser baerii].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang H(1), Fan CX, Song JK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Marine Biosystem and Neurosciences, Shanghai Ocean University,
Shanghai, China.

Tbx3, a member of the TBX2 subfamily of T-box gene family, encodes a
transcription factor with a highly conserved DNA-binding domain, which called
T-domain. Tbx3 is involved in morphogenesis and organogenesis in vertebrates,
such as limb development, heart remodeling, and neural placode differentiation.
In the present study, a full-length 2 908 bp Tbx3 cDNA from Acipenser baerii
(AbTbx3) was obtained using RT-PCR and RACE technique, which includes a 2 166 bp 
complete open reading frame encoding a putative peptide of 721 amino acids.
AbTbx3 shares 73.5% identity with its human homolog. Particularly, the
DNA-binding domain of AbTbx3 shared 95.2% identity with human Tbx3. Phylogenetic 
analysis revealed that AbTbx3 was grouped with Tbx3s in other vertebrates, which 
were clustered with Tbx2s and separated from Tbx4/5s. The predicted secondary and
three-dimensional structures of the T-domain of AbTbx3 were remarkably similar to
human Tbx3. Through semi-quantity RT-PCR, the expression of AbTbx3 was first
detected at blastula stage during Siberian sturgeon embryonic development,
increased gradually, reached its peak at early tail-bud stage and then decreased 
slightly. In adult sturgeon, AbTbx3 was strongly expressed in eye, brain, gill,
intestines, pectoral fin and pelvic fin, but not in liver, blood, heart, kidney
and muscle. The whole mount in situ hybridization showed that AbTbx3 was mainly
expressed in the otic vesicle, hindbrain, dorsal notochord, pineal organ and
dorsal fin bud in the larvae of stage 37 and 43.

PMID: 22467390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Eur Urol. 2012 Jun;61(6):1245-56. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2012.01.011. Epub 2012
Jan 18.

Genome-wide analysis of CpG island methylation in bladder cancer identified TBX2,
TBX3, GATA2, and ZIC4 as pTa-specific prognostic markers.

Kandimalla R(1), van Tilborg AA, Kompier LC, Stumpel DJ, Stam RW, Bangma CH,
Zwarthoff EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation markers could serve as useful biomarkers, both as
markers for progression and for urine-based diagnostic assays.
OBJECTIVE: Identify bladder cancer (BCa)-specific methylated DNA sequences for
predicting pTa-specific progression and detecting BCa in voided urine.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Genome-wide methylation analysis was performed
on 44 bladder tumours using the Agilent 244K Human CpG Island Microarray (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Validation was done using a custom Illumina 
384-plex assay (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) in a retrospective group of 77
independent tumours. Markers for progression were identified in pTa (n = 24)
tumours and validated retrospectively in an independent series of 41 pTa tumours 
by the SNaPshot method (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).
MEASUREMENTS: The percentage of methylation in tumour and urine samples was used 
to identify markers for detection and related to the end point of progression to 
muscle-invasive disease with Kaplan-Meier models and multivariate analysis.
RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: In the validation set, methylation of the T-box 2
(TBX2), T-box 3 (TBX3), GATA binding protein 2 (GATA2), and Zic family member 4
(ZIC4) genes was associated with progression to muscle-invasive disease in pTa
tumours (p = 0.003). Methylation of TBX2 alone showed a sensitivity of 100%, a
specificity of 80%, a positive predictive value of 78%, and a negative predictive
value of 100%, with an area under the curve of 0.96 (p<0.0001) for predicting
progression. Multivariate analysis showed that methylation of TBX3 and GATA2 are 
independent predictors of progression when compared to clinicopathologic
variables (p = 0.04 and p = 0.03, respectively). The predictive accuracy improved
by 23% by adding methylation of TBX2, TBX3, and GATA2 to the European
Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer risk scores. We further
identified and validated 110 CpG islands (CGIs) that are differentially
methylated between tumour cells and control urine. The limitation of this study
is the small number of patients analysed for testing and validating the
prognostic markers.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified four methylation markers that predict progression
in pTa tumours, thereby allowing stratification of patients for personalised
follow-up. In addition, we identified CGIs that will enable detection of bladder 
tumours in voided urine.

Copyright © 2012 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 22284968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 1;363(1):234-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.034. Epub 2011
Dec 29.

Tbx20 regulation of cardiac cell proliferation and lineage specialization during 
embryonic and fetal development in vivo.

Chakraborty S(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)The Heart Institute, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH
45229, USA.

TBX20 gain-of-function mutations in humans are associated with congenital heart
malformations and myocardial defects. However the effects of increased Tbx20
function during cardiac chamber development and maturation have not been reported
previously. CAG-CAT-Tbx20 transgenic mice were generated for Cre-dependent
induction of Tbx20 in myocardial lineages in the developing heart.
ßMHCCre-mediated overexpression of Tbx20 in fetal ventricular cardiomyocytes
results in increased thickness of compact myocardium, induction of cardiomyocyte 
proliferation, and increased expression of Bmp10 and pSmad1/5/8 at embryonic day 
(E) 14.5. ßMHCCre-mediated Tbx20 overexpression also leads to increased
expression of cardiac conduction system (CCS) genes Tbx5, Cx40, and Cx43
throughout the ventricular myocardium. In contrast, Nkx2.5Cre mediated
overexpression of Tbx20 in the embryonic heart results in reduced cardiomyocyte
proliferation, increased expression of a cell cycle inhibitor, p21(CIP1), and
decreased expression of Tbx2, Tbx5, and N-myc1 at E9.5, concomitant with
decreased phospho-ERK1/2 expression. Together, these analyses demonstrate that
Tbx20 differentially regulates cell proliferation and cardiac lineage
specification in embryonic versus fetal cardiomyocytes. Induction of pSmad1/5/8
at E14.5 and inhibition of dpERK expression at E9.5 are consistent with selective
Tbx20 regulation of these pathways in association with stage-specific effects on 
cardiomyocyte proliferation. Together, these in vivo data support distinct
functions for Tbx20 in regulation of cardiomyocyte lineage maturation and cell
proliferation at embryonic and fetal stages of heart development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3296120
PMID: 22226977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Dev Dyn. 2012 Feb;241(2):365-75. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23710. Epub 2011 Dec 16.

Dynamic expression of Tbx2 subfamily genes in development of the mouse
reproductive system.

Douglas NC(1), Heng K, Sauer MV, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York 10032, USA. nd2058@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx4, and Tbx5, members of the Tbx2 subfamily of T-box
transcription factor genes, are important for many aspects of embryonic
development and mutations in some human TBX2 subfamily genes cause developmental 
syndromes. In addition, TBX2 and TBX3 are overexpressed in a variety of cancers, 
including reproductive system cancers. This study characterizes the expression of
Tbx2 subfamily genes during development of the reproductive system.
RESULTS: We show that these genes are expressed in both the internal and external
reproductive systems. Tbx2 is expressed in gonads and genital ducts, the Wolffian
and Müllerian ducts, while Tbx3 is only expressed in genital ducts. Tbx4 is
expressed in embryonic and postnatal germ cells. All four genes are expressed in 
mesenchyme in external genitalia, with Tbx3 and Tbx5 expression in the epithelium
as well.
CONCLUSION: This study lays the foundation for investigation of functional
requirements for Tbx2 subfamily genes in development of the mammalian
reproductive system.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3503486
PMID: 22223620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Development. 2012 Jan;139(2):385-95. doi: 10.1242/dev.067058.

Ectopic retinoic acid signaling affects outflow tract cushion development through
suppression of the myocardial Tbx2-Tgfß2 pathway.

Sakabe M(1), Kokubo H, Nakajima Y, Saga Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mammalian Development, National Institute of Genetics, 1111 Yata
Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.

The progress of molecular genetics has enabled us to identify the genes
responsible for congenital heart malformations. However, recent studies suggest
that congenital heart diseases are induced not only by mutations in certain
genes, but also by abnormal maternal factors. A high concentration of maternal
retinoic acid (RA), the active derivative of vitamin A, is well known as a
teratogenic agent that can cause developmental defects. Our previous studies have
shown that the maternal administration of RA to mice within a narrow
developmental window induces outflow tract (OFT) septum defects, a condition that
closely resembles human transposition of the great arteries (TGA), although the
responsible factors and pathogenic mechanisms of the TGA induced by RA remain
unknown. We herein demonstrate that the expression of Tbx2 in the OFT myocardium 
is responsive to RA, and its downregulation is associated with abnormal OFT
development. We found that RA could directly downregulate the Tbx2 expression
through a functional retinoic acid response element (RARE) in the Tbx2 promoter
region, which is also required for the initiation of Tbx2 transcription during
OFT development. Tgfb2 expression was also downregulated in the RA-treated OFT
region and was upregulated by Tbx2 in a culture system. Moreover, defective
epithelial-mesenchymal transition caused by the excess RA was rescued by the
addition of Tgfß2 in an organ culture system. These data suggest that RA
signaling participates in the Tbx2 transcriptional mechanism during OFT
development and that the Tbx2-Tgfß2 cascade is one of the key pathways involved
in inducing the TGA phenotype.

PMID: 22186728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Apr;69(8):1377-89. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0884-2. Epub
2011 Dec 1.

Tbx2 and Tbx3 induce atrioventricular myocardial development and endocardial
cushion formation.

Singh R(1), Hoogaars WM, Barnett P, Grieskamp T, Rana MS, Buermans H, Farin HF,
Petry M, Heallen T, Martin JF, Moorman AF, 't Hoen PA, Kispert A, Christoffels
VM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Germany.

A key step in heart development is the coordinated development of the
atrioventricular canal (AVC), the constriction between the atria and ventricles
that electrically and physically separates the chambers, and the development of
the atrioventricular valves that ensure unidirectional blood flow. Using
knock-out and inducible overexpression mouse models, we provide evidence that the
developmentally important T-box factors Tbx2 and Tbx3, in a functionally
redundant manner, maintain the AVC myocardium phenotype during the process of
chamber differentiation. Expression profiling and ChIP-sequencing analysis of
Tbx3 revealed that it directly interacts with and represses chamber myocardial
genes, and induces the atrioventricular pacemaker-like phenotype by activating
relevant genes. Moreover, mutant mice lacking 3 or 4 functional alleles of Tbx2
and Tbx3 failed to form atrioventricular cushions, precursors of the valves and
septa. Tbx2 and Tbx3 trigger development of the cushions through a regulatory
feed-forward loop with Bmp2, thus providing a mechanism for the co-localization
and coordination of these important processes in heart development.

PMCID: PMC3314179
PMID: 22130515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Mar 15;21(6):1217-29. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr553. Epub 2011 Nov 
24.

Identification of a Tbx1/Tbx2/Tbx3 genetic pathway governing pharyngeal and
arterial pole morphogenesis.

Mesbah K(1), Rana MS, Francou A, van Duijvenboden K, Papaioannou VE, Moorman AF, 
Kelly RG, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Institute of Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille University,
CNRS UMR6216, Marseille, France.

The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) is the most common microdeletion
disorder and is characterized by abnormal development of the pharyngeal apparatus
and heart. Cardiovascular malformations (CVMs) affecting the outflow tract (OFT) 
are frequently observed in 22q11.2DS and are among the most commonly occurring
heart defects. The gene encoding T-box transcription factor 1 (Tbx1) has been
identified as a major candidate for 22q11.2DS. However, CVMs are generally
considered to have a multigenic basis and single-gene mutations underlying these 
malformations are rare. The T-box family members Tbx2 and Tbx3 are individually
required in regulating aspects of OFT and pharyngeal development. Here, using
expression and three-dimensional reconstruction analysis, we show that Tbx1 and
Tbx2/Tbx3 are largely uniquely expressed but overlap in the caudal pharyngeal
mesoderm during OFT development, suggesting potential combinatorial requirements.
Cross-regulation between Tbx1 and Tbx2/Tbx3 was analyzed using mouse genetics and
revealed that Tbx1 deficiency affects Tbx2 and Tbx3 expression in neural
crest-derived cells and pharyngeal mesoderm, whereas Tbx2 and Tbx3 function
redundantly upstream of Tbx1 and Hh ligand expression in pharyngeal endoderm and 
bone morphogenetic protein- and fibroblast growth factor-signaling in cardiac
progenitors. Moreover, in vivo, we show that loss of two of the three genes
results in severe pharyngeal hypoplasia and heart tube extension defects. These
findings reveal an indispensable T-box gene network governing pharyngeal and OFT 
development and identify TBX2 and TBX3 as potential modifier genes of the
cardiopharyngeal phenotypes found in TBX1-haploinsufficient 22q11.2DS patients.

PMCID: PMC3491916
PMID: 22116936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Dec;155A(12):3082-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34307. Epub 2011 
Nov 3.

A de novo 3.54 Mb deletion of 17q22-q23.1 associated with hydrocephalus: a case
report and review of literature.

Khattab M(1), Xu F, Li P, Bhandari V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Perinatal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8064, USA.

We describe a female newborn with a de novo 3.54 megabase (Mb) deletion of
17q22-q23.1 (chr17:53,072,536-56,612,662, hg18) including genes from MSI2 to
BCAS3 detected by oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH).
Prenatal ultrasound examination noted oligohydramnios and ventriculomegaly in the
fetus. Postnatal examination found hypotonia, macrocephaly, arachnodactyly of
fingers and toes, dysmorphic features, bilateral hearing loss and heart defect.
Review of reported cases with genomic findings noted one case with proximal
deletion involving the NOG gene and a case series with distal recurrent
microdeletions involving the TBX2 and TBX4 genes. Our case presented a unique
deletion partially overlapped with the above deletions but not including the NOG,
TBX2, and TBX4 genes. A genomic map for deletions in this 17q22-q23.1 region was 
constructed to further define the common deletion intervals for potential
haplo-insufficient genes.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22052796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Dec;155A(12):2964-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34302. Epub 2011 
Nov 3.

Two new cases with microdeletion of 17q23.2 suggest presence of a candidate gene 
for sensorineural hearing loss within this region.

Schönewolf-Greulich B(1), Ronan A, Ravn K, Baekgaard P, Lodahl M, Nielsen K,
Rendtorff ND, Tranebjaerg L, Brøndum-Nielsen K, Tümer Z.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Counselling Clinic, Kennedy Center, Glostrup, Denmark.

Microdeletion of the 17q23.2 region has very recently been suggested as a new
emerging syndrome based on the finding of 8 cases with common phenotypes
including mild-to-moderate developmental delay, heart defects, microcephaly,
postnatal growth retardation, and hand, foot, and limb abnormalities. In this
report, we describe two new 17q23.2 deletion patients with mild intellectual
disability and sensorineural hearing loss. They both had submicroscopic deletions
smaller than the common deleted region for the 8 previously described 17q23.2
microdeletion cases. TBX4 was previously suggested as the responsible gene for
the heart or limb defects observed in 17q23.2 deletion patients, but the present 
cases do not have these features despite deletion of this gene. The finding of
sensorineural hearing loss in 5 of the 10 cases, including the present cases,
with a microdeletion at17q23.2, strongly suggests the presence of a candidate
gene for hearing loss within this region. We screened 41 patients with profound
sensorineural hearing loss for mutations of TBX2 and detected no mutations.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22052739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. EMBO J. 2012 Jan 4;31(1):95-109. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.370. Epub 2011 Oct 14.

Physical and functional interaction between PML and TBX2 in the establishment of 
cellular senescence.

Martin N(1), Benhamed M, Nacerddine K, Demarque MD, van Lohuizen M, Dejean A,
Bischof O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Infection, Nuclear Organisation and Oncogenesis
Laboratory, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Cellular senescence acts as a potent barrier for tumour initiation and
progression. Previous studies showed that the PML tumour suppressor promotes
senescence, although the precise mechanisms remain to be elucidated. Combining
gene expression profiling with chromatin-binding analyses and promoter reporter
studies, we identify TBX2, a T-box transcription factor frequently overexpressed 
in cancer, as a novel and direct PML-repressible E2F-target gene in senescence
but not quiescence. Recruitment of PML to the TBX2 promoter is dependent on a
functional p130/E2F4 repressor complex ultimately implementing a
transcriptionally inactive chromatin environment at the TBX2 promoter. TBX2
repression actively contributes to senescence induction as cells depleted for
TBX2 trigger PML pro-senescence function(s) and enter senescence. Reciprocally,
elevated TBX2 levels antagonize PML pro-senescence function through direct
protein-protein interaction. Collectively, our findings indicate that PML and
TBX2 act in an autoregulatory loop to control the effective execution of the
senescence program.

PMCID: PMC3252579
PMID: 22002537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Dev Biol. 2011 Dec 15;360(2):381-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.023. Epub 2011 
Oct 1.

Myocardial Tbx20 regulates early atrioventricular canal formation and endocardial
epithelial-mesenchymal transition via Bmp2.

Cai X(1), Nomura-Kitabayashi A, Cai W, Yan J, Christoffels VM, Cai CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Center for Molecular
Cardiology of the Child Health and Development Institute, the Black Family Stem
Cell Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

During early embryogenesis, the formation of the cardiac atrioventricular canal
(AVC) facilitates the transition of the heart from a linear tube into a chambered
organ. However, the genetic pathways underlying this developmental process are
poorly understood. The T-box transcription factor Tbx20 is expressed
predominantly in the AVC of early heart tube. It was shown that Tbx20 activates
Nmyc1 and suppresses Tbx2 expression to promote proliferation and specification
of the atrial and ventricular chambers, yet it is not known if Tbx20 is involved 
in early AVC development. Here, we report that mice lacking Tbx20 in the AVC
myocardium fail to form the AVC constriction, and the endocardial
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is severely perturbed. Tbx20 maintains
expression of a variety of genes, including Bmp2, Tbx3 and Hand1 in the AVC
myocardium. Intriguingly, we found Bmp2 downstream genes involved in the EMT
initiation are also downregulated. In addition, re-expression of Bmp2 in the AVC 
myocardium substantially rescues the EMT defects resulting from the lack of
Tbx20, suggesting Bmp2 is one of the key downstream targets of Tbx20 in AVC
development. Our data support a complex signaling network with Tbx20 suppressing 
Tbx2 in the AVC myocardium but also indirectly promoting Tbx2 expression through 
Bmp2. The spatiotemporal expression of Tbx2 in the AVC appears to be balanced
between these two opposing signals. Overall, our study provides genetic evidence 
that Tbx20 has essential roles in regulating AVC development that coordinate
early cardiac chamber formation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3217163
PMID: 21983003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Gene Expr Patterns. 2011 Dec;11(8):476-83. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2011.08.003. Epub
2011 Aug 17.

Dynamic expression of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in developing mouse pancreas.

Begum S(1), Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032, USA.

Tbx2 and Tbx3 are closely related members of the T-box family of transcription
factors that are important regulators during normal development as well as major 
contributors to human developmental syndromes when mutated. Although there is
evidence for the involvement of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in pancreatic cancer, so far there 
are no reports characterizing the normal expression pattern of these genes in the
pancreas. In this study, we examined spatial and temporal expression of Tbx2 and 
Tbx3 in mouse pancreas during development and in the adult using in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Our results show that Tbx2 and Tbx3 are
both expressed in the pancreatic mesenchyme throughout development beginning at
embryonic day (E) 9.5. In addition, Tbx2 is expressed in pancreatic vasculature
during development and in epithelial-derived endocrine and ductal cells during
late fetal stages, postnatal development and in adult pancreas. In contrast, Tbx3
is expressed in exocrine tissue in the postnatal and adult pancreas. Further our 
results demonstrate that Tbx2 and Tbx3 are expressed in tumor-derived endocrine
and exocrine cell lines, respectively. These dynamic changes in the expression
pattern of these transcription factors lay the foundation for investigation of
potential roles in pancreas development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3200443
PMID: 21867776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;31(19):4036-51. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01342-10. Epub 2011 Jul 
11.

A pathway for the control of anoikis sensitivity by E-cadherin and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Kumar S(1), Park SH, Cieply B, Schupp J, Killiam E, Zhang F, Rimm DL, Frisch SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, West Virginia
University, Morgantown, West Virginia 26506, USA.

Detachment of epithelial cells from matrix or attachment to an inappropriate
matrix engages an apoptotic response known as anoikis, which prevents metastasis.
Cellular sensitivity to anoikis is compromised during the oncogenic
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), through unknown mechanisms. We report
here a pathway through which EMT confers anoikis resistance. NRAGE (neurotrophin 
receptor-interacting melanoma antigen) interacted with a component of the
E-cadherin complex, ankyrin-G, maintaining NRAGE in the cytoplasm. Oncogenic EMT 
downregulated ankyrin-G, enhancing the nuclear localization of NRAGE. The
oncogenic transcriptional repressor protein TBX2 interacted with NRAGE,
repressing the tumor suppressor gene p14ARF. P14ARF sensitized cells to anoikis; 
conversely, the TBX2/NRAGE complex protected cells against anoikis by
downregulating this gene. This represents a novel pathway for the regulation of
anoikis by EMT and E-cadherin.

PMCID: PMC3187352
PMID: 21746881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2011 Jun;91(6):435-40. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20804. Epub 2011 Apr 28.

Wnt signaling regulates atrioventricular canal formation upstream of BMP and
Tbx2.

Verhoeven MC(1), Haase C, Christoffels VM, Weidinger G, Bakkers J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, KNAW & University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

In the developing heart, the atrioventricular canal (AVC) is essential for
separation and alignment of the cardiac chambers, for valve formation, and serves
to delay the electrical impulse from the atria to the ventricles. Defects in
various aspects of its formation are the most common form of congenital heart
defects. Using mutant and transgenic approaches in zebrafish, this study
demonstrates that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is both sufficient and required for the
induction of BMP4 and Tbx2b expression in the AVC and consequently the proper
patterning of the myocardium. Furthermore, genetic analysis shows that
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is upstream and in a linear pathway with BMP and Tbx2
during AVC specification.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21567896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 22;6(4):e18661. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018661.

Comparative analysis of 3D expression patterns of transcription factor genes and 
digit fate maps in the developing chick wing.

Fisher M(1), Downie H, Welten MC, Delgado I, Bain A, Planzer T, Sherman A, Sang
H, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Dundee, Dundee,
Scotland, United Kingdom.

Hoxd13, Tbx2, Tbx3, Sall1 and Sall3 genes are candidates for encoding
antero-posterior positional values in the developing chick wing and specifying
digit identity. In order to build up a detailed profile of gene expression
patterns in cell lineages that give rise to each of the digits over time, we
compared 3 dimensional (3D) expression patterns of these genes during wing
development and related them to digit fate maps. 3D gene expression data at
stages 21, 24 and 27 spanning early bud to digital plate formation, captured from
in situ hybridisation whole mounts using Optical Projection Tomography (OPT) were
mapped to reference wing bud models. Grafts of wing bud tissue from GFP chicken
embryos were used to fate map regions of the wing bud giving rise to each digit; 
3D images of the grafts were captured using OPT and mapped on to the same models.
Computational analysis of the combined computerised data revealed that Tbx2 and
Tbx3 are expressed in digit 3 and 4 progenitors at all stages, consistent with
encoding stable antero-posterior positional values established in the early bud; 
Hoxd13 and Sall1 expression is more dynamic, being associated with posterior
digit 3 and 4 progenitors in the early bud but later becoming associated with
anterior digit 2 progenitors in the digital plate. Sox9 expression in digit
condensations lies within domains of digit progenitors defined by fate mapping;
digit 3 condensations express Hoxd13 and Sall1, digit 4 condensations Hoxd13,
Tbx3 and to a lesser extent Tbx2. Sall3 is only transiently expressed in digit 3 
progenitors at stage 24 together with Sall1 and Hoxd13; then becomes excluded
from the digital plate. These dynamic patterns of expression suggest that these
genes may play different roles in digit identity either together or in
combination at different stages including the digit condensation stage.

PMCID: PMC3081307
PMID: 21526123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Jul 15;91(2):212-22. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr112. Epub 2011 Apr 
14.

Mechanisms of T-box gene function in the developing heart.

Greulich F(1), Rudat C, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, OE5250, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

The multi-chambered mammalian heart arises from a simple tube by polar
elongation, myocardial differentiation and morphogenesis. Members of the large
family of T-box (Tbx) transcription factors have been identified as crucial
players that act in distinct subprogrammes during cardiac regionalization. Tbx1
and Tbx18 ensure elongation of the cardiac tube at the anterior and posterior
pole, respectively. Tbx1 acts in the pharyngeal mesoderm to maintain
proliferation of mesenchymal precursor cells for formation of a myocardialized
and septated outflow tract. Tbx18 is expressed in the sinus venosus region and is
required for myocardialization of the caval veins and the sinoatrial node. Tbx5
and Tbx20 function in the early heart tube and independently activate the chamber
myocardial gene programme, whereas Tbx2 and Tbx3 locally repress this programme
to favour valvuloseptal and conduction system development. Here, we summarize
that these T-box factors act in different molecular circuits and control target
gene expression using diverse molecular strategies including binding to distinct 
protein interaction partners.

PMID: 21498422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Dev Dyn. 2011 Jun;240(6):1548-57. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22622. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Heart chamber size in zebrafish is regulated redundantly by duplicated tbx2
genes.

Sedletcaia A(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York
10065, USA.

The Tbx2 transcription factor is implicated in growth control based on its
association with human cancers. In the heart, Tbx2 represses cardiac
differentiation to mediate development of the atrioventricular canal (AVC). The
zebrafish genome retains two tbx2 genes, and both are required for formation of
the AVC. Here, we show that both genes are also expressed earlier in the
primitive heart tube, and we describe a previously unrecognized role for Tbx2 in 
promoting proliferation of presumptive myocardium at the heart tube stage. In
contrast to single knockdowns, depletion of both gene products causes chamber
defects, resulting in an expanded atrium and a smaller ventricle, associated with
decreased proliferation of ventricular cardiomyocytes. The phenotype correlates
with changes in the expression for known cardiac growth factors. Therefore, in
zebrafish, two tbx2 genes are functionally redundant for regulating chamber
development, while each gene is required independently for development of the
AVC.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3460804
PMID: 21448936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Nov;20(11):1995-2007. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0494. Epub 2011 
Apr 6.

Mesenchymal stromal cells from neonatal tracheal aspirates demonstrate a pattern 
of lung-specific gene expression.

Bozyk PD(1), Popova AP, Bentley JK, Goldsmith AM, Linn MJ, Weiss DJ, Hershenson
MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-5688, USA.

We have previously isolated mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) from the tracheal
aspirates of premature neonates with respiratory distress. Although isolation of 
MSCs correlates with the development of bronchopulmonary dysplasia, the
physiologic role of these cells remains unclear. To address this, we further
characterized the cells, focusing on the issues of gene expression, origin, and
cytokine expression. Microarray comparison of early passage neonatal lung MSC
gene expression to cord blood MSCs and human fetal and neonatal lung fibroblast
lines demonstrated that the neonatal lung MSCs differentially expressed 971 gene 
probes compared with cord blood MSCs, including the transcription factors Tbx2,
Tbx3, Wnt5a, FoxF1, and Gli2, each of which has been associated with lung
development. Compared with lung fibroblasts, 710 gene probe transcripts were
differentially expressed by the lung MSCs, including IL-6 and IL-8/CXCL8.
Differential chemokine expression was confirmed by protein analysis. Further,
neonatal lung MSCs exhibited a pattern of Hox gene expression distinct from cord 
blood MSCs but similar to human fetal lung fibroblasts, consistent with a lung
origin. On the other hand, limiting dilution analysis showed that fetal lung
fibroblasts form colonies at a significantly lower rate than MSCs, and
fibroblasts failed to undergo differentiation along adipogenic, osteogenic, and
chondrogenic lineages. In conclusion, MSCs isolated from neonatal tracheal
aspirates demonstrate a pattern of lung-specific gene expression, are distinct
from lung fibroblasts, and secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines.

PMCID: PMC3202893
PMID: 21341990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2010 May;20(4):109-14. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2010.09.004.

Tbx20, Smads, and the atrioventricular canal.

Singh R(1), Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule, D-30625 Hannover,
Germany.

Specification of chamber and nonchamber myocardium in the forming vertebrate
heart is a crucial lineage decision on which most of the functional architecture 
of the mature organ is built. Members of the T-box (Tbx) gene family are decisive
players in this early myocardial dichotomy by either promoting (Tbx5, Tbx20) or
inhibiting (Tbx2, Tbx3) the chamber gene program in the early heart tube. Because
Tbx5 and Tbx20 are widely expressed in the linear heart tube, localized
expression of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in regions fated to become primary myocardium of the 
atrioventricular canal and outflow tract is crucial to localize the chambers.
Here, we will review recent findings that suggest an important role for Tbx20 and
Bmp2/Smad signaling in restricting Tbx2 activation to the atrioventricular canal 
and outflow tract. Surprisingly, Tbx20 does not act as a direct transcriptional
repressor of Tbx2 but sequesters receptor-activated Smad factors of the Bmp
signaling pathway to prevent precocious Tbx2 transcription.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21335279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Dev Biol. 2011 Apr 1;352(1):164-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.032. Epub 2011
Feb 3.

Evolutionary implications of morphogenesis and molecular patterning of the blind 
gut in the planarian Schmidtea polychroa.

Martín-Durán JM(1), Romero R.

Author information: 
(1)Universitat de Barcelona, Departament de Genètica, Avda. Diagonal 645, E-08028
Barcelona, Spain. chemamartin@ub.edu

The formation of a through-gut was a key innovation in the evolution of
metazoans. There is still controversy regarding the origin of the anus and how it
may have been either gained or lost during evolution in different bilaterian
taxa. Thus, the study of groups with a blind gut is of great importance for
understanding the evolution of this organ system. Here, we describe the
morphogenesis and molecular patterning of the blind gut in the sexual triclad
Schmidtea polychroa. We identify and analyze the expression of goosecoid,
commonly associated with the foregut, and the GATA, ParaHox and T-box genes,
members of which commonly are associated with gut regionalization. We show that
GATA456a is expressed in the blind gut of triclads, while GATA456b is localized
in dorsal parenchymal cells. Goosecoid is expressed in the central nervous
system, and the unique ParaHox gene identified, Xlox, is detected in association 
with the nervous system. We have not isolated any brachyury gene in the T-box
complement of S. polychroa, which consists of one tbx1/10, three tbx2/3 and one
tbx20. Furthermore, the absence of genes like brachyury and caudal is also
present in other groups of Platyhelminthes. This study suggests that GATA456, in 
combination with foxA, is a gut-specific patterning mechanism conserved in the
triclad S. polychroa, while the conserved gut-associated expression of foregut,
midgut and hindgut markers is absent. Based on these data and the deviations in
spiral cleavage found in more basal flatworms, we propose that the lack of an
anus is an innovation of Platyhelminthes. This may be associated with loss of gut
gene expression or even gene loss.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21295562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Feb;155A(2):418-23. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33827. Epub 2011
Jan 13.

Microdeletion of 17q22q23.2 encompassing TBX2 and TBX4 in a patient with
congenital microcephaly, thyroid duct cyst, sensorineural hearing loss, and
pulmonary hypertension.

Nimmakayalu M(1), Major H, Sheffield V, Solomon DH, Smith RJ, Patil SR,
Shchelochkov OA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa
Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

Microdeletions of the long arm of chromosome 17 are being reported with
increasing frequency. Deletions of 17q22q23.2 may represent a genetically
recognizable phenotype although its spectrum of genomic abnormalities, clinical
manifestations, and critical regions are not fully delineated. Isolated reports
and small case series suggest that deletions of 17q22q23.2 result in
haploinsufficiency of dosage sensitive genes NOG, TBX2, and TBX4, which may be
responsible for many aspects of the phenotype. Shared clinical features in this
group of patients include microcephaly, prenatal onset growth restriction, heart 
defects, tracheoesophageal fistula, and esophageal atresia (TEF/EA), skeletal
anomalies, and moderate to severe global developmental delay. We describe a
female patient who presented with severe congenital microcephaly, thyroglossal
duct cyst, sensorineural hearing loss, mild tracheomalacia, abnormal auricles,
pulmonary hypertension, developmental delay, and postnatal onset growth delay.
She had no TEF/EA or heart defects. Using a high density oligonucleotide
microarray, we identified a microdeletion at 17q22q23.2, resulting in the
heterozygous loss of several genes, including TBX2 and TBX4 but not NOG. The
breakpoints did not lie within known segmental duplications. This case helps to
further delineate the critical region for TEF/EA, which is likely confined to the
chromosomal region proximal to 17q23.1, and suggests that genes in 17q23.1q23.2
may be associated with thyroglossal duct cysts. The role of TBX2 and TBX4 in
pulmonary hypertension warrants investigation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21271665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Clin Invest. 2011 Feb;121(2):534-44. doi: 10.1172/JCI44350. Epub 2011 Jan 25.

Defective Tbx2-dependent patterning of the atrioventricular canal myocardium
causes accessory pathway formation in mice.

Aanhaanen WT(1), Boukens BJ, Sizarov A, Wakker V, de Gier-de Vries C, van
Ginneken AC, Moorman AF, Coronel R, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2011 Feb;121(2):513-6.

Ventricular preexcitation, a feature of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, is caused
by accessory myocardial pathways that bypass the annulus fibrosus. This condition
increases the risk of atrioventricular tachycardia and, in the presence of atrial
fibrillation, sudden death. The developmental mechanisms underlying accessory
pathway formation are poorly understood but are thought to primarily involve
malformation of the annulus fibrosus. Before birth, slowly conducting
atrioventricular myocardium causes a functional atrioventricular activation delay
in the absence of the annulus fibrosus. This myocardium remains present after
birth, suggesting that the disturbed development of the atrioventricular canal
myocardium may mediate the formation of rapidly conducting accessory pathways.
Here we show that myocardium-specific inactivation of T-box 2 (Tbx2), a
transcription factor essential for atrioventricular canal patterning, leads to
the formation of fast-conducting accessory pathways, malformation of the annulus 
fibrosus, and ventricular preexcitation in mice. The accessory pathways
ectopically express proteins required for fast conduction (connexin-40 [Cx40],
Cx43, and sodium channel, voltage-gated, type V, a [Scn5a]). Additional
inactivation of Cx30.2, a subunit for gap junctions with low conductance
expressed in the atrioventricular canal and unaffected by the loss of Tbx2, did
not affect the functionality of the accessory pathways. Our results suggest that 
malformation of the annulus fibrosus and preexcitation arise from the disturbed
development of the atrioventricular myocardium.

PMCID: PMC3026729
PMID: 21266775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Apr;300(4):E691-8. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00710.2010. Epub 2011 Jan 25.

Soluble epoxide hydrolase in the generation and maintenance of high blood
pressure in spontaneously hypertensive rats.

Koeners MP(1), Wesseling S, Ulu A, Sepúlveda RL, Morisseau C, Braam B, Hammock
BD, Joles JA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Nephrology and Hypertension, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.

We hypothesized that perinatal inhibition of soluble epoxide hydrolase (SEH),
which metabolizes epoxyeicosatrienoic acids in the arachidonic acid (AA) cascade,
with an orally active SEH inhibitor, 12-(3-adamantan-1-yl-ureido)-dodecanoic acid
(AUDA), would persistently reduce blood pressure (BP) in adult SHR despite
discontinuation of AUDA at 4 wk of age. Renal cytoplasmic epoxide hydrolase-2
(Ephx2) gene expression was enhanced in SHR vs. WKY from 2 days to 24 wk. Effects
of perinatal treatment with AUDA, supplied to SHR dams until 4 wk after birth, on
BP in female and male offspring and renal oxylipin metabolome in female offspring
were observed and contrasted to female SHR for direct effects of AUDA (8-12 wk). 
Briefly, inhibition of SEH was effective in persistently reducing BP in female
SHR when applied during the perinatal phase. This was accompanied by marked
increases in major renal AA epoxides and decreases in renal lipoxygenase products
of AA. Early inhibition of SEH induced a delayed increase in renal 5-HETE at 24
wk, in contrast to a decrease at 2 wk. Inhibition of SEH in female SHR from 8 to 
12 wk did not reduce BP but caused profound decreases in renal 15(S)-HETrE, LTB4,
TBX2, 5-HETE, and 20-HETE and increases in TriHOMEs. In male SHR, BP reduction
after perinatal AUDA was transient. Thus, Ephx2 transcription and SEH activity in
early life may initiate mechanisms that eventually contribute to high BP in adult
female SHR. However, programmed BP-lowering effects of perinatal SEH inhibition
in female SHR cannot be simply explained by persistent reduction in renal SEH
activity but rather by more complex and temporally dynamic interactions between
the renal SEH, lipoxygenase, and cyclooxygenase pathways.

PMCID: PMC3074945
PMID: 21266668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Development. 2011 Feb;138(3):465-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.061234.

Role of Tbx2 in defining the territory of the pronephric nephron.

Cho GS(1), Choi SC, Park EC, Han JK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and
Technology, San 31, Hyoja-dong, Nam-gu, Pohang, Kyungbuk, Republic of Korea.

Despite extensive study of the development of the nephron, which is the
functional unit of the kidney, the molecular mechanisms underlying the
determination of nephron size remain largely unknown. Using the Xenopus
pronephros, we demonstrate here that Tbx2, a T-box transcriptional repressor,
functions to demarcate the territory of the pronephric nephron. Tbx2 is
specifically expressed around three distinct components of the pronephric
nephron: the tubule, duct and glomus. Gain of function of Tbx2 inhibits nephric
mesoderm formation. Conversely, Tbx2 loss of function expands the boundary of
each component of the pronephric nephron, resulting in an enlarged pronephros.
BMP signals induce Tbx2 in the non-nephric mesoderm, which inhibits the
expression of the nephric markers Hey1 and Gremlin. Importantly, these pronephric
molecules repress Tbx2 expression by antagonizing BMP signals in the nephric
mesoderm. These results suggest that the negative regulatory loops between
BMP/Tbx2 and Gremlin or Hey1 are responsible for defining the territory of the
pronephric nephron.

PMID: 21205791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS Genet. 2010 Dec 23;6(12):e1001259. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001259.

Ancestral regulatory circuits governing ectoderm patterning downstream of Nodal
and BMP2/4 revealed by gene regulatory network analysis in an echinoderm.

Saudemont A(1), Haillot E, Mekpoh F, Bessodes N, Quirin M, Lapraz F, Duboc V,
Röttinger E, Range R, Oisel A, Besnardeau L, Wincker P, Lepage T.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 7009 CNRS, Université de Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris 6), Observatoire
Oceanologique, Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.

Echinoderms, which are phylogenetically related to vertebrates and produce large 
numbers of transparent embryos that can be experimentally manipulated, offer many
advantages for the analysis of the gene regulatory networks (GRN) regulating germ
layer formation. During development of the sea urchin embryo, the ectoderm is the
source of signals that pattern all three germ layers along the dorsal-ventral
axis. How this signaling center controls patterning and morphogenesis of the
embryo is not understood. Here, we report a large-scale analysis of the GRN
deployed in response to the activity of this signaling center in the embryos of
the Mediterranean sea urchin Paracentrotus lividus, in which studies with high
spatial resolution are possible. By using a combination of in situ hybridization 
screening, overexpression of mRNA, recombinant ligand treatments, and
morpholino-based loss-of-function studies, we identified a cohort of
transcription factors and signaling molecules expressed in the ventral ectoderm, 
dorsal ectoderm, and interposed neurogenic ("ciliary band") region in response to
the known key signaling molecules Nodal and BMP2/4 and defined the epistatic
relationships between the most important genes. The resultant GRN showed a number
of striking features. First, Nodal was found to be essential for the expression
of all ventral and dorsal marker genes, and BMP2/4 for all dorsal genes. Second, 
goosecoid was identified as a central player in a regulatory sub-circuit
controlling mouth formation, while tbx2/3 emerged as a critical factor for
differentiation of the dorsal ectoderm. Finally, and unexpectedly, a neurogenic
ectoderm regulatory circuit characterized by expression of "ciliary band" genes
was triggered in the absence of TGF beta signaling. We propose a novel model for 
ectoderm regionalization, in which neural ectoderm is the default fate in the
absence of TGF beta signaling, and suggest that the stomodeal and neural
subcircuits that we uncovered may represent ancient regulatory pathways
controlling embryonic patterning.

PMCID: PMC3009687
PMID: 21203442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dev Genes Evol. 2010 Dec;220(9-10):251-62. doi: 10.1007/s00427-010-0344-2. Epub
2010 Nov 17.

Expansion, diversification, and expression of T-box family genes in Porifera.

Holstien K(1), Rivera A, Windsor P, Ding S, Leys SP, Hill M, Hill A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Richmond, 28 Westhampton Way, Richmond,
VA, 23173, USA.

Sponges are among the earliest diverging lineage within the metazoan phyla.
Although their adult morphology is distinctive, at several stages of development,
they possess characteristics found in more complex animals. The T-box family of
transcription factors is an evolutionarily ancient gene family known to be
involved in the development of structures derived from all germ layers in the
bilaterian animals. There is an incomplete understanding of the role that T-box
transcription factors play in normal sponge development or whether developmental 
pathways using the T-box family share similarities between parazoan and
eumetazoan animals. To address these questions, we present data that identify
several important T-box genes in marine and freshwater sponges, place these genes
in a phylogenetic context, and reveal patterns in how these genes are expressed
in developing sponges. Phylogenetic analyses demonstrate that sponges have
members of at least two of the five T-box subfamilies (Brachyury and Tbx2/3/4/5) 
and that the T-box genes expanded and diverged in the poriferan lineage. Our
analysis of signature residues in the sponge T-box genes calls into question
whether "true" Brachyury genes are found in the Porifera. Expression for a subset
of the T-box genes was elucidated in larvae from the marine demosponge,
Halichondria bowerbanki. Our results show that sponges regulate the timing and
specificity of gene expression for T-box orthologs across larval developmental
stages. In situ hybridization reveals distinct, yet sometimes overlapping
expression of particular T-box genes in free-swimming larvae. Our results provide
a comparative framework from which we can gain insights into the evolution of
developmentally important pathways.

PMID: 21082201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biomed Res. 2010 Oct;31(5):301-5.

Different distribution of Cav3.2 and Cav3.1 transcripts encoding T-type Ca(2+)
channels in the embryonic heart of mice.

Mizuta E(1), Shirai M, Arakawa K, Hidaka K, Miake J, Ninomiya H, Kato M,
Shigemasa C, Shirayoshi Y, Hisatome I, Morisaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Department of
Multidisciplinary Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University,
Yonago, Japan. einosuke@kc4.so-net.ne.jp

We investigated the distribution of T-type Ca(2+) channel mRNAs in the mouse
embryonic heart. Cav3.2, but not Cav3.1, was expressed in the E8.5 embryonic
heart along with cardiac progenitor markers (Nkx2.5, Tbx5, Isl-1) and contractile
proteins (alpha and beta MHC). In the E10.5 heart, the distribution of Cav3.1
mRNA was confirmed in the AV-canal and overlapped with that of MinK or Tbx2.
Cav3.2 mRNA was observed not only in the AV-canal but also in the outflow tract, 
along with MinK and Isl-1, indicating the expression of Cav3.2 in the secondary
heart field. Thus, Cav3.2 may contribute to the development of the outflow tract 
from the secondary heart field in the embryonic heart, whereas Cav3.1 may be
involved in the development of the cardiac conduction-system together with
Cav3.2.

PMID: 21079360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 15;70(22):9084-94. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0159. Epub 
2010 Nov 9.

Critical roles of DMP1 in human epidermal growth factor receptor 2/neu-Arf-p53
signaling and breast cancer development.

Taneja P(1), Maglic D, Kai F, Sugiyama T, Kendig RD, Frazier DP, Willingham MC,
Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Cancer Biology and Graduate Program in Molecular 
Medicine, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Medical Center Boulevard,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina.

Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) overexpression stimulates cell
growth in p53-mutated cells while it inhibits cell proliferation in those with
wild-type p53, but the molecular mechanism is unknown. The Dmp1 promoter was
activated by HER2/neu through the phosphatidylinositol-3'-kinase-Akt-NF-<U+03BA>B
pathway, which in turn stimulated Arf transcription. Binding of p65 and p52
subunits of NF-<U+03BA>B was shown to the Dmp1 promoter and that of Dmp1 to the Arf
promoter on HER2/neu overexpression. Both Dmp1 and p53 were induced in
premalignant lesions from mouse mammary tumor virus-neu mice, and mammary
tumorigenesis was significantly accelerated in both Dmp1+/- and Dmp1-/- mice.
Selective deletion of Dmp1 and/or overexpression of Tbx2/Pokemon was found in
>50% of wild-type HER2/neu carcinomas, although the involvement of Arf, Mdm2, or 
p53 was rare. Tumors from Dmp1+/-, Dmp1-/-, and wild-type neu mice with
hemizygous Dmp1 deletion showed significant downregulation of Arf and
p21Cip1/WAF1, showing p53 inactivity and more aggressive phenotypes than tumors
without Dmp1 deletion. Notably, endogenous hDMP1 mRNA decreased when HER2 was
depleted in human breast cancer cells. Our study shows the pivotal roles of Dmp1 
in HER2/neu-p53 signaling and breast carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3073839
PMID: 21062982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Dev Dyn. 2010 Dec;239(12):3303-11. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22449.

Expression of Slit and Robo genes in the developing mouse heart.

Medioni C(1), Bertrand N, Mesbah K, Hudry B, Dupays L, Wolstein O, Washkowitz AJ,
Papaioannou VE, Mohun TJ, Harvey RP, Zaffran S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology and Cancer, CNRS UMR 6543, Faculté des
Sciences, Parc Valrose Nice, France.

Development of the mammalian heart is mediated by complex interactions between
myocardial, endocardial, and neural crest-derived cells. Studies in Drosophila
have shown that the Slit-Robo signaling pathway controls cardiac cell shape
changes and lumen formation of the heart tube. Here, we demonstrate by in situ
hybridization that multiple Slit ligands and Robo receptors are expressed in the 
developing mouse heart. Slit3 is the predominant ligand transcribed in the early 
mouse heart and is expressed in the ventral wall of the linear heart tube and
subsequently in chamber but not in atrioventricular canal myocardium.
Furthermore, we identify that the homeobox gene Nkx2-5 is required for early
ventral restriction of Slit3 and that the T-box transcription factor Tbx2
mediates repression of Slit3 in nonchamber myocardium. Our results suggest that
patterned Slit-Robo signaling may contribute to the control of oriented cell
growth during chamber morphogenesis of the mammalian heart.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2996720
PMID: 20941780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Development. 2010 Nov;137(22):3823-33. doi: 10.1242/dev.054015. Epub 2010 Oct 7.

Endothelin receptor type A expression defines a distinct cardiac subdomain within
the heart field and is later implicated in chamber myocardium formation.

Asai R(1), Kurihara Y, Fujisawa K, Sato T, Kawamura Y, Kokubo H, Tonami K,
Nishiyama K, Uchijima Y, Miyagawa-Tomita S, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The avian and mammalian heart originates from two distinct embryonic regions: an 
early differentiating first heart field and a dorsomedially located second heart 
field. It remains largely unknown when and how these subdivisions of the heart
field divide into regions with different fates. Here, we identify in the mouse a 
subpopulation of the first (crescent-forming) field marked by endothelin receptor
type A (Ednra) gene expression, which contributes to chamber myocardium through a
unique type of cell behavior. Ednra-lacZ/EGFP-expressing cells arise in the
ventrocaudal inflow region of the early linear heart tube, converge to the
midline, move anteriorly along the outer curvature and give rise to chamber
myocardium mainly of the left ventricle and both atria. This movement was
confirmed by fluorescent dye-labeling and transplantation experiments. The
Ednra-lacZ/EGFP-expressing subpopulation is characterized by the presence of
Tbx5-expressing cells. Ednra-null embryonic hearts often demonstrate hypoplasia
of the ventricular wall, low mitotic activity and decreased Tbx5 expression with 
reciprocal expansion of Tbx2 expression. Conversely, endothelin 1 stimulates ERK 
phosphorylation and Tbx5 expression in the early embryonic heart. These results
indicate that early Ednra expression defines a subdomain of the first heart field
contributing to chamber formation, in which endothelin 1/Ednra signaling is
involved. The present finding provides an insight into how subpopulations within 
the crescent-forming (first) heart field contribute to the coordination of heart 
morphogenesis through spatiotemporally defined cell movements.

PMID: 20929948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Circ Res. 2010 Sep 17;107(6):728-36. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.222992. Epub
2010 Jul 29.

Developmental origin, growth, and three-dimensional architecture of the
atrioventricular conduction axis of the mouse heart.

Aanhaanen WT(1), Mommersteeg MT, Norden J, Wakker V, de Gier-de Vries C, Anderson
RH, Kispert A, Moorman AF, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

RATIONALE: The clinically important atrioventricular conduction axis is
structurally complex and heterogeneous, and its molecular composition and
developmental origin are uncertain.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the molecular composition and 3D architecture of the
atrioventricular conduction axis in the postnatal mouse heart and to define the
developmental origin of its component parts.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We generated an interactive 3D model of the atrioventricular
junctions in the mouse heart using the patterns of expression of Tbx3, Hcn4,
Cx40, Cx43, Cx45, and Nav1.5, which are important for conduction system function.
We found extensive figure-of-eight rings of nodal and transitional cells around
the mitral and tricuspid junctions and in the base of the atrial septum. The
rings included the compact node and nodal extensions. We then used genetic
lineage labeling tools (Tbx2(+/Cre), Mef2c-AHF-Cre, Tbx18(+/Cre)), along with
morphometric analyses, to assess the developmental origin of the specific
components of the axis. The majority of the atrial components, including the
atrioventricular rings and compact node, are derived from the embryonic
atrioventricular canal. The atrioventricular bundle, including the lower cells of
the atrioventricular node, in contrast, is derived from the ventricular
myocardium. No contributions to the conduction system myocardium were identified 
from the sinus venosus, the epicardium, or the dorsal mesenchymal protrusion.
CONCLUSIONS: The atrioventricular conduction axis comprises multiple domains with
distinctive molecular signatures. The atrial part proliferates from the embryonic
atrioventricular canal, along with myocytes derived from the developing atrial
septum. The atrioventricular bundle and lower nodal cells are derived from
ventricular myocardium.

PMID: 20671237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Aug;152A(8):2061-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33506.

TBX2 gene duplication associated with complex heart defect and skeletal
malformations.

Radio FC(1), Bernardini L, Loddo S, Bottillo I, Novelli A, Mingarelli R,
Dallapiccola B.

Author information: 
(1)Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCSS, San Giovanni Rotondo and
CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy.

We report on a patient with mild mental retardation, prenatal onset growth
retardation, cerebellar hypoplasia, and complex heart defect including:
interventricular septal defect, patent foramen ovale, aortic coarctation,
tricuspid valve insufficiency, mitral valve stenosis, and minor skeletal
anomalies with hypo-aplasia of the distal phalanges. A SNP-array analysis
detected a de novo duplication of 17q23.2, encompassing the TBX2 gene. Animal
models argue for a key role of Tbx2 during cardiac and limb development.
Accordingly, we hypothesize that the heart malformation and mild digital
anomalies found in this patient could be related to TBX2 gene overexpression,
suggesting parallel consequences of TBX2 gene dosage imbalances in animals and in
humans.

PMID: 20635360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Dec;1806(2):268-74. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2010.07.001. 
Epub 2010 Jul 17.

TBX2 and TBX3: the special value for anticancer drug targets.

Lu J(1), Li XP, Dong Q, Kung HF, He ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.

TBX2 and TBX3 are members of the T-box family of transcription factors, which are
implicated in embryonic development. Unlike most members of the T-box family,
TBX2 and TBX3 are the only mammalian T-box factors which function as
transcriptional repressors, mediated by the repression domain in the C-terminal. 
In addition to a role in development, recent evidence suggests that TBX2 and TBX3
are overexpressed in a number of cancers, including melanoma, breast, liver,
lung, pancreas, ovarian, and cervical cancers. However, there is little
information about the mechanisms for how these T-box genes contribute to
tumorigenesis. Upregulation of TBX2 and TBX3 suppresses the expression of
p14(ARF) and p21(CIP1) and promotes bypass of senescence through inactivation of 
p53 pathway. TBX2 functionally interacts with pRb, and pRb modulates TBX2
functional specificity. In addition, TBX2 is a player of Wnt signaling while TBX3
is a downstream target of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, and overexpression of
TBX2 and TBX3 represses the expression of E-cadherin, which is demonstrated to be
a prerequisite for epithelial tumor cell invasion. Moreover, TBX2 is shown to
interact with EGR1 to block multiple downstream tumor suppressors. Here, we
review the current knowledge on TBX2 and TBX3 in tumorigenesis and prospect their
special value for development of target-based anticancer drugs.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20624445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Clin Med Insights Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;4:15-34.

Classical and Novel Prognostic Markers for Breast Cancer and their Clinical
Significance.

Taneja P(1), Maglic D, Kai F, Zhu S, Kendig RD, Fry EA, Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)The Departments of Pathology and.

The use of biomarkers ensures breast cancer patients receive optimal treatment.
Established biomarkers such as estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor
(PR) have been playing significant roles in the selection and management of
patients for endocrine therapy. HER2 is a strong predictor of response to
trastuzumab. Recently, the roles of ER as a negative and HER2 as a positive
indicator for chemotherapy have been established. Ki67 has traditionally been
recognized as a poor prognostic factor, but recent studies suggest that
measurement of Ki67-positive cells during treatment will more effectively predict
treatment efficacy for both anti-hormonal and chemotherapy. p53 mutations are
found in 20-35% of human breast cancers and are associated with aggressive
disease with poor clinical outcome when the DNA-binding domain is mutated. The
utility of cyclin D1 as a predictor of breast cancer prognosis is controversial, 
but cyclin D1b overexpression is associated with poor prognosis. Likewise,
overexpression of the low molecular weight form of cyclin E1 protein predicts
poor prognosis. Breast cancers from BRCA1/2 carriers often show high nuclear
grades, negativity to ER/PR/HER2, and p53 mutations, and thus, are associated
with poor prognosis. The prognostic values of other molecular markers, such as
p14(ARF), TBX2/3, VEGF in breast cancer are also discussed. Careful evaluation of
these biomarkers with current treatment modality is required to determine whether
their measurement or monitoring offer significant clinical benefits.

PMCID: PMC2883240
PMID: 20567632  [PubMed]


102. Mol Biol Cell. 2010 Aug 1;21(15):2770-9. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-12-1029. Epub 2010 
Jun 9.

The retinoblastoma protein modulates Tbx2 functional specificity.

Vance KW(1), Shaw HM, Rodriguez M, Ott S, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Biomedical Research Institute, University of
Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom. k.w.vance@warwick.ac.uk

Tbx2 is a member of a large family of transcription factors defined by homology
to the T-box DNA-binding domain. Tbx2 plays a key role in embryonic development, 
and in cancer through its capacity to suppress senescence and promote
invasiveness. Despite its importance, little is known of how Tbx2 is regulated or
how it achieves target gene specificity. Here we show that Tbx2 specifically
associates with active hypophosphorylated retinoblastoma protein (Rb1), a known
regulator of many transcription factors involved in cell cycle progression and
cellular differentiation, but not with the Rb1-related proteins p107 or p130. The
interaction with Rb1 maps to a domain immediately carboxy-terminal to the T-box
and enhances Tbx2 DNA binding and transcriptional repression. Microarray analysis
of melanoma cells expressing inducible dominant-negative Tbx2, comprising the
T-box and either an intact or mutated Rb1 interaction domain, shows that Tbx2
regulates the expression of many genes involved in cell cycle control and that a 
mutation which disrupts the Rb1-Tbx2 interaction also affects Tbx2 target gene
selectivity. Taken together, the data show that Rb1 is an important determinant
of Tbx2 functional specificity.

PMCID: PMC2912361
PMID: 20534814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Onkologie. 2010;33(5):241-5. doi: 10.1159/000305098. Epub 2010 Apr 21.

Expression of PSCA, PIWIL1, and TBX2 in endometrial adenocarcinoma.

Liu WK(1), Jiang XY, Zhang ZX.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of the Ministry of
Education, School of Life Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University,
Xi'an Shaanxi Province, China. lwk2001@263.net

BACKGROUND: Endometrial cancer is the 4th most common gynecological cancer. The
expression of prostate stem cell antigen (PSCA), piwi-like 1 (PIWIL1), and T-box 
2 (TBX2) in endometrial cancer remains to be elucidated.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The expression of PSCA, PIWIL1, and TBX2 was examined using
the streptavidin-peroxidase method in 64 endometrial endometrioid adenocarcinoma 
(EAC) and paired normal endometrium (NE) samples from the Shaanxi Province in
China.
RESULTS: Positive expression rates of PSCA, PIWIL1, and TBX2 were 75% (48/64),
25% (16/64), and 56% (36/64), respectively in EACs, but 5% (3/64), 6% (4/64), and
2% (1/64), respectively in NEs. The difference was statistically significant (p <
0.05). PSCA was positively correlated with TBX2 (p = 0.003) but not PIWIL1 (p =
0.188). PIWIL1 was positively correlated with TBX2 (p = 0.003). PSCA was
positively correlated with age, tumor grade, and lymph node metastasis (p <
0.05). TBX2 had an association with lymph node metastasis (p = 0.014). PIWIL1 was
not associated with clinicopathological features (p > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: We report the first analysis of PSCA, PIWIL1, and TBX2 expression in
EAC. Our findings suggest that PSCA and TBX2 might be candidate targets for
cancer therapy, and have helped us further understand the carcinogenesis of
endometrial cancer.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20502058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Oncogene. 2010 Jun 3;29(22):3252-62. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.84. Epub 2010 Mar 29.

T-box 2 represses NDRG1 through an EGR1-dependent mechanism to drive the
proliferation of breast cancer cells.

Redmond KL(1), Crawford NT, Farmer H, D'Costa ZC, O'Brien GJ, Buckley NE, Kennedy
RD, Johnston PG, Harkin DP, Mullan PB.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast,
Belfast, UK.

T-box 2 (TBX2) is a transcription factor involved in mammary development and is
known to be overexpressed in a subset of aggressive breast cancers. TBX2 has
previously been shown to repress growth control genes such as p14(ARF) and
p21(WAF1/cip1). In this study we show that TBX2 drives proliferation in breast
cancer cells and this is abrogated after TBX2 small interfering RNA (siRNA)
knockdown or after the expression of a dominant-negative TBX2 protein. Using
microarray analysis we identified a large cohort of novel TBX2-repressed target
genes including the breast tumour suppressor NDRG1 (N-myc downregulated gene 1). 
We show that TBX2 targets NDRG1 through a previously undescribed mechanism
involving the recruitment of early growth response 1 (EGR1). We show EGR1 is
required for the ability of TBX2 to repress NDRG1 and drive cell proliferation.
We show that TBX2 interacts with EGR1 and that TBX2 requires EGR1 to target the
NDRG1 proximal promoter. Abrogation of either TBX2 or EGR1 expression is
accompanied by the upregulation of cell senescence and apoptotic markers. NDRG1
can recapitulate these effects when transfected into TBX2-expressing cells.
Together, these data identify a novel mechanism for TBX2-driven oncogenesis and
highlight the importance of NDRG1 as a growth control gene in breast tissue.

PMID: 20348948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Arch Virol. 2010 May;155(5):657-63. doi: 10.1007/s00705-010-0635-y. Epub 2010 Mar
13.

Expression of PSCA, PIWIL1 and TBX2 and its correlation with HPV16 infection in
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded cervical squamous cell carcinoma specimens.

Liu WK(1), Jiang XY, Zhang ZX.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of
Education, Biomedical Engineering Postdoctoral Research Station, School of Life
Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 710049, Xi'an, Shaanxi
Province, People's Republic of China. lwk2001@263.net

The purpose of our study was to investigate the expression of prostate stem cell 
antigen (PSCA), piwi-like 1 (PIWIL1) and T-box 2 (TBX2) and its correlation with 
HPV16 infection in cervical squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC). HPV16 was detected by
amplifying the HPV16 E7 gene by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method, and
the expression of PSCA, PIWIL1, TBX2 and HPV16 E7 in 59 CSCCs and matched
adjacent normal cervix (MANC) was examined by the streptavidin-peroxidase (SP)
method. Fifty-two CSCCs and MANC specimens that were positive for the E7 gene and
the E7 protein were identified as infected with HPV16 and included in present
study. The rate of infection with HPV16 in CSCC was 52% (27/52), but that in
matched adjacent normal cervix (MANC) samples was 4% (2/52). Infection with HPV16
was found to be statistically more frequent in CSCC (P = 0.000). The expression
rates of PSCA, PIWIL1 and TBX2 in MANC were 6% (3/52), 8% (4/52) and 2% (1/52),
respectively, but those in CSCC were 62% (32/52), 75% (39/52) and 52% (27/52),
respectively. Higher expression rates of PSCA, PIWIL1 and TBX2 were observed in
CSCC than in MANC (P = 0.000). HPV16 had a statistical positive correlation with 
PSCA, PIWIL1 and TBX2 in CSCC (P < 0.05). The increased expression of PSCA,
PIWIL1 and TBX2 had no correlation with the patient's age or histological grade P
> 0.05). The elevated expression of PSCA and PIWIL1 was associated with invasion 
of CSCC (P < 0.05). Up-regulated expression of TBX2 had a positive association
with lymph node metastasis (P = 0.014). These findings demonstrate for the first 
time the expression of PSCA, PIWIL1 and TBX2 in CSCC. Their correlation with
HPV16 might provide new basic information for investigating the molecular
mechanism of HPV and help us to deepen our understanding of the interaction
between HPV16 and host cells the carcinogenesis of CSCC.

PMID: 20229117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Mar 12;86(3):454-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.038. Epub
2010 Mar 4.

Identification of a recurrent microdeletion at 17q23.1q23.2 flanked by segmental 
duplications associated with heart defects and limb abnormalities.

Ballif BC(1), Theisen A, Rosenfeld JA, Traylor RN, Gastier-Foster J, Thrush DL,
Astbury C, Bartholomew D, McBride KL, Pyatt RE, Shane K, Smith WE, Banks V,
Gallentine WB, Brock P, Rudd MK, Adam MP, Keene JA, Phillips JA 3rd, Pfotenhauer 
JP, Gowans GC, Stankiewicz P, Bejjani BA, Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, WA 99207, USA.
ballif@signaturegenomics.com

Segmental duplications, which comprise approximately 5%-10% of the human genome, 
are known to mediate medically relevant deletions, duplications, and inversions
through nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR) and have been suggested to be 
hot spots in chromosome evolution and human genomic instability. We report seven 
individuals with microdeletions at 17q23.1q23.2, identified by microarray-based
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH). Six of the seven deletions are
approximately 2.2 Mb in size and flanked by large segmental duplications of >98% 
sequence identity and in the same orientation. One of the deletions is
approximately 2.8 Mb in size and is flanked on the distal side by a segmental
duplication, whereas the proximal breakpoint falls between segmental
duplications. These characteristics suggest that NAHR mediated six out of seven
of these rearrangements. These individuals have common features, including mild
to moderate developmental delay (particularly speech delay), microcephaly,
postnatal growth retardation, heart defects, and hand, foot, and limb
abnormalities. Although all individuals had at least mild dysmorphic facial
features, there was no characteristic constellation of features that would elicit
clinical suspicion of a specific disorder. The identification of common clinical 
features suggests that microdeletions at 17q23.1q23.2 constitute a novel
syndrome. Furthermore, the inclusion in the minimal deletion region of TBX2 and
TBX4, transcription factors belonging to a family of genes implicated in a
variety of developmental pathways including those of heart and limb, suggests
that these genes may play an important role in the phenotype of this emerging
syndrome.

Copyright 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2833380
PMID: 20206336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Genes Cancer. 2010 Mar;1(3):272-82. doi: 10.1177/1947601910365160.

The Highly Homologous T-Box Transcription Factors, TBX2 and TBX3, Have Distinct
Roles in the Oncogenic Process.

Peres J(1), Davis E, Mowla S, Bennett DC, Li JA, Wansleben S, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa.

The T-box transcription factors TBX2 and TBX3 are overexpressed in several
cancers and are able to bypass senescence by repressing ARF and
p21(WAF1/CIP1/SDII). Although these studies suggest that they may both contribute
to the oncogenic process by repressing common targets, whether they have
redundant or distinct roles in cancers where they are both overexpressed remains 
to be elucidated. Importantly, when Tbx2 function is inhibited in melanoma cells 
lacking Tbx3, the cells senesce, but whether this is possible in melanoma cells
overexpressing both proteins is not known. An understanding of this issue may
have important implications for the design of an effective pro-senescence
therapy. In this study, the authors used a sh-RNA approach to knock down TBX2 and
TBX3 individually in 2 human melanoma cell lines that overexpress both these
factors and then examined their specific involvement in the oncogenic process.
They demonstrate, using in vitro and in vivo cell proliferation, as well as
colony- and tumor-forming ability and cell motility assays, that TBX2 and TBX3
have distinct roles in melanoma progression. In the tested lines, although TBX2
could promote proliferation and transformation and was required by primary
melanoma cells for immortality, TBX3 was required for tumor formation and cell
migration. These findings were reproducible in a human breast cancer cell line,
which confirms that TBX2 and TBX3, although highly homologous, do not have
redundant roles in the transformation process of cancers where they are both
overexpressed. These results have important implications for the development of
new cancer treatments and in particular for melanoma, which is a highly
aggressive and intractable cancer.

PMCID: PMC3092191
PMID: 21779450  [PubMed]


108. Evol Dev. 2010 Jan-Feb;12(1):34-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-142X.2009.00389.x.

Mechanisms of heart development in the Japanese lamprey, Lethenteron japonicum.

Kokubo N(1), Matsuura M, Onimaru K, Tiecke E, Kuraku S, Kuratani S, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Midori-ku, Yokohama, Japan.

Vertebrate hearts have evolved from undivided tubular hearts of chordate
ancestors. One of the most intriguing issues in heart evolution is the abrupt
appearance of multichambered hearts in the agnathan vertebrates. To explore the
developmental mechanisms behind the drastic morphological changes that led to
complex vertebrate hearts, we examined the developmental patterning of the
agnathan lamprey Lethenteron japonicum. We isolated lamprey orthologs of genes
thought to be essential for heart development in chicken and mouse embryos,
including genes responsible for differentiation and proliferation of the
myocardium (LjTbx20, LjTbx4/5, and LjIsl1/2A), establishment of left-right heart 
asymmetry (LjPitxA), and partitioning of the heart tube (LjTbx2/3A), and studied 
their expression patterns during lamprey cardiogenesis. We confirmed the presence
of the cardiac progenitors expressing LjIsl1/2A in the pharyngeal and splanchnic 
mesoderm and the heart tube of the lamprey. The presence of LjIsl1/2A-positive
cardiac progenitor cells in cardiogenesis may have permitted an increase of
myocardial size in vertebrates. We also observed LjPitxA expression in the left
side of lamprey cardiac mesoderm, suggesting that asymmetric expression of Pitx
in the heart has been acquired in the vertebrate lineage. Additionally, we
observed LjTbx2/3A expression in the nonchambered myocardium, supporting the view
that acquisition of Tbx2/3 expression may have allowed primitive tubular hearts
to partition, giving rise to multichambered hearts.

PMID: 20156281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 9;285(15):11129-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.087429. Epub 2010
Feb 3.

Pitx2-dependent occupancy by histone deacetylases is associated with T-box gene
regulation in mammalian abdominal tissue.

Hilton T(1), Gross MK, Kioussi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factor Pitx2 and the T-box transcription factors
are essential for organogenesis. Pitx2 and T-box genes are induced by growth
factors and function as transcriptional activators or repressors. Gene expression
analyses on abdominal tissue were used to identify seven of the T-box genes of
the genome as Pitx2 target genes in the abdomen at embryonic day.10.5. Pitx2
activated Tbx4, Tbx15, and Mga and repressed Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx5, and Tbx6
expression. As expected, activated genes showed reduced expression patterns, and 
repressed T-box genes showed increased expression patterns in the abdomen of
Pitx2 mutants. Pitx2 occupied chromatin sites near all of these T-box genes.
Co-occupancy by coactivators, corepressors, and histone acetylation at these
sites was frequently Pitx2-dependent. Genes repressed by Pitx2 generally showed
increased histone acetylation and decreased histone deacetylase
(HDAC)/corepressor occupancy in Pitx2 mutants. The lower N-CoR, HDAC1, and HDAC3 
occupancy observed at multiple sites along Tbx1 chromatin in mutants is
consistent with the model that increased histone acetylation and gene expression 
of Tbx1 may result from a loss of recruitment of corepressors by Pitx2. Genes
activated by Pitx2 showed less consistent patterns in chromatin analyses. Reduced
H4 acetylation and increased HDAC1/nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR) occupancy
at some Tbx4 sites were accompanied by increased H3 acetylation and reduced HDAC3
occupancy at the same or other more distal chromatin sites in mutants.
Pitx2-dependent occupancy by corepressors resulted in alteration of the
acetylation levels of several T-box genes, whereas Pitx2-dependent occupancy by
coactivators was more site-localized. These studies will provide the basic
scientific underpinning to understand abdominal wall syndromes.

PMCID: PMC2856990
PMID: 20129917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Genesis. 2010 Mar;48(3):195-9. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20596.

Generation of mice with a conditional null allele for Tbx2.

Wakker V(1), Brons JF, Aanhaanen WT, van Roon MA, Moorman AF, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

The T-box transcription factor Tbx2 plays important roles in patterning and
development, and has been implicated in cell-cycle regulation and cancer.
Conventional disruption of Tbx2 results in abnormalities of the heart, limbs, eye
and other structures, and early fetal lethality. To gain insight into the role of
Tbx2 in different tissues and at different stages of development, we have
generated a conditional null allele of Tbx2 by flanking Exon 2 with loxP sites
(Tbx2(fl2)). Homozygous Tbx2(fl2) mice are viable and fertile, indicating that
the Tbx2(fl2) allele is a fully functional Tbx2 allele. Cre-mediated
recombination, using a ubiquitously active CMV-Cre line, results in deletion of
Exon 2 and loss of protein expression. Embryos homozygous for the recombined
allele (Tbx2(Delta2)) show the same heart and limb defects as conventional
Tbx2-deficient embryos. This Tbx2 conditional null allele will be a valuable tool
to uncover tissue-specific roles of Tbx2 in development and disease.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20095052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Genet Genomics. 2010 Feb;283(2):147-56. doi: 10.1007/s00438-009-0505-z. Epub 
2009 Dec 24.

Null mutations in Drosophila Optomotor-blind affect T-domain residues conserved
in all Tbx proteins.

Sen A(1), Gadomski C, Balles J, Abassi Y, Dorner C, Pflugfelder GO.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität, Becherweg 32, 55128,
Mainz, Germany.

The T-box transcription factors TBX2 and TBX3 are overexpressed in many human
cancers raising the need for a thorough understanding of the cellular function of
these proteins. In Drosophila, there is one corresponding ortholog,
Optomotor-blind (Omb). Currently, only two missense mutations are known for the
two human proteins. Making use of the developmental defects caused by
inactivation of omb, we have isolated and molecularly characterized four new omb 
mutations, three of them are missense mutations of amino acids fully conserved in
all Tbx proteins. We interpret the functional defects in the framework of the
known structure of the human TBX3 protein and provide evidence for loss of Omb
DNA-binding activity in all three newly identified missense mutations.

PMID: 20033428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. IUBMB Life. 2010 Feb;62(2):92-102. doi: 10.1002/iub.275.

The T-box transcription factor Tbx2: its role in development and possible
implication in cancer.

Abrahams A(1), Parker MI, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Human Biology, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, Cape Town, South Africa.

Tbx2 is a member of the T-box family of transcription factors that are crucial in
embryonic development. Recent studies suggest that T-box factors may also play a 
role in controlling cell cycle progression and in the genesis of cancer. Tbx2 has
been implicated in several developmental processes such as coordinating cell
fate, patterning and morphogenesis of a wide range of tissues and organs
including limbs, kidneys, lungs, mammary glands, heart, and craniofacial
structures. Importantly, Tbx2 is overexpressed in several cancers including
melanoma, small cell lung carcinoma, breast, pancreatic, liver, and bladder
cancers and can suppress senescence, a cellular process, which serves as a
barrier to cancer development. This review presents a state of the art overview
of the role and regulation of Tbx2 in early embryonic development and in cancer.

(c) 2009 IUBMB IUBMB Life.

PMID: 19960541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Nov 3;106(44):18604-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0900635106. Epub 2009 Oct 21.

T-box 2, a mediator of Bmp-Smad signaling, induced hyaluronan synthase 2 and
Tgfbeta2 expression and endocardial cushion formation.

Shirai M(1), Imanaka-Yoshida K, Schneider MD, Schwartz RJ, Morisaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute,
5-7-1 Fujishirodai, Suita, Osaka 565-8565, Japan.

During early heart development, Tbx2 gene expression is initiated in the cardiac 
crescent and then becomes restricted to the outflow tract and the
atrioventricular region. We identified a Tbx2 regulatory region, enriched in
multiple Smad sites, sufficient to reproduce Tbx2 expression patterns overlapping
Bmp2 and Bmp4 gene activity in the heart. The role of Tbx2 in cardiogenesis was
analyzed by using Cre-LoxP activated Tbx2 transgenic misexpression in chamber
myocardium. Ventricular Tbx2 misexpression exhibited an abnormally narrow chamber
lumen owing to the expansion of Hyaluronan synthase 2 expression in the ECM or
cardiac jelly and the appearance of the endocardial cushions (ECs). Excessive
Tbx2 also induced Tgfbeta2, which coincided with the outgrowth
epithelial-mesenchymal transformed cells in ventricular and atrial tissues
modifying cardiomyocyte identity from chamber type to non-chamber type. Tbx2, a
central intermediary of Bmp-Smad signaling, has a central part in directing Has2 
and Tgfbeta2 expression, facilitating EC formation.

PMCID: PMC2773962
PMID: 19846762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Cardiol. 2011 Feb 17;147(1):95-111. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2009.08.021. Epub
2009 Sep 22.

Differentiation induction of mouse embryonic stem cells into sinus node-like
cells by suramin.

Wiese C(1), Nikolova T, Zahanich I, Sulzbacher S, Fuchs J, Yamanaka S, Graf E,
Ravens U, Boheler KR, Wobus AM.

Author information: 
(1)In Vitro Differentiation Group, Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop
Plant Research IPK, Corrensstrasse 3, D-06466 Gatersleben, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Embryonic stem (ES) cells differentiate into cardiac phenotypes
representing early pacemaker-, atrial-, ventricular-, and sinus node-like cells, 
however, ES-derived specification into sinus nodal cells is not yet known. By
using the naphthylamine derivative of urea, suramin, we were able to follow the
process of cardiac specialization into sinus node-like cells.
METHODS: Differentiating mouse ES cells were treated with suramin (500 µM) from
day 5 to 7 of embryoid body formation, and cells were analysed for their
differentiation potential via morphological analysis, flow cytometry, RT-PCR,
immunohistochemistry and patch clamp analysis.
RESULTS: Application of suramin resulted in an increased number of cardiac cells,
but inhibition of neuronal, skeletal muscle and definitive endoderm
differentiation. Immediately after suramin treatment, a decreased mesendoderm
differentiation was found. Brachyury, FGF10, Wnt8 and Wnt3a transcript levels
were significantly down-regulated, followed by a decrease in mesoderm- and
cardiac progenitor-specific markers BMP2, GATA4/5, Wnt11, Isl1, Nkx2.5 and Tbx5
immediately after removal of the substance. With continued differentiation, a
significant up-regulation of Brachyury, FGF10 and GATA5 transcript levels was
observed, whereas Nkx2.5, Isl1, Tbx5, BMP2 and Wnt11 levels were normalized to
control levels. At advanced differentiation stages, sinus node-specific HCN4,
Tbx2 and Tbx3 transcript levels were significantly up-regulated.
Immunofluorescence and patch-clamp analysis confirmed the increased number of
sinus node-like cells, and electrophysiological analysis revealed a lower number 
of atrial- and ventricular-like cardiomyocytes following suramin treatment.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the interference of suramin with the cardiac
differentiation process modified mesoderm- and cardiac-specific gene expression
resulting in enhanced formation of sinus node-like cells.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4751033
PMID: 19775764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Dev Biol. 2009 Dec 15;336(2):145-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.09.020. Epub 2009 
Sep 19.

Expression and requirement of T-box transcription factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 during
secondary palate development in the mouse.

Zirzow S(1), Lüdtke TH, Brons JF, Petry M, Christoffels VM, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, OE5250, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

Formation of the mammalian secondary palate is a highly regulated and complex
process. Impairment of the underlying cellular and molecular programs often
results in cleft palate, a common birth defect in mammals. Here we report that
Tbx2 and Tbx3, two closely related genes encoding T-box transcription factors,
are expressed in the mesenchyme of the mouse palatal structures during
development. Mice homozygous mutant for Tbx2 and mice double heterozygous for
Tbx2 and Tbx3 exhibit a cleft palate phenotype arguing for an important
contribution of Tbx2 and Tbx3 to palatogenesis. In Tbx2-deficient embryos, the
bilateral primordial palatal shelves form but are smaller and retarded in the
outgrowth process. They do not make contact but retain the potential to fuse.
Development of other craniofacial structures appears normal, suggesting that
impaired palate formation in Tbx2-mutant mice is caused by a primary defect in
the palatal shelf mesenchyme. This is further supported by increased cell
proliferation and apoptosis accompanied by increased expression of Bmp4 and
CyclinD1 in Tbx2-deficient palatal shelves. Hence, Tbx2 and Tbx3 function
overlappingly to control growth of the palatal shelf mesenchyme.

PMID: 19769959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Tumori. 2009 May-Jun;95(3):357-66.

Genomic markers for ovarian cancer at chromosomes 1, 8 and 17 revealed by array
CGH analysis.

Dimova I(1), Orsetti B, Negre V, Rouge C, Ursule L, Lasorsa L, Dimitrov R,
Doganov N, Toncheva D, Theillet C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria.
idimova73@yahoo.com

AIMS AND BACKGROUND: The literature data show that the most frequently affected
chromosomes in ovarian carcinogenesis are 1, 8 and 17. In the present study we
aimed to define more precisely at a high resolution the genomic imbalances of
these chromosomes in ovarian cancer and to determine genomic markers separating
tumors of different histological types and stages.
METHODS: Array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) with a resolution of
approximately 0.8 Mb was applied in 28 primary ovarian tumors. We identified
regions of highly frequent gains or losses (affecting more than 40% of ovarian
cancers) and determined sites showing alterations of elevated amplitude
(amplifications or homozygous deletions). Doing this we also identified at least 
two adjacent changed clones.
RESULTS: We determined anomalies strongly associated with the disease such as
deletions at 8p21-23, 17p12-13, 1p35-36 or amplifications at 1q23, 17q12,
17q23.2, 8q13.2, 8q24. We defined more precisely the gains in 17q12-q24, finding 
as strong candidates for ovarian tumorigenesis the genes LASP1 (17q12), TGF11
(17q21.32), MUL (17q23.2), TBX2 (17q23.2), AXIN2 (17q24.3) and GRB2 (17q25.1). Of
particular note was gain of 8q13.2, which occurred at a high frequency in ovarian
cancer, especially in serous and late-stage tumors. We found that gains of
1q32-1q43, 8p11-p12, 8q11.23, 8q13.2, and 8q24.21-8q24.22 and losses of 1p36.21, 
8p23.1-8p21.1 and 8q21.2 were associated with serous histology, whereas losses of
1q23 and 1q32-43 and gains of 17q11.2-12 and 17q25 were associated with mucinous 
histology. Gains of 1q23, 8q24, 17q23.2, 17q24.2 and losses of 1p35-36, 8p, 17p, 
and 17q were specific for late-stage ovarian cancers.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study has identified potential genomic markers of interest on
chromosomes 1, 8 and 17 in ovarian cancer. Tumors showed a wide variety in the
patterns of alteration, suggesting that alternative mechanisms of genomic
instability may play a role in this tumor type.

PMID: 19688977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Circ Res. 2009 Aug 28;105(5):442-52. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.196063. Epub
2009 Aug 6.

Tbx20 interacts with smads to confine tbx2 expression to the atrioventricular
canal.

Singh R(1), Horsthuis T, Farin HF, Grieskamp T, Norden J, Petry M, Wakker V,
Moorman AF, Christoffels VM, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, OE5250, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

RATIONALE: T-box transcription factors play critical roles in the coordinated
formation of the working chambers and the atrioventricular canal (AVC). Tbx2
patterns embryonic myocardial cells to form the AVC and suppresses their
differentiation into chamber myocardium. Tbx20-deficient embryos, which fail to
form chambers, ectopically express Tbx2 throughout the entire heart tube,
providing a potential mechanism for the function of Tbx20 in chamber
differentiation.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the mechanism of Tbx2 suppression by Tbx20 and to
investigate the involvement of Tbx2 in Tbx20-mediated chamber formation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We generated Tbx20 and Tbx2 single and double knockout
embryos and observed that loss of Tbx2 did not rescue the Tbx20-deficient heart
from failure to form chambers. However, Tbx20 is required to suppress Tbx2 in the
developing chambers, a prerequisite to localize its strong
differentiation-inhibiting activity to the AVC. We identified a bone
morphogenetic protein (Bmp)/Smad-dependent Tbx2 enhancer conferring
AVC-restricted expression and Tbx20-dependent chamber suppression of Tbx2 in
vivo. Unexpectedly, we found in transfection and localization studies in vitro
that both Tbx20 and mutant isoforms of Tbx20 unable to bind DNA attenuate
Bmp/Smad-dependent activation of Tbx2 by binding Smad1 and Smad5 and sequestering
them from Smad4.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that Tbx20 directly interferes with Bmp/Smad
signaling to suppress Tbx2 expression in the chambers, thereby confining Tbx2
expression to the prospective AVC region.

PMID: 19661464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 25;284(39):26368-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.021360. Epub
2009 Jul 24.

Phosphorylation of histone H3 by protein kinase C signaling plays a critical role
in the regulation of the developmentally important TBX2 gene.

Teng H(1), Ballim RD, Mowla S, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, 7925 Cape Town, South Africa.

The mechanism(s) regulating the expression of the TBX2 gene, a key regulator of
development, is poorly understood and thus limits an understanding of its
function(s). Here we demonstrate that 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) 
induces TBX2 expression in normal human fibroblasts in a protein kinase C
(PKC)-dependent and MAPK-independent manner. Our data further reveal that TPA
activates transcription of TBX2 through activating MSK1, which leads to an
increase in phosphorylated histone H3 and the recruitment of Sp1 to the TBX2
gene. In addition, TPA was shown to activate MSK1 in a PKC-dependent and
MAPK-independent manner. This study is the first to provide evidence that
phosphorylation of histone H3 leads to the transcriptional activation of the TBX2
gene and to link MSK1 to PKC.

PMCID: PMC2785324
PMID: 19633291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Dev Biol. 2009 Sep 15;333(2):360-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.06.026. Epub 2009 
Jul 1.

Loss of Tbx2 delays optic vesicle invagination leading to small optic cups.

Behesti H(1), Papaioannou VE, Sowden JC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, London, WC1N 1EH, UK.

Tbx2 is a T-box transcription factor gene that is dynamically expressed in the
presumptive retina during optic vesicle invagination. Several findings implicate 
Tbx2 in cell cycle regulation, including its overexpression in tumours and
regulation of proliferation during heart development. We investigated the role of
Tbx2 in optic cup formation by analysing mice with a targeted homozygous mutation
in Tbx2. Loss of Tbx2 caused a reduced presumptive retinal volume due to
increased apoptosis, and a delay in ventral optic vesicle invagination leading to
the formation of small and abnormally shaped optic cups. Tbx2 is essential for
maintenance, but not induction of expression of the dorsal retinal determinant,
Tbx5, and acts downstream of Bmp4, a dorsally expressed gene implicated in human 
microphthalmia. The small retina showed a hypocellular ventral region, loss of
Fgf15, normally expressed in proliferating central retinal cells, and increased
numbers of mitotic cells in the dorsal region, indicating that Tbx2 is required
for normal growth and development across the D-V axis. Dorsal expression of
potential regulators of retinal growth, Cyp1b1 and Cx43, and the topographic
guidance molecule ephrinB2, was increased, and intraretinal axons were
disorganised resulting in a failure of optic nerve formation. Our data provide
evidence that Tbx2 is required for proper optic cup formation and plays a
critical early role in regulating regional retinal growth and the acquisition of 
shape during optic vesicle invagination.

PMCID: PMC2735611
PMID: 19576202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Dev Biol. 2009 Sep 1;333(1):121-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.06.025. Epub 2009
Jun 27.

Tbx2 misexpression impairs deployment of second heart field derived progenitor
cells to the arterial pole of the embryonic heart.

Dupays L(1), Kotecha S, Angst B, Mohun TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

Tbx2 is a member of the T-box family of transcription factors that play important
roles during heart development. In the embryonic heart tube, Tbx2 is expressed in
non-chamber myocardium (outflow tract and interventricular canal) and has been
shown to block chamber formation. We have developed a genetic system to
conditionally misexpress Tbx2 in the embryonic mouse heart at early stages of
development. We show that Tbx2 expression throughout the myocardium of the heart 
tube both represses proliferation and impairs secondary heart field (SHF)
progenitor cell deployment into the outflow tract (OFT). Repression of
proliferation is accompanied by the upregulation of Ndrg2 and downregulation of
Ndrg4 expression, both genes believed to be involved in cell growth and
proliferation. Impaired deployment of SHF cells from the pharyngeal mesoderm is
accompanied by downregulation of the cell adhesion molecules Alcam and N-cadherin
in the anterior part of the embryonic heart. Tbx2 misexpression also results in
downregulation of Tbx20 within the OFT, indicating complex and region-specific
transcriptional cross-regulation between the two T-box genes.

PMID: 19563797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2009 Jan-Mar;10(1):118-22.

Expression and clinical significance of tbx2 in pancreatic cancer.

Duo S(1), Tiao-Dong T, Lei Z, Wei W, Hong-Li S, Xian-Wei D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning, China.

TBX2 is one of the family of genes encoding developmental transcription factors, 
characterized by a 200 amino acid DNA binding domain (T-box), found to be related
to malignant phenotypes of mammary cancer. However, the role of TBX2 in
pancreatic cancer progression remains unclear. Therefore, the present study was
conducted to investigate the expression and clinical significance of TBX2 in
pancreatic cancer. Immunohistochemistry was carried out on paraffin-embedded
sections of pancreatic cancer and normal pancreatic tissues. In addition,
semiquantitative RT-PCR and Western blots were carried out to analyze mRNA and
protein expression of Tbx2 in 6 pairs of freshly resected pancreatic cancer and
their adjacent nontumorous tissue. TBX2 expression was significantly increased in
pancreatic cancer tissue (29/48 or 60.4%). The expression level of Tbx2 had a
significant positive relationship with tumor differentiation degree, higher TNM
stage and distant metastasis. Also, mRNA and protein expression of Tbx2 were
found to be at higher levels in almost all cancer tissues compared to adjacent
tissues. In conclusion, Tbx2 protein might play an important role in the process 
of the development and metastasis of pancreatic cancers and high-level Tbx2
expression might be related to malignant potential.

PMID: 19469638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Jun;18(6):1864-8. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-0486. Epub 2009 May 19.

Genetic variation in the chromosome 17q23 amplicon and breast cancer risk.

Kelemen LE(1), Wang X, Fredericksen ZS, Pankratz VS, Pharoah PD, Ahmed S, Dunning
AM, Easton DF, Vierkant RA, Cerhan JR, Goode EL, Olson JE, Couch FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Population Health, Alberta Cancer Board, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Gene amplification leading to overexpression is a common event in
breast tumors that is linked to tumor development and progression. The 17q23
region is amplified in >40% of breast tumors and contains several candidate
oncogenes. Because common genetic variation in several oncogenes has been
associated with cancer risk, we assessed the relevance of common variants in the 
17q23 candidate oncogenes to breast cancer.
METHODS: We investigated 60 polymorphisms in the TUBD1, SEPT4, PRKCA, TBX2, TBX4,
TEX14, TLK2, YPEL2, and PPM1E genes from this amplicon for association with
breast cancer risk among 798 Caucasian breast cancer cases and 843 unaffected
Caucasian controls from the Mayo Clinic.
RESULTS: Eight polymorphisms in PRKCA, TBX4, TLK2, and YPEL2 displayed
significant dose-response associations with breast cancer risk (P(trend) < 0.05).
Of these, PRKCA rs7342847 and TLK2 rs2245092 and rs733025 were also associated
with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer: PRKCA rs7342847 (odds ratio, 0.7;
95% confidence interval, 0.6-0.9; P(trend) = 0.002) and TLK2 rs733025 and
rs2245092 (both: odds ratio, 0.8; 95% confidence interval, 0.7-1.0; P(trend) =
0.03). Interactions between SEPT4 rs758377 and TEX14 rs302864 (P(interaction) =
0.0003) and between TLK2 rs733025 and YPEL2 rs16943468 (P(interaction) = 0.05)
for risk of breast cancer were also observed.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that single polymorphisms and combinations of 
polymorphisms within candidate oncogenes from the 17q23 amplicon may influence
risk of breast cancer overall and possibly specific molecular subtypes of breast 
tumors. The findings are discussed within the context of the results from two
independent data sets.

PMCID: PMC2729317
PMID: 19454617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Circ Res. 2009 Jun 5;104(11):1267-74. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.192450. Epub
2009 May 7.

The Tbx2+ primary myocardium of the atrioventricular canal forms the
atrioventricular node and the base of the left ventricle.

Aanhaanen WT(1), Brons JF, Domínguez JN, Rana MS, Norden J, Airik R, Wakker V, de
Gier-de Vries C, Brown NA, Kispert A, Moorman AF, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2009 Jun 5;104(11):1235-7.

The primary myocardium of the embryonic heart, including the atrioventricular
canal and outflow tract, is essential for septation and valve formation. In the
chamber-forming heart, the expression of the T-box transcription factor Tbx2 is
restricted to the primary myocardium. To gain insight into the cellular
contributions of the Tbx2+ primary myocardium to the components of the definitive
heart, genetic lineage tracing was performed using a novel Tbx2Cre allele. These 
analyses revealed that progeny of Tbx2+ cells provide an unexpectedly large
contribution to the Tbx2-negative ventricles. Contrary to common assumption, we
found that the embryonic left ventricle only forms the left part of the
definitive ventricular septum and the apex. The atrioventricular node, but not
the atrioventricular bundle, was found to derive from Tbx2+ cells. The Tbx2+
outflow tract formed the right ventricle and right part of the ventricular
septum. In Tbx2-deficient embryos, the left-sided atrioventricular canal was
found to prematurely differentiate to chamber myocardium and to proliferate at
increased rates similar to those of chamber myocardium. As a result, the
atrioventricular junction and base of the left ventricle were malformed.
Together, these observations indicate that Tbx2 temporally suppresses
differentiation and proliferation of primary myocardial cells. A subset of these 
Tbx2Cre-marked cells switch off expression of Tbx2, which allows them to
differentiate into chamber myocardium, to initiate proliferation, and to provide 
a large contribution to the ventricles. These findings imply that errors in the
development of the early atrioventricular canal may affect a much larger region
than previously anticipated, including the ventricular base.

PMID: 19423846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cancer Lett. 2009 Jun 18;278(2):230-40. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.01.006. Epub
2009 Feb 11.

Expression of TBX2 promotes anchorage-independent growth and survival in the
p53-negative SW13 adrenocortical carcinoma.

Ismail A(1), Bateman A.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Laboratory, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill
University Health Center, Royal Victoria Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada.
amin.ismail@mcgill.ca

The transcriptional regulator TBX2 is genetically amplified in several cancers
and has, in addition, important roles in development. In carcinogenesis, TBX2
regulates the cell cycle by suppressing the expression of cyclin-dependent kinase
(CDK) inhibitors and destabilizes p53 by suppressing expression of ARF. In
embryogenesis, however, TBX2 appears to act independently of the cell cycle or
p53 and is regulated by growth factors. Tumorigenic functions of TBX2 that are
independent of p53 or cell cycle regulation remain poorly understood. Here we
used SW13 carcinoma cells which express inactive p53 and have no detectable p16
or p21 CDK-inhibitors as a model to study these functions. Expression of TBX2 in 
SW13 cells had no effect on the cell cycle but promoted anchorage-independence
and increased resistance to apoptotic stimuli including UV-irradiation, the
cytotoxic drug doxorubicin and lethal endoplasmic-reticulum stress. This is a
cell type-dependent effect as TBX2 overexpression in PANC1 pancreatic cancer
cells which are p53-negative has no effect on colony formation or survival after 
irradiation. Mechanistically, in SW13 cells, TBX2 overexpression strongly reduced
the activation of caspase 3, 8 and 9 following UV-irradiation but without
altering the expression of the corresponding procaspases. There were, however,
dramatic and specific decreases in the expression of procaspases 1 and 4. The
expression of the inhibitor of apoptosis, cIAP2/BIRC3, increased in
TBX2-overexpressing cells. TBX2 was upregulated in a PI3K-dependent manner by
growth factors that are tumorigenic for SW13. Inhibition of Akt phosphorylation
abrogates upregulation of TBX2 by FGF-4. Our findings identify TBX2 as a cell
type-dependent survival factor under a p53-negative background, and are
indicative of a potentially wider role for TBX2 in carcinogenesis than hitherto
described.

PMID: 19216023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Neurogenet. 2009;23(1-2):15-33. doi: 10.1080/01677060802471619. Epub 2008 Dec
1.

omb and circumstance.

Pflugfelder GO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Genetik, Universtät Mainz, Germany. pflugfel@uni-mainz.de

Since its isolation in a behavioral screen in 1971, work on the gene,
optomotor-blind (omb, FlyBase: bifid, bi), has proceeded in many laboratories.
The Drosophila T-box transcription factor, Omb, is active in several
developmental processes, in particular in those of wing, eye, and abdominal
tergites and optic lobes. The orthologous genes, TBX2 and TBX3, are found
overexpressed or amplified in an increasing number of human cancers, emphasizing 
the importance of Tbx genes also in postdevelopmental processes. This review
summarizes recent findings pertaining to omb and orthologous genes.

PMID: 19052953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;28(24):7263-73. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00313-08. Epub 2008 Oct 
20.

Anchorage-independent growth of pocket protein-deficient murine fibroblasts
requires bypass of G2 arrest and can be accomplished by expression of TBX2.

Vormer TL(1), Foijer F, Wielders CL, te Riele H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan
121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) deficient for pocket proteins (i.e.,
pRB/p107-, pRB/p130-, or pRB/p107/p130-deficient MEFs) have lost proper G(1)
control and are refractory to Ras(V12)-induced senescence. However, pocket
protein-deficient MEFs expressing Ras(V12) were unable to exhibit
anchorage-independent growth or to form tumors in nude mice. We show that
depending on the level of pocket proteins, loss of adhesion induces G(1) and G(2)
arrest, which could be alleviated by overexpression of the TBX2 oncogene.
TBX2-induced transformation occurred only in the absence of pocket proteins and
could be attributed to downregulation of the p53/p21(CIP1) pathway. Our results
show that a balance between the pocket protein and p53 pathways determines the
level of transformation of MEFs by regulating cyclin-dependent kinase activities.
Since transformation of human fibroblasts also requires ablation of both
pathways, our results imply that the mechanisms underlying transformation of
human and mouse cells are not as different as previously claimed.

PMCID: PMC2593436
PMID: 18936168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 1;68(19):7872-81. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0301.

Tbx3 represses E-cadherin expression and enhances melanoma invasiveness.

Rodriguez M(1), Aladowicz E, Lanfrancone L, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Signalling and Development Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The
Chart, Oxted, Surrey, United Kingdom.

The T-box transcription factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 are overexpressed in many cancers
and in melanoma promote proliferation by actively suppressing senescence. Whether
they also contribute to tumor progression via other mechanisms is not known.
Here, we identify a novel role for these factors, providing evidence that Tbx3,
and potentially Tbx2, directly repress the expression of E-cadherin, a
keratinocyte-melanoma adhesion molecule whose loss is required for the
acquisition of an invasive phenotype. Overexpression of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in melanoma
cells down-regulates endogenous E-cadherin expression, whereas depletion of Tbx3,
but not Tbx2, increases E-cadherin mRNA and protein levels and decreases melanoma
invasiveness in vitro. Consistent with these observations, in melanoma tissue,
Tbx3 and E-cadherin expression are inversely correlated. Depletion of Tbx3 also
leads to substantial up-regulation of Tbx2. The results suggest that Tbx2 and
Tbx3 may play a dual role during the radial to vertical growth phase transition
by both inhibiting senescence via repression of p21(CIP1) expression, and
enhancing melanoma invasiveness by decreasing E-cadherin levels.

PMID: 18829543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Dev Genes Evol. 2008 Dec;218(11-12):613-28. doi: 10.1007/s00427-008-0249-5. Epub 
2008 Sep 25.

Conservation of linkage and evolution of developmental function within the
Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily of T-box genes: implications for the origin of vertebrate
limbs.

Horton AC(1), Mahadevan NR, Minguillon C, Osoegawa K, Rokhsar DS, Ruvinsky I, de 
Jong PJ, Logan MP, Gibson-Brown JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, 1 Brookings Drive, 
St. Louis, MO 63130, USA.

T-box genes encode a family of DNA-binding transcription factors implicated in
numerous developmental processes in all metazoans. The Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily genes
are especially interesting because of their key roles in the evolution of
vertebrate appendages, eyes, and the heart, and, like the Hox genes, the
longevity of their chromosomal linkage. A BAC library derived from the single
male amphioxus (Branchiostoma floridae) used to sequence the amphioxus genome was
screened for AmphiTbx2/3 and AmphiTbx4/5, yielding two independent clones
containing both genes. Using comparative expression, genomic linkage, and
phylogenetic analyses, we have reconstructed the evolutionary histories of these 
members of the T-box gene family. We find that the Tbx2-Tbx4 and Tbx3-Tbx5 gene
pairs have maintained tight linkage in most animal lineages since their birth by 
tandem duplication, long before the divergence of protostomes and deuterostomes
(e.g., arthropods and vertebrates) at least 600 million years ago, and possibly
before the divergence of poriferans and cnidarians (e.g., sponges and jellyfish).
Interestingly, we find that the gene linkage detected in all vertebrate genomes
has been maintained in the primitively appendage-lacking, basal chordate,
amphioxus. Although all four genes have been involved in the evolution of
developmental programs regulating paired fin and (later) limb outgrowth and
patterning, and most are also implicated in eye and heart development, linkage
maintenance--often considered due to regulatory constraints imposed by limb, eye,
and/or heart associated gene expression--is undoubtedly a consequence of other,
much more ancient functional constraints.

PMID: 18815807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Oncogene. 2008 Nov 20;27(54):6806-16. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.294. Epub 2008 Sep 1.

In vitro genetic screen identifies a cooperative role for LPA signaling and c-Myc
in cell transformation.

Taghavi P(1), Verhoeven E, Jacobs JJ, Lambooij JP, Stortelers C, Tanger E,
Moolenaar WH, van Lohuizen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

c-Myc drives uncontrolled cell proliferation in various human cancers. However,
in mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs), c-Myc also induces apoptosis by activating
the p19Arf tumor suppressor pathway. Tbx2, a transcriptional repressor of p19Arf,
can collaborate with c-Myc by suppressing apoptosis. MEFs overexpressing c-Myc
and Tbx2 are immortal but not transformed. We have performed an unbiased genetic 
screen, which identified 12 oncogenes that collaborate with c-Myc and Tbx2 to
transform MEFs in vitro. One of them encodes the LPA2 receptor for the lipid
growth factor lysophosphatidic acid (LPA). We find that LPA1 and LPA4, but not
LPA3, can reproduce the transforming effect of LPA2. Using pharmacological
inhibitors, we show that the in vitro cell transformation induced by LPA
receptors is dependent on the Gi-linked ERK and PI3K signaling pathways. The
transforming ability of LPA1, LPA2 and LPA4 was confirmed by tumor formation
assays in vivo and correlated with prolonged ERK1/2 activation in response to
LPA. Our results reveal a direct role for LPA receptor signaling in cell
transformation and tumorigenesis in conjunction with c-Myc and reduced p19Arf
expression.

PMID: 18762810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Int J Mol Med. 2008 Sep;22(3):271-5.

Hedgehog signaling, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and miRNA (review).

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical Bioinformatics, Hongo 113-003, Japan.

SHH, IHH, and DHH are lipid-modified secreted proteins binding to Patched
receptors, and CDON, BOC or GAS1 co-receptors. In the absence of Hedgehog
signaling, GLI1 is transcriptionally repressed, GLI2 is phosphorylated by GSK3
and CK1 for the FBXW11 (betaTRCP2)-mediated degradation, and GLI3 is processed to
a cleaved repressor. In the presence of Hedgehog signaling, Smoothened is
relieved from Patched-mediated suppression due to the Hedgehog-dependent
internalization of Patched, which leads to MAP3K10 (MST) activation and SUFU
inactivation for the stabilization and nuclear accumulation of GLI family
members. GLI activators then upregulate CCND1, CCND2 for cell cycle acceleration,
FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXF1, FOXL1, FOXP3, POU3F1, RUNX2, SOX13, TBX2 for cell
fate determination, JAG2, INHBC, and INHBE for stem cell signaling regulation.
Hedgehog signals also upregulate SFRP1 in mesenchymal cells for WNT signaling
regulation. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during embryogenesis,
adult tissue homeostasis and carcinogenesis is characterized by class switch from
E-cadherin to N-cadherin. SNAI1 (Snail), SNAI2 (Slug), SNAI3, ZEB1, ZEB2 (SIP1), 
KLF8, TWIST1, and TWIST2 are EMT regulators repressing CDH1 gene encoding
E-cadherin. Hedgehog signals induce JAG2 upregulation for Notch-CSL-mediated
SNAI1 upregulation, and also induce TGFbeta1 secretion for ZEB1 and ZEB2
upregulation via TGFbeta receptor and NF-kappaB. TGFbeta-mediated downregulation 
of miR-141, miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-205, and miR-429 results in
upregulation of ZEB1 and ZEB2 proteins. Hedgehog signaling activation indirectly 
leads to EMT through FGF, Notch, TGFbeta signaling cascades, and miRNA regulatory
networks. miRNAs targeted to stem cell signaling components or EMT regulators are
potent drug targets; however, off-target effects should be strictly controlled
before clinical application of synthetic miRNA. Peptide mimetic and RNA aptamer
could also be utilized as Hedgehog signaling inhibitors or EMT suppressors.

PMID: 18698484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 30;8:75. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-75.

Msx1 and Msx2 are required for endothelial-mesenchymal transformation of the
atrioventricular cushions and patterning of the atrioventricular myocardium.

Chen YH(1), Ishii M, Sucov HM, Maxson RE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center and Hospital, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-9176, USA. yihuiche@gate.sinica.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: Msx1 and Msx2, which belong to the highly conserved Nk family of
homeobox genes, display overlapping expression patterns and redundant functions
in multiple tissues and organs during vertebrate development. Msx1 and Msx2 have 
well-documented roles in mediating epithelial-mesenchymal interactions during
organogenesis. Given that both Msx1 and Msx2 are crucial downstream effectors of 
Bmp signaling, we investigated whether Msx1 and Msx2 are required for the
Bmp-induced endothelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) during atrioventricular 
(AV) valve formation.
RESULTS: While both Msx1-/- and Msx2-/- single homozygous mutant mice exhibited
normal valve formation, we observed hypoplastic AV cushions and malformed AV
valves in Msx1-/-; Msx2-/- mutants, indicating redundant functions of Msx1 and
Msx2 during AV valve morphogenesis. In Msx1/2 null mutant AV cushions, we found
decreased Bmp2/4 and Notch1 signaling as well as reduced expression of Has2,
NFATc1 and Notch1, demonstrating impaired endocardial activation and EMT.
Moreover, perturbed expression of chamber-specific genes Anf, Tbx2, Hand1 and
Hand2 reveals mispatterning of the Msx1/2 double mutant myocardium and suggests
functions of Msx1 and Msx2 in regulating myocardial signals required for
remodelling AV valves and maintaining an undifferentiated state of the AV
myocardium.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate redundant roles of Msx1 and Msx2 in
regulating signals required for development of the AV myocardium and formation of
the AV valves.

PMCID: PMC2518925
PMID: 18667074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Gene. 2008 Oct 15;423(1):8-13. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.06.017. Epub 2008 Jun 21.

Functional characterization of cis-acting elements involved in basal
transcription of the human Tbx2 gene: a new insight into the role of Sp1 in
transcriptional regulation.

Teng H(1), Parker MI, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Observatory, 7925,
Cape Town, South Africa.

Tbx2, a member of the T-box family of genes that encode developmentally important
transcription factors, plays a critical role in development and has been linked
to cancer. Here a 5'-flanking region of the human Tbx2 gene was cloned and
characterized. While we identify a Sp1 element and a reverse CCAAT box to be
essential for basal Tbx2 promoter activity, a physical interaction between Sp1
and NF-Y does not seem to be required for mediating their effect. Furthermore,
our data reveal a downstream promoter element (DPE) in the Tbx2 promoter which
significantly influences basal activity.

PMID: 18640248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Gene Expr Patterns. 2008 Jul;8(6):411-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2008.04.006. Epub
2008 Apr 29.

Expression of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in the developing hypothalamic-pituitary axis.

Pontecorvi M(1), Goding CR, Richardson WD, Kessaris N.

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology,
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
m.pontecorvi@mcri.ac.uk

TBX2 and TBX3 are transcription factors that belong to the T-box family, members 
of which play important roles during mammalian embryogenesis. Mutations in T-box 
genes have been linked to several human genetic disorders and increasing evidence
suggests that Tbx2 and Tbx3 may play a key role in cancer. The primary functions 
of Tbx2 and Tbx3 remain poorly defined, mainly because of their widespread
expression in several tissues and their multiple potential roles in
morphogenesis, organogenesis and cell-fate commitment. Here, we describe in
detail the expression of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in the developing hypothalamic-pituitary
axis. Localized transcripts can be detected during the early stages of pituitary 
commitment. Expression of Tbx2 is restricted to the infundibular region of the
ventral diencephalon (VD) at all ages examined, whereas Tbx3 can be detected in
both the VD and Rathke's pouch, the precursor of the anterior pituitary. Outside 
the developing hypophyseal organ novel sites of Tbx3 and Tbx2 expression include 
migrating branchiomotor (BM) and visceromotor (VM) neurons in the hindbrain,
neuroepithelial cells of the developing tongue (Tbx3) as well as the developing
blood vessel network (Tbx2).

PMID: 18534921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2008 Jun;21(3):379-87. doi:
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2008.00461.x. Epub 2008 Apr 26.

TBX3 and its splice variant TBX3 + exon 2a are functionally similar.

Hoogaars WM(1), Barnett P, Rodriguez M, Clout DE, Moorman AF, Goding CR,
Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Heart Failure Research, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Tbx3, a member of the conserved family of T-box developmental transcription
factors, is a transcriptional repressor required during cardiogenesis for the
formation and specification of the sinoatrial node, the pacemaker of the heart.
Both the TBX3 and the highly related TBX2 genes are also associated with several 
cancers, most likely as a consequence of their powerful anti-senescence
properties mediated via suppression p14(Arf) and p21(CIP) expression. In
melanoma, the TBX2 gene is frequently amplified and inhibition of Tbx2 function
leads to senescence and up-regulation of p21(CIP), a Tbx2 target gene. Tbx3 + 2a 
is a splice variant containing an extra 20 amino acids encoded by exon 2a
inserted into the highly conserved T-box DNA-binding domain. We find here that
Tbx3 + 2a is evolutionary conserved and that similar insertions are largely
absent from the T-box domains of other T-box factors. Tbx3 + 2a has been reported
to lack DNA-binding ability and act as a functional antagonist of Tbx3. By
contrast, we now demonstrate that both Tbx3 and Tbx3 + 2a bind the consensus
T-element, the p21(CIP1) promoter, and the Nppa cardiac target gene. Both
isoforms also function as repressors of p21(CIP1) and Nppa promoter activity and 
interact with homeobox factor Nkx2-5. When ectopically expressed in the embryonic
heart of mice, Tbx3 and Tbx3 + 2a both suppressed chamber formation and repressed
expression of cardiac chamber markers Nppa and Cx40. The results suggest that in 
the assays used, Tbx3 and Tbx3 + 2a are functionally equivalent and that like
Tbx2, Tbx3 may also function as an anti-senescence factor in melanoma.

PMID: 18444963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2008 Feb;21(1):27-38. doi:
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2007.00433.x.

How to make a melanoma: what do we know of the primary clonal events?

Bennett DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Medical Sciences, St George's, University of London, London,
UK. dbennett@sgul.ac.uk

Rapid advances have been made in our knowledge of the commonest genetic and
epigenetic alterations found in human sporadic melanomas. Valuable recent
contributions came from analyses of gene copy number by comparative genome
hybridization, and from large-scale gene expression profiling. All of the
commonest affected genes encode regulatory components. Loci with established
importance in melanoma, like CDKN2A, BRAF and PTEN, have been joined by some less
familiar genes including transcription factor sequences TBX2 and STK11 (LKB).
This knowledge is reviewed in relation to the cellular signaling pathways
affected by these molecules, their biological outcomes, and the implications as
to what changes are required overall to generate a melanoma. The data support a
model in which genesis of melanoma requires changes that (1) initiate clonal
expansion, (2) overcome cell senescence, and (3) reduce apoptosis.

PMID: 18353141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Genes Dev. 2008 Mar 15;22(6):734-9. doi: 10.1101/gad.1629408.

Foxn4 directly regulates tbx2b expression and atrioventricular canal formation.

Chi NC(1), Shaw RM, De Val S, Kang G, Jan LY, Black BL, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94158, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2008 Mar 15;22(6):706-10.

Cardiac chamber formation represents an essential evolutionary milestone that
allows for the heart to receive (atrium) and pump (ventricle) blood throughout a 
closed circulatory system. Here, we reveal a novel transcriptional pathway
between foxn4 and tbx genes that facilitates this evolutionary event. We show
that the zebrafish gene slipjig, which encodes Foxn4, regulates the formation of 
the atrioventricular (AV) canal to divide the heart. sli/foxn4 is expressed in
the AV canal, and its encoded product binds to a highly conserved tbx2 enhancer
domain that contains Foxn4- and T-box-binding sites, both necessary to regulate
tbx2b expression in the AV canal.

PMCID: PMC2275426
PMID: 18347092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Cardiovasc Res. 2008 Jun 1;78(3):485-93. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn049. Epub 2008 Feb
19.

Msx1 and Msx2 are functional interacting partners of T-box factors in the
regulation of Connexin43.

Boogerd KJ(1), Wong LY, Christoffels VM, Klarenbeek M, Ruijter JM, Moorman AF,
Barnett P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Heart Failure Research Centre, Academic 
Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105AZ Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

AIMS: T-box factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 play key roles in the development of the
cardiac conduction system, atrioventricular canal, and outflow tract of the
heart. They regulate the gap-junction-encoding gene Connexin43 (Cx43) and other
genes critical for heart development and function. Discovering protein partners
of Tbx2 and Tbx3 will shed light on the mechanisms by which these factors
regulate these gene programs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Employing an yeast 2-hybrid screen and subsequent in vitro
pull-down experiments we demonstrate that muscle segment homeobox genes Msx1 and 
Msx2 are able to bind the cardiac T-box proteins Tbx2, Tbx3, and Tbx5. This
interaction, as that of the related Nkx2.5 protein, is supported by the T-box and
homeodomain alone. Overlapping spatiotemporal expression patterns of Msx1 and
Msx2 together with the T-box genes during cardiac development in mouse and
chicken underscore the biological significance of this interaction. We
demonstrate that Msx proteins together with Tbx2 and Tbx3 suppress Cx43 promoter 
activity and down regulate Cx43 gene activity in a rat heart-derived cell line.
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis we demonstrate that Msx1 can bind
the Cx43 promoter at a conserved binding site located in close proximity to a
previously defined T-box binding site, and that the activity of Msx proteins on
this promoter appears dependent in the presence of Tbx3.
CONCLUSION: Msx1 and Msx2 can function in concert with the T-box proteins to
suppress Cx43 and other working myocardial genes.

PMID: 18285513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Biochem Soc Trans. 2007 Dec;35(Pt 6):1424-6.

SUMOylation-dependent function of a T-box transcriptional repressor in
Caenorhabditis elegans.

Crum TL(1), Okkema PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Laboratory for Molecular Biology,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 900 S. Ashland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

T-box transcription factors are crucial developmental regulators, and they have
not previously been associated with SUMOylation. In Caenorhabditis elegans, the
Tbx2 subfamily member TBX-2 (T-box protein 2) is required for anterior pharyngeal
muscle development. TBX-2 interacts with SUMOylation pathway enzymes, and loss of
these enzymes phenocopies tbx-2 mutants. We hypothesize that TBX-2 functions as a
SUMOylation-dependent transcriptional repressor. TBX-2 contains two consensus
SUMOylation sites conserved in many T-box transcriptional repressors, and we
suggest that the function of these T-box factors may similarly involve
SUMOylation.

PMID: 18031237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 25;283(4):2223-30. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

UV-mediated regulation of the anti-senescence factor Tbx2.

Abrahams A(1), Mowla S, Parker MI, Goding CR, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Observatory 7925, Cape Town, South Africa.

Several lines of evidence have implicated members of the developmentally
important T-box gene family in cell cycle regulation and in cancer. Importantly, 
the highly related T-box factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 can suppress senescence through
repressing the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p19(ARF) and
p21(WAF1/CIP1/SDII). Furthermore, Tbx2 is up-regulated in several cancers,
including melanomas where it was shown to function as an anti-senescence factor, 
suggesting that this may be one of the mechanisms by which T-box proteins
contribute to the oncogenic process. However, very little is known about whether 
Tbx2 is regulated by p21-mediated stress-induced senescence signaling pathways.
In this study, using the MCF-7 breast cancer cell line known to overexpress Tbx2,
we show that in response to stress induced by ultraviolet irradiation the Tbx2
protein is specifically phosphorylated by the p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase. Using site-directed mutagenesis and in vitro kinase assays, we have
identified serine residues 336, 623, and 675 in the Tbx2 protein as the p38
target sites and show that these sites are phosphorylated in vivo. Importantly,
we show by Western blotting, immunofluorescence, and reporter assays that this
phosphorylation leads to increased Tbx2 protein levels, predominant nuclear
localization of the protein, and an increase in the ability of Tbx2 to repress
the p21(WAF1/CIP1/SDII) promoter. These results show for the first time that the 
ability of Tbx2 to repress the p21 gene is enhanced in response to a
stress-induced senescence pathway, which leads to a better understanding of the
regulation of the anti-senescence function of Tbx2.

PMID: 18025091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Oncogene. 2008 Feb 7;27(7):976-84. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

Ectopic Tbx2 expression results in polyploidy and cisplatin resistance.

Davis E(1), Teng H, Bilican B, Parker MI, Liu B, Carriera S, Goding CR, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, Western
Province, South Africa.

T-box factors play critical roles in embryonic development and have been
implicated in cell cycle regulation and cancer. For example, Tbx2 can suppress
senescence through a mechanism involving the repression of the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitors, p19(ARF) and p21(WAF1/CIP1/SDII), and the Tbx2 gene is
deregulated in melanoma, breast and pancreatic cancers. In this study, several
transformed human lung fibroblast cell lines were shown to downregulate Tbx2. To 
further investigate the role of Tbx2 in oncogenesis we therefore stably
reexpressed Tbx2 in one such cell line. Compared to their parental cells, the
resulting Tbx2-expressing cells are larger, with binucleate and lobular nuclei
containing double the number of chromosomes. Moreover, these cells had an
increase in frequency of several features of genomic instability such as
chromosome missegregation, chromosomal rearrangements and polyploidy. While
grossly abnormal, these cells still divide and give rise to cells that are
resistant to the chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin. Furthermore, this is shown to
be neither species nor cell type dependent, as ectopically expressing Tbx2 in a
murine melanoma cell line also induce mitotic defects and polyploidy. These
results have important implications for our understanding of the role of Tbx2 in 
tumorigenesis because polyploidy frequently precedes aneuploidy, which is
associated with high malignancy and poor prognosis.

PMID: 17700536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Apr 10;87(14):991-4.

[Establishment of model of congenital heart disease with Tbx2 gene knockdown:
experiment with zebrafish].

[Article in Chinese]

Chong M(1), Gui YH, Cheng L, Lu DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish a model of congenital heart disease with Tbx2 gene
knockdown.
METHODS: 1200 fertilized eggs of zebrafish (Danio rerio) were divided into 3
groups: wild type group (n = 100), Tbx2-morpholino (MO) group (n = 600, to be
injected with Tbx2-MO so as to knock down the Tbx2 gene), and control MO group (n
= 500, to be injected with control MO). 12, 24, 36, 48, 72, and 96 hours after
fertilization the heart structure, heart rate, rhythm, contractibility, and blood
flow of the embryos were observed under anatomic microscope and digital camera
was used to record the findings. Whole-mount in situ hybridization was conducted 
to observe the expression of versican in the heart.
RESULTS: Eight hours after fertilization 27.2% of the fertilized eggs of the
Tbx2-MO group died, and 21.3%, 32.8%, and 18.7% of them showed mild, moderate, or
severe developmental abnormality of heart, including hypogenetic ventricle,
dilatation of atria, abnormal atrioventricular canal, slow heartbeat, arrhythmia,
and blood regurgitation. Whole-mount in situ hybridization showed that versican
did not decrease with the passage of time but was expressed abnormally in the
atria and ventricles, and did not disappear 72 hours after fertilization;
however, it was expressed normally in the statolith.
CONCLUSION: MO antisense oligonucleotide knockdown is a good method for the study
of heart development. Tbx2 gene plays an important role in the differentiation of
atria and ventricles and formation of atrioventricular canal.

PMID: 17650427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Pigment Cell Res. 2007 Aug;20(4):279-87.

T-box factors: targeting to chromatin and interaction with the histone H3
N-terminal tail.

Demay F(1), Bilican B, Rodriguez M, Carreira S, Pontecorvi M, Ling Y, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Signalling and Development Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The
Chart, Oxted, Surrey, UK.

T-box transcription factors play a crucial role in development where they are
implicated in patterning and cell fate decisions. Tbx2 and Tbx3 have also been
implicated in several cancers including melanoma, and can act as antisenescence
factors through their ability to repress p19(ARF) and p21(CIP1) expression.
Although several target genes for T-box factors have been identified, it is
unknown whether this family of proteins can bind chromatin, a property that would
facilitate the epigenetic reprogramming that occurs in both development and
cancer progression. Here, we show that Tbx2 has the potential to recognize
mitotic chromatin in a DNA-dependent fashion, can interact specifically with the 
histone H3 N-terminal tail, a property shared with Tbx4, Tbx5 and Tbx6, and can
also recognize nucleosomal DNA, with binding to nucleosomes being antagonized by 
the presence of the histone tails. Strikingly, in vivo Tbx2 co-localization with 
pericentric heterochromatin appears to be regulated and ectopic expression of
Tbx2 leads to severe mitotic defects. Taken together our results suggest that
Tbx2, and most likely other members of the T-box family, are able to target
chromatin and may indicate a role for the T-box factors in epigenetic
reprogramming events.

PMID: 17630961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 29;104(22):9313-8. Epub 2007 May 22.

Beta-catenin directly regulates Islet1 expression in cardiovascular progenitors
and is required for multiple aspects of cardiogenesis.

Lin L(1), Cui L, Zhou W, Dufort D, Zhang X, Cai CL, Bu L, Yang L, Martin J,
Kemler R, Rosenfeld MG, Chen J, Evans SM.

Author information: 
(1)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
California at San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Recent studies have demonstrated that the LIM homeodomain transcription factor
Islet1 (Isl1) marks pluripotent cardiovascular progenitor cells and is required
for proliferation, survival, and migration of recently defined second heart field
progenitors. Factors that are upstream of Isl1 in cardiovascular progenitors have
not yet been defined. Here we demonstrate that beta-catenin is required for Isl1 
expression in cardiac progenitors, directly regulating the Isl1 promoter.
Ablation of beta-catenin in Isl1-expressing progenitors disrupts multiple aspects
of cardiogenesis, resulting in embryonic lethality at E13. beta-Catenin is also
required upstream of a number of genes required for pharyngeal arch, outflow
tract, and/or atrial septal morphogenesis, including Tbx2, Tbx3, Wnt11, Shh, and 
Pitx2. Our findings demonstrate that beta-catenin signaling regulates
proliferation and survival of cardiac progenitors.

PMCID: PMC1890491
PMID: 17519333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. PLoS One. 2007 Apr 25;2(4):e398.

Tbx2 and Tbx3 regulate the dynamics of cell proliferation during heart
remodeling.

Ribeiro I(1), Kawakami Y, Büscher D, Raya A, Rodríguez-León J, Morita M,
Rodríguez Esteban C, Izpisúa Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The heart forms from a linear tube that is subject to complex
remodeling during embryonic development. Hallmarks of this remodeling are the
looping of the heart tube and the regionalization into chamber and non-chamber
myocardium. Cardiomyocytes in the future chamber myocardium acquire different
cellular and physiological characteristics through activation of a
chamber-specific genetic program, which is in part mediated by T-box genes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDING: We characterize two new zebrafish T-box
transcription factors, tbx3b and tbx2a, and analyze their role during the
development of the atrioventricular canal. Loss- and gain-of-function analyses
demonstrate that tbx3b and tbx2a are necessary to repress the chamber-genetic
program in the non-chamber myocardium. We also show that tbx3b and tbx2a are
required to control cell proliferation in the atrioventricular canal and that
misregulation of cell proliferation in the heart tube influences looping.
Furthermore, we characterize the heart phenotype of a novel Tbx3 mutation in mice
and show that both the control of cell proliferation and the repression of
chamber-specific genetic program in the non-chamber myocardium are conserved
roles of Tbx3 in this species.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together, our results uncover an evolutionarily
conserved role of Tbx2/3 transcription factors during remodeling of the heart
myocardium and highlight the importance of controlling cell proliferation as a
driving force of morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1851989
PMID: 17460765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Oct 15;102(3):618-25.

A role for Tbx2 in the regulation of the alpha2(1) collagen gene in human
fibroblasts.

Teng H(1), Davis E, Abrahams A, Mowla S, Parker MI, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Institute of Infectious 
Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.

The T-box gene family encodes highly conserved transcription factors that play
important roles in embryonic development and have been implicated in
carcinogenesis. One member of the family, Tbx2, is generally regarded as a
transcriptional repressor but appears to be capable of functioning as an
activator depending on the cellular context. This study shows that Tbx2 is
expressed in normal human fibroblasts but is drastically reduced in several
transformed fibroblast cell lines. This pattern of Tbx2 expression correlated
with that observed for the human alpha2(1) collagen gene (COL1A2). Interestingly,
stable expression of transfected Tbx2 in transformed fibroblast cell lines
further reduces expression of the human endogenous COL1A2 gene. This ability of
Tbx2 to repress the human COL1A2 gene was confirmed in luciferase reporter assays
and shown to be independent of the consensus T-box binding element.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17407139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 1;304(1):9-21. Epub 2006 Dec 9.

Characterization of a novel ectodermal signaling center regulating Tbx2 and Shh
in the vertebrate limb.

Nissim S(1), Allard P, Bandyopadhyay A, Harfe BD, Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Normal patterning of the developing limb requires a tight restriction of Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) mRNA to the posterior margin of the limb bud. While several
positive and negative regulatory factors have been identified which serve to
position the Shh expression domain in the distal posterior limb, these factors
cannot in themselves explain the tight restriction of Shh to the posterior
margin, nor can they explain the similarly tight restriction of Shh to the
anterior margin when the regulatory factors are disrupted or misexpressed. We
suggest that the transcription factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 are excellent candidates for
positively-acting factors responsible for limiting Shh expression to the margins 
of the limb bud. These closely related factors are indeed expressed at the
anterior and posterior limb margins over a wide range of limb bud stages.
Moreover, previous reports indicate that in addition, misexpression of Tbx2
beyond the limb margin is sufficient to anteriorly expand Shh, and conversely,
antagonizing Tbx2 function leads to loss of Shh. In contrast to this idea,
previous models have placed Tbx2 expression downstream of Shh and Bone
Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) signaling. We find, however, that Tbx2 expression is 
neither affected by blocking Shh signaling with cyclopamine nor by genetic
removal of several BMP activities in the limb bud. To understand the true source 
of the positional information responsible for limiting Tbx2, Tbx3 and Shh
expression to the marginal mesenchyme of the limb bud, we undertook a series of
grafting and extirpation experiments, which led to the identification of the
dorsal-ventral (DV) border ectoderm exclusive of the apical ectodermal ridge
(AER) as a new signaling center in the limb bud. We find that maintenance of Tbx2
expression in the limb mesoderm requires proximity to the non-AER D-V border.
Using chick-quail graft chimeras, we find that a graft of the non-AER D-V border 
ectoderm to a location on the surface of the middle of the limb bud is sufficient
to induce ectopic expression of Tbx2 in underlying mesoderm. These data
demonstrate that the non-AER D-V border ectoderm is necessary and sufficient for 
Tbx2 expression at the anterior and posterior limb margins. Similarly, we find
that a graft of the non-AER D-V border can expand the domain of Shh anteriorly
when grafted just anterior to the ZPA. It is notable that Tbx2 expression does
not extend distally to the mesoderm underlying the AER. Moreover, we find that
grafts of the AER to more proximal locations result in downregulation of Tbx2
expression, suggesting that the AER produces a negatively-acting signal opposing 
the activity of the non-AER DV border ectoderm. Indeed, implantation of beads
soaked in fibroblast growth factor 8 (Fgf8), expressed in the AER, downregulates 
Tbx2 expression. The data presented here identify the non-AER border of
dorsal-ventral ectoderm as a new signaling center in limb development that
localizes the ZPA to the limb margin. This finding explains the tight restriction
of Shh expression to the posterior margin throughout limb outgrowth as well as
the tight restriction of Shh expression to the anterior margin in many mutants
exhibiting preaxial polydactyly.

PMCID: PMC1868507
PMID: 17300775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Development. 2007 Feb;134(4):747-55.

Hesr1 and Hesr2 regulate atrioventricular boundary formation in the developing
heart through the repression of Tbx2.

Kokubo H(1), Tomita-Miyagawa S, Hamada Y, Saga Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mammalian Development, National Institute of Genetics, 1111 Yata, 
Mishima Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan. hkokubo@lab.nig.ac.jp

The establishment of chamber specificity is an essential requirement for cardiac 
morphogenesis and function. Hesr1 (Hey1) and Hesr2 (Hey2) are specifically
expressed in the atrium and ventricle, respectively, implicating these genes in
chamber specification. In our current study, we show that the forced expression
of Hesr1 or Hesr2 in the entire cardiac lineage of the mouse results in the
reduction or loss of the atrioventricular (AV) canal. In the Hesr1-misexpressing 
heart, the boundaries of the AV canal are poorly defined, and the expression
levels of specific markers of the AV myocardium, Bmp2 and Tbx2, are either very
weak or undetectable. More potent effects were observed in Hesr2-misexpressing
embryos, in which the AV canal appears to be absent entirely. These data suggest 
that Hesr1 and Hesr2 may prevent cells from expressing the AV canal-specific
genes that lead to the precise formation of the AV boundary. Our findings suggest
that Tbx2 expression might be directly suppressed by Hesr1 and Hesr2.
Furthermore, we find that the expression of Hesr1 and Hesr2 is independent of
Notch2 signaling. Taken together, our data demonstrate that Hesr1 and Hesr2 play 
crucial roles in AV boundary formation through the suppression of Tbx2.

PMID: 17259303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. BMC Dev Biol. 2006 Dec 15;6:62.

The level of BMP4 signaling is critical for the regulation of distinct T-box gene
expression domains and growth along the dorso-ventral axis of the optic cup.

Behesti H(1), Holt JK, Sowden JC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College
London, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, UK. h.behesti@ich.ucl.ac.uk
<h.behesti@ich.ucl.ac.uk>

BACKGROUND: Polarised gene expression is thought to lead to the graded
distribution of signaling molecules providing a patterning mechanism across the
embryonic eye. Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (Bmp4) is expressed in the dorsal
optic vesicle as it transforms into the optic cup. Bmp4 deletions in human and
mouse result in failure of eye development, but little attempt has been made to
investigate mammalian targets of BMP4 signaling. In chick, retroviral gene
overexpression studies indicate that Bmp4 activates the dorsally expressed Tbx5
gene, which represses ventrally expressed cVax. It is not known whether the Tbx5 
related genes, Tbx2 and Tbx3, are BMP4 targets in the mammalian retina and
whether BMP4 acts at a distance from its site of expression. Although it is
established that Drosophila Dpp (homologue of vertebrate Bmp4) acts as a
morphogen, there is little evidence that BMP4 gradients are interpreted to create
domains of BMP4 target gene expression in the mouse.
RESULTS: Our data show that the level of BMP4 signaling is critical for the
regulation of distinct Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx5 and Vax2 gene expression domains along
the dorso-ventral axis of the mouse optic cup. BMP4 signaling gradients were
manipulated in whole mouse embryo cultures during optic cup development, by
implantation of beads soaked in BMP4, or the BMP antagonist Noggin, to provide a 
local signaling source. Tbx2, Tbx3 and Tbx5, showed a differential response to
alterations in the level of BMP4 along the entire dorso-ventral axis of the optic
cup, suggesting that BMP4 acts across a distance. Increased levels of BMP4 caused
expansion of Tbx2 and Tbx3, but not Tbx5, into the ventral retina and repression 
of the ventral marker Vax2. Conversely, Noggin abolished Tbx5 expression but only
shifted Tbx2 expression dorsally. Increased levels of BMP4 signaling caused
decreased proliferation, reduced retinal volume and altered the shape of the
optic cup.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest the existence of a dorsal-high, ventral-low BMP4
signaling gradient across which distinct domains of Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx5 and Vax2
transcription factor gene expression are set up. Furthermore we show that the
correct level of BMP4 signaling is critical for normal growth of the mammalian
embryonic eye.

PMCID: PMC1764729
PMID: 17173667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Dev Cell. 2006 Dec;11(6):873-85.

Regional morphogenesis in the hypothalamus: a BMP-Tbx2 pathway coordinates fate
and proliferation through Shh downregulation.

Manning L(1), Ohyama K, Saeger B, Hatano O, Wilson SA, Logan M, Placzek M.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre Development for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, University
of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

A central challenge in embryonic development is to understand how growth and
pattern are coordinated to direct emerging new territories during morphogenesis. 
Here, we report on a signaling cascade that links cell proliferation and fate,
promoting formation of a distinct progenitor domain within the developing chick
hypothalamus. We show that the downregulation of Shh in floor plate-like cells in
the forebrain governs their progression to a distinctive, proliferating
hypothalamic progenitor domain. Shh downregulation occurs via a local BMP-Tbx2
pathway, Tbx2 acting to repress Shh expression. We show in vivo and in vitro that
forced maintenance of Shh in hypothalamic progenitors prevents their normal
morphogenesis, leading to maintenance of the Shh receptor, ptc, and preventing
progression to an Emx2(+)-proliferative progenitor state. Our data identify a
molecular pathway for the downregulation of Shh via a BMP-Tbx2 pathway and
provide a mechanism for expansion of a discrete progenitor domain within the
developing forebrain.

PMID: 17141161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 15;302(2):376-88. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

Tbx20 regulation of endocardial cushion cell proliferation and extracellular
matrix gene expression.

Shelton EL(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical
Center ML 7020, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

While recent work has implicated Tbx20 in myocardial maturation and
proliferation, the role of Tbx20 in heart valve development remains relatively
unknown. Tbx20 expression was manipulated in primary avian endocardial cells in
order to elucidate its function in developing endocardial cushions. Tbx20 gain of
function was achieved with a Tbx20-adenovirus, and endogenous Tbx20 expression
was inhibited with Tbx20-specific siRNA in cultured endocardial cushion cells.
With Tbx20 gain of function, the expression of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans 
(CSPG), including aggrecan and versican, was decreased, while the expression of
the matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) mmp9 and mmp13 was increased. Consistent
results were observed with Tbx20 loss of function, where the expression of CSPG
genes increased and MMP genes decreased. In addition, cushion mesenchyme
proliferation increased with infection of a Tbx20-adenovirus and decreased with
transfection of Tbx20-specfic siRNA. Furthermore, BMP2 treatment resulted in
increased Tbx20 expression in endocardial cushion cells, and loss of Tbx20 led to
increased Tbx2 and decreased N-myc gene expression. Taken together, these data
support a role for Tbx20 in repressing extracellular matrix remodeling and
promoting cell proliferation in mesenchymal valve precursor populations in
endocardial cushions during embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC1847324
PMID: 17064679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Development. 2006 Nov;133(21):4381-90. Epub 2006 Oct 4.

Developmental patterning of the cardiac atrioventricular canal by Notch and
Hairy-related transcription factors.

Rutenberg JB(1), Fischer A, Jia H, Gessler M, Zhong TP, Mercola M.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 10901 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, 
CA 92037, USA.

Mutations in Notch2, Jagged1 or homologs of the Hairy-related transcriptional
repressor Hey2 cause congenital malformations involving the non-chamber
atrioventricular canal (AVC) and inner curvature (IC) regions of the heart, but
the underlying mechanisms have not been investigated. By manipulating signaling
directly within the developing chick heart, we demonstrated that Notch2, Hey1 and
Hey2 initiate a signaling cascade that delimits the non-chamber AVC and IC
regions. Specifically, misactivation of Notch2 signaling, or misexpression of
either Hey1 or Hey2, repressed Bmp2. Because Jagged (also known as Serrate in
non-mammalian species) ligands were found to be present in prospective chamber
myocardium, these data support the model that Notch2 and Hey proteins cause the
progressive restriction of Bmp2 expression to within the developing AVC and IC,
where it is essential for differentiation. Misactivation or inhibition of Notch2 
specifically induced or inhibited Hey1, respectively, but these manipulations did
not affect Hey2, implicating Hey1 as the direct mediator of Notch2. Bmp2 within
the developing AVC and IC has been shown to induce Tbx2, and we found that Tbx2
misexpression inhibited the expression of both Hey1 and Hey2. Tbx2, therefore, is
envisaged to constitute a feedback loop that sharpens the border with the
developing AVC and IC by delimiting Hey gene expression to within prospective
chamber regions. Analysis of the loss-of-function phenotype in mouse embryos
homozygous for targeted disruption of Hey2 revealed an expanded AVC domain of
Bmp2. Similarly, zebrafish gridlock (Hey2 homolog) mutant embryos showed ectopic 
expression of Bmp4, which normally marks AVC myocardium in this species. Thus,
Hey pathway regulation of cardiac Bmp appears to be an evolutionarily conserved
mechanism to delimit AVC and IC fate, and provides a potential mechanistic
explanation for cardiac malformations caused by mutations in Serrate/Jagged1 and 
Notch signaling components.

PMCID: PMC3619037
PMID: 17021042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Dev Dyn. 2006 Nov;235(11):3080-4.

Segmental expression of the T-box transcription factor, Tbx2, during early
somitogenesis.

Harrelson Z(1), Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.

Tbx2 belongs to the T-box transcription factor gene family and is expressed in a 
variety of tissues and structures throughout development, although not all
expression domains have been thoroughly described. Two areas of segmented
expression along the rostral-caudal axis of E10.5-11.5 embryos were identified as
inter-somitic vessels and dorsal root ganglia. In addition, Tbx2 expression is
observed during somitogenesis beginning at E9.5, both in the posterior half of
prospective somites and in a progressively restricted pattern in recently formed 
somites.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16958122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. PLoS Biol. 2006 Sep;4(9):e291.

Dorsoventral patterning in hemichordates: insights into early chordate evolution.

Lowe CJ(1), Terasaki M, Wu M, Freeman RM Jr, Runft L, Kwan K, Haigo S, Aronowicz 
J, Lander E, Gruber C, Smith M, Kirschner M, Gerhart J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Biol. 2015 Dec;13(12):e1002354.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2006 Sep;4(9):e288.

We have compared the dorsoventral development of hemichordates and chordates to
deduce the organization of their common ancestor, and hence to identify the
evolutionary modifications of the chordate body axis after the lineages split. In
the hemichordate embryo, genes encoding bone morphogenetic proteins (Bmp) 2/4 and
5/8, as well as several genes for modulators of Bmp activity, are expressed in a 
thin stripe of ectoderm on one midline, historically called "dorsal." On the
opposite midline, the genes encoding Chordin and Anti-dorsalizing morphogenetic
protein (Admp) are expressed. Thus, we find a Bmp-Chordin developmental axis
preceding and underlying the anatomical dorsoventral axis of hemichordates,
adding to the evidence from Drosophila and chordates that this axis may be at
least as ancient as the first bilateral animals. Numerous genes encoding
transcription factors and signaling ligands are expressed in the three germ
layers of hemichordate embryos in distinct dorsoventral domains, such as pox
neuro, pituitary homeobox, distalless, and tbx2/3 on the Bmp side and netrin,
mnx, mox, and single-minded on the Chordin-Admp side. When we expose the embryo
to excess Bmp protein, or when we deplete endogenous Bmp by small interfering RNA
injections, these expression domains expand or contract, reflecting their
activation or repression by Bmp, and the embryos develop as dorsalized or
ventralized limit forms. Dorsoventral patterning is independent of
anterior/posterior patterning, as in Drosophila but not chordates. Unlike both
chordates and Drosophila, neural gene expression in hemichordates is not
repressed by high Bmp levels, consistent with their development of a diffuse
rather than centralized nervous system. We suggest that the common ancestor of
hemichordates and chordates did not use its Bmp-Chordin axis to segregate
epidermal and neural ectoderm but to pattern many other dorsoventral aspects of
the germ layers, including neural cell fates within a diffuse nervous system.
Accordingly, centralization was added in the chordate line by neural-epidermal
segregation, mediated by the pre-existing Bmp-Chordin axis. Finally, since
hemichordates develop the mouth on the non-Bmp side, like arthropods but opposite
to chordates, the mouth and Bmp-Chordin axis may have rearranged in the chordate 
line, one relative to the other.

PMCID: PMC1551926
PMID: 16933975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cancer Res. 2006 Aug 15;66(16):7859-63.

Disruption of scaffold attachment factor B1 leads to TBX2 up-regulation, lack of 
p19ARF induction, lack of senescence, and cell immortalization.

Dobrzycka KM(1), Kang K, Jiang S, Meyer R, Rao PH, Lee AV, Oesterreich S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Scaffold attachment factor B1 (SAFB1) is a multifunctional protein, which has
previously been implicated in breast cancer. Here, we show that genetic deletion 
of SAFB1 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) leads to spontaneous
immortalization and altered expression of two proteins involved in
immortalization and escape from senescence: low levels of p19(ARF) and high
levels of TBX2. Inactivation of TBX2 using a dominant-negative TBX2 resulted in
up-regulation of p19(ARF) in SAFB1 knockout MEFs. SAFB1 loss also caused lack of 
contact inhibition, increased foci formation, and increased oncogene-induced
anchorage-independent growth. These findings suggest that SAFB1 is a novel player
in cellular immortalization and transformation.

PMID: 16912158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Nat Med. 2006 Aug;12(8):933-8. Epub 2006 Jul 23.

Interaction of KAI1 on tumor cells with DARC on vascular endothelium leads to
metastasis suppression.

Bandyopadhyay S(1), Zhan R, Chaudhuri A, Watabe M, Pai SK, Hirota S, Hosobe S,
Tsukada T, Miura K, Takano Y, Saito K, Pauza ME, Hayashi S, Wang Y, Mohinta S,
Mashimo T, Iiizumi M, Furuta E, Watabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Department of Medical
Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, 801 N. Rutledge Street, PO Box 19626, 
Springfield, Illinois 62794-9626, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2006 Aug;12(8):887-8.

CD82, also known as KAI1, was recently identified as a prostate cancer metastasis
suppressor gene on human chromosome 11p1.2 (ref. 1). The product of CD82 is KAI1,
a 40- to 75-kDa tetraspanin cell-surface protein also known as the leukocyte
cell-surface marker CD82 (refs. 1,2). Downregulation of KAI1 has been found to be
clinically associated with metastatic progression in a variety of cancers,
whereas overexpression of CD82 specifically suppresses tumor metastasis in
various animal models. To define the mechanism of action of KAI1, we used a yeast
two-hybrid screen and identified an endothelial cell-surface protein, DARC (also 
known as gp-Fy), as an interacting partner of KAI1. Our results indicate that the
cancer cells expressing KAI1 attach to vascular endothelial cells through direct 
interaction between KAI1 and DARC, and that this interaction leads to inhibition 
of tumor cell proliferation and induction of senescence by modulating the
expression of TBX2 and p21. Furthermore, the metastasis-suppression activity of
KAI1 was significantly compromised in DARC knockout mice, whereas KAI1 completely
abrogated pulmonary metastasis in wild-type and heterozygous littermates. These
results provide direct evidence that DARC is essential for the function of CD82
as a suppressor of metastasis.

PMID: 16862154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Gene. 2006 Aug 1;377:130-9. Epub 2006 Jun 5.

T-box proteins differentially activate the expression of the endogenous
interferon gamma gene versus transfected reporter genes in non-immune cells.

Butz NV(1), Gronostajski RM, Campbell CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, State 
University of New York at Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

The T-box transcription factor T-bet is expressed in a number of hematopoetic
cell types and plays an essential role in the lineage determination of Th1
T-helper cells. In the absence of T-bet, CD4(+) T-cells fail to induce IFNgamma, 
the cytokine whose expression characterizes Th1 cells. Here we show that,
surprisingly, T-bet induces the expression of endogenous IFNgamma in non-immune
human cells, including 293 and other cell lines. Thus T-bet can induce IFNgamma
expression independently of its role in T-cell lineage determination. In
addition, mutations in T-bet, and chimeras of T-bet with other transcription
factors including the T-box transcription factor, TBX2, differentially affect the
ability of T-bet to activate expression of endogenous IFNgamma versus a T-site
regulated reporter gene. A truncated T-betVp16 fusion protein strongly activates 
the T-site reporter but fails to activate endogenous IFNgamma. Conversely, native
T-bet strongly activates endogenous IFNgamma expression but only weakly activates
the reporter gene. Fusion of the Vp16 activation domain to full-length T-bet
greatly increases its activation of both endogenous IFNgamma and transfected
T-site reporter gene expression. In contrast, TBX2Vp16 potently activates the
T-site reporter but has a negligible effect on endogenous IFNgamma expression.
Butyrate treatment of T-bet expressing cells potentiates the expression of
endogenous IFNgamma but weakly represses expression of the T-site reporter gene. 
These data indicate that induction of endogenous IFNgamma can be uncoupled from
differentiation into the Th1 lineage and that the expression of endogenous
IFNgamma versus a T-site reporter gene is differentially regulated by T-bet and
other T-box proteins.

PMID: 16737784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Jul 15;312(12):2358-66. Epub 2006 May 6.

Cell cycle regulation of the T-box transcription factor tbx2.

Bilican B(1), Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Signalling and Development Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The
Chart, Oxted, Surrey, RH8 0TL, UK.

T-box transcription factors play key roles in development and in particular the
determination or maintenance of cell fate. Tbx2 is a transcriptional repressor
implicated in several developmental processes and which has also been implicated 
in cancer through its ability to suppress senescence via repression of the
p19(ARF) and p21(Cip1) (CDKN1A) promoters. However, despite its importance,
little is known about how Tbx2 may be regulated. Here, we show that Tbx2 protein 
expression is tightly regulated during cell cycle progression, with levels being 
low in G1, increasing in mid-S-phase and persisting at high levels though G2
until finally undergoing a dramatic reduction at the onset of mitosis. Moreover, 
in S-phase, Tbx2 is present at a subset of late, but not early, replication foci 
and a significant fraction of Tbx2 is tightly associated with the nucleus in
small DNA-associated foci that do not correspond with telomeres, PML or cajal
bodies. The results are consistent with Tbx2 playing a role in cell cycle
progression and organization of subnuclear compartments.

PMID: 16730707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Jul 1;140(13):1407-13.

T-genes and limb bud development.

King M(1), Arnold JS, Shanske A, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Women's Health, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The T-box family of transcriptional factors is ancient and highly conserved among
most species of animals. Haploinsufficiency of multiple T-box proteins results in
severe human congenital malformation syndromes, involving craniofacial,
cardiovascular, and skeletal structures. These genes have major roles in
embryogenesis, including the development of the limbs. Formation of the limbs
begins with a limb bud and its morphogenesis requires complex
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. Recent studies have shown that T, Tbx2,
Tbx3, Tbx4, Tbx5, Tbx15, and Tbx18 are all expressed in the limb buds, and many
have developmental functions. The study of these genes is clinically relevant as 
mutations in several of them cause human congenital malformation syndromes.
Furthermore, understanding the function and biology of these genes is important
in understanding normal embryogenesis.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16688725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 23;345(1):239-47. Epub 2006 Apr 25.

The role of Paraxial Protocadherin in Xenopus otic placode development.

Hu RY(1), Xu P, Chen YL, Lou X, Ding X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, 
Shanghai 200031, China.

Vertebrate inner ear develops from its rudiment, otic placode, which later forms 
otic vesicle and gives rise to tissues comprising the entire inner ear. Although 
several signaling molecules have been identified as candidates responsible for
inner ear specification and patterning, many details remain elusive. Here, we
report that Paraxial Protocadherin (PAPC) is required for otic vesicle formation 
in Xenopus embryos. PAPC is expressed strictly in presumptive otic placode and
later in otic vesicle during inner ear morphogenesis. Knockdown of PAPC by
dominant-negative PAPC results in the failure of otic vesicle formation and the
loss of early inner ear markers Sox9 and Tbx2, suggesting the requirement of PAPC
in the early stage of otic vesicle development. However, PAPC alone is not
sufficient to induce otic placode formation.

PMID: 16678122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Development. 2006 Apr;133(8):1575-85.

Isl1Cre reveals a common Bmp pathway in heart and limb development.

Yang L(1), Cai CL, Lin L, Qyang Y, Chung C, Monteiro RM, Mummery CL, Fishman GI, 
Cogen A, Evans S.

Author information: 
(1)Skaggs School of Pharmacy, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

A number of human congenital disorders present with both heart and limb defects, 
consistent with common genetic pathways. We have recently shown that the LIM
homeodomain transcription factor islet 1 (Isl1) marks a subset of cardiac
progenitors. Here, we perform lineage studies with an Isl1Cre mouse line to
demonstrate that Isl1 also marks a subset of limb progenitors. In both cardiac
and limb progenitors, Isl1 expression is downregulated as progenitors migrate in 
to form either heart or limb. To investigate common heart-limb pathways in
Isl1-expressing progenitors, we ablated the Type I Bmp receptor, Bmpr1a utilizing
Isl1Cre/+. Analysis of consequent heart and limb phenotypes has revealed novel
requirements for Bmp signaling. Additionally, we find that Bmp signaling in
Isl1-expressing progenitors is required for expression of T-box transcription
factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 in heart and limb. Tbx3 is required for heart and limb
formation, and is mutated in ulnar-mammary syndrome. We provide evidence that the
Tbx3 promoter is directly regulated by Bmp Smads in vivo.

PMID: 16556916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Dev Dyn. 2006 Jun;235(6):1623-30.

Developmental expression patterns of Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx5, and Tbx20 in Xenopus
tropicalis.

Showell C(1), Christine KS, Mandel EM, Conlon FL.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center and Department of Genetics, University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-3280, USA.

T-box genes have diverse functions during embryogenesis and are implicated in
several human congenital disorders. Here, we report the identification, sequence 
analysis, and developmental expression patterns of four members of the T-box gene
family in the diploid frog Xenopus tropicalis. These four genes-Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx5,
and Tbx20-have been shown to influence cardiac development in a variety of
organisms, in addition to their individual roles in regulating other aspects of
embryonic development. Our results highlight the high degree of evolutionary
conservation between orthologs of these genes in X. tropicalis and other
vertebrates, both at the molecular level and in their developmental expression
patterns, and also identify novel features of their expression. Thus, X.
tropicalis represents a potentially valuable vertebrate model in which to further
investigate the functions of these genes through genetic approaches.

Developmental Dynamics 235:1623-1630, 2006. (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC1635807
PMID: 16477648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Development. 2005 Dec;132(24):5601-11.

Bmp2 is essential for cardiac cushion epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
myocardial patterning.

Ma L(1), Lu MF, Schwartz RJ, Martin JF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University System Health
Science Center, 2121 West Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Cardiac cushion development provides a valuable system to investigate epithelial 
to mesenchymal transition (EMT), a fundamental process in development and tumor
progression. In the atrioventricular (AV) canal, endocardial cells lining the
heart respond to a myocardial-derived signal, undergo EMT, and contribute to
cushion mesenchyme. Here, we inactivated bone morphogenetic protein 2 (Bmp2) in
the AV myocardium of mice. We show that Bmp2 has three functions in the AV canal:
to enhance formation of the cardiac jelly, to induce endocardial EMT and to
pattern the AV myocardium. Bmp2 is required for myocardial expression of Has2, a 
crucial component of the cardiac jelly matrix. During EMT, Bmp2 promotes
expression of the basic helix-loop-helix factor Twist1, previously implicated in 
EMT in cancer metastases, and the homeobox genes Msx1 and Msx2. Deletion of the
Bmp type 1A receptor, Bmpr1a, in endocardium also resulted in failed cushion
formation, indicating that Bmp2 signals directly to cushion-forming endocardium
to induce EMT. Lastly, we show that Bmp2 mutants failed to specify the AV
myocardium with loss of Tbx2 expression uncovering a myocardial, planar signaling
function for Bmp2. Our data indicate that Bmp2 has a crucial role in coordinating
multiple aspects of AV canal morphogenesis.

PMID: 16314491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Dev Dyn. 2005 Dec;234(4):922-33.

Tbx3, the ulnar-mammary syndrome gene, and Tbx2 interact in mammary gland
development through a p19Arf/p53-independent pathway.

Jerome-Majewska LA(1), Jenkins GP, Ernstoff E, Zindy F, Sherr CJ, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The closely related T-box genes Tbx2 and Tbx3 are both expressed in the
developing mammary glands of mouse embryos and both have been implicated in
mammary carcinogenesis. Tbx3 is essential for induction of the mammary placodes
in mice. In humans, mutations in TBX3 are responsible for ulnar-mammary syndrome.
Here, we show a haploinsufficiency effect of Tbx3 on maintenance of the mammary
placodes and on the extent of branching of the ductal tree in mice. Loss or
heterozygosity for Tbx2, on the other hand, has no effect on either induction or 
maintenance of the placodes, although a small effect was seen on branching
morphogenesis in adult heterozygotes. However, the deficiency in maintenance of
the mammary placodes in Tbx2, Tbx3 double heterozygous mice is more marked than
in Tbx3 single heterozygotes, indicating a genetic interaction between the two
genes. In spite of a large body of evidence implicating these genes in cell cycle
control through the p19(Arf)/p53 pathways, we find no evidence for involvement of
these pathways either in embryonic lethality of homozygous mutants or in the
mammary gland phenotype of Tbx3 heterozygous mice.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16222716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. FEBS Lett. 2005 Sep 12;579(22):5024-8.

T-box and homeobox genes from the ctenophore Pleurobrachia pileus: comparison of 
Brachyury, Tbx2/3 and Tlx in basal metazoans and bilaterians.

Martinelli C(1), Spring J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, University of Basel, Biocenter/Pharmacenter,
Klingelbergstrasse 50, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland.

Most animals are classified as Bilateria and only four phyla are still extant as 
outgroups, namely Porifera, Placozoa, Cnidaria and Ctenophora. These
non-bilaterians were not considered to have a mesoderm and hence
mesoderm-specific genes. However, the T-box gene Brachyury could be isolated from
sponges, placozoans and cnidarians. Here, we describe the first Brachyury and a
Tbx2/3 homologue from a ctenophore. In addition, analysing T-box and homeobox
genes under comparable conditions in all four basal phyla lead to the discovery
of novel T-box genes in sponges and cnidarians and a Tlx homeobox gene in the
ctenophore Pleurobrachia pileus. The conservation of the T-box and the homeobox
genes suggest that distinct subfamilies with different roles in bilaterians were 
already split in non-bilaterians.

PMID: 16122738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Development. 2005 Aug;132(16):3587-96. Epub 2005 Jul 20.

Wnt signalling mediated by Tbx2b regulates cell migration during formation of the
neural plate.

Fong SH(1), Emelyanov A, Teh C, Korzh V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos, 138673
Singapore.

During gastrulation, optimal adhesion and receptivity to signalling cues are
essential for cells to acquire new positions and identities via coordinated cell 
movements. T-box transcription factors and the Wnt signalling pathways are known 
to play important roles in these processes. Zebrafish tbx2b, a member of the TBX2
family, has previously been shown to be required for the specification of midline
mesoderm. We show here that tbx2b transcripts are present during mid-gastrula
before its expression is detected by whole-mount in situ hybridization. Isolated 
ectodermal cells deficient in Tbx2b have altered cell surface properties and the 
level of cadherins in these cells is lower. In chimaeric embryos generated by
cell transplantation and single blastomere injections, Tbx2b-deficient cells are 
defective in cell movement in a cell-autonomous manner, resulting in their
exclusion from the developing neural plate. Using this ;exclusion' phenotype as a
screen, we show that Tbx2b acts within the context of Fz7 signalling. The
exclusion of cells lacking T-box proteins in chimeras during development was
demonstrated with other T-box genes and may indicate a general functional
mechanism for T-box proteins.

PMID: 16033799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Development. 2005 Jun;132(12):2697-707. Epub 2005 May 18.

Tbx20 is essential for cardiac chamber differentiation and repression of Tbx2.

Singh MK(1), Christoffels VM, Dias JM, Trowe MO, Petry M, Schuster-Gossler K,
Bürger A, Ericson J, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30625
Hannover, Germany.

Tbx20, a member of the T-box family of transcriptional regulators, shows
evolutionary conserved expression in the developing heart. In the mouse, Tbx20 is
expressed in the cardiac crescent, then in the endocardium and myocardium of the 
linear and looped heart tube before it is restricted to the atrioventricular
canal and outflow tract in the multi-chambered heart. Here, we show that Tbx20 is
required for progression from the linear heart tube to a multi-chambered heart.
Mice carrying a targeted mutation of Tbx20 show early embryonic lethality due to 
hemodynamic failure. A linear heart tube with normal anteroposterior patterning
is established in the mutant. The tube does not elongate, indicating a defect in 
recruitment of mesenchyme from the secondary heart field, even though markers of 
the secondary heart field are not affected. Furthermore, dorsoventral patterning 
of the tube, formation of working myocardium, looping, and further
differentiation and morphogenesis fail. Instead, Tbx2, Bmp2 and vinexin alpha
(Sh3d4), genes normally restricted to regions of primary myocardium and lining
endocardium, are ectopically expressed in the linear heart tube of Tbx20 mutant
embryos. Because Tbx2 is both necessary and sufficient to repress chamber
differentiation (Christoffels et al., 2004a; Harrelson et al., 2004), Tbx20 may
ensure progression to a multi-chambered heart by repressing Tbx2 in the
myocardial precursor cells of the linear heart tube destined to form the
chambers.

PMID: 15901664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biol Cell. 2005 Aug;97(8):641-50.

Expression pattern of the Brachyury and Tbx2 homologues from the sponge Suberites
domuncula.

Adell T(1), Müller WE.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Abteilung Angewandte Molekularbiologie,
Universität, Duesbergweg 6, D-55099 Mainz, Germany.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION: T-box transcription factors are a large family of
transcriptional regulators involved in many aspects of embryonic development. In 
a previous report, we described the isolation and genomic characterization of two
T-box genes from the siliceous sponge Suberites domuncula: a Brachyury homologue,
Sd-Bra, and a Tbx2 homologue, Sd-Tbx2. Elucidation of the genomic structure of
Sd-Bra allowed us to demonstrate the existence of two different isoforms,
resulting from alternative splicing. Moreover, we demonstrated that the shorter
isoform exists in two different glycosylation states.
RESULTS: In the present study, we demonstrate a differential subcellular
localization of the three Sd-Bra isoforms, suggesting that its differential
nuclear import could be an important mechanism for its functional regulation.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that Sd-Tbx2 exists only in one isoform, which is
mainly localized in the nucleus. The pattern of expression of Sd-Bra and Sd-Tbx2 
genes is analysed in sponge tissue, in gemmules and in cultured cells.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest a conserved role for Sd-Bra in the control of
morphogenetic movements through the regulation of cell-adhesion properties and
the involvement of Sd-Tbx2 in the determination of cell identity in the early
stages of differentiation, reminiscent of the function of Tbx2-3-4-5 in
vertebrates during limb specification. Also, the fact that a Brachyury and a Tbx2
homologue exist in S. domuncula suggests that the first divergence from the
ancestral Brachyury-like gene might be a Tbx2-like gene and not a Tbrain-like
gene as had been previously suggested.

PMID: 15850455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Development. 2005 May;132(10):2451-62. Epub 2005 Apr 20.

Murine T-box transcription factor Tbx20 acts as a repressor during heart
development, and is essential for adult heart integrity, function and adaptation.

Stennard FA(1), Costa MW, Lai D, Biben C, Furtado MB, Solloway MJ, McCulley DJ,
Leimena C, Preis JI, Dunwoodie SL, Elliott DE, Prall OW, Black BL, Fatkin D,
Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, St Vincent's Hospital, 384 Victoria
Street, Darlinghurst 2010, New South Wales, Australia.

The genetic hierarchies guiding lineage specification and morphogenesis of the
mammalian embryonic heart are poorly understood. We now show by gene targeting
that murine T-box transcription factor Tbx20 plays a central role in these
pathways, and has important activities in both cardiac development and adult
function. Loss of Tbx20 results in death of embryos at mid-gestation with grossly
abnormal heart morphogenesis. Underlying these disturbances was a severely
compromised cardiac transcriptional program, defects in the molecular
pre-pattern, reduced expansion of cardiac progenitors and a block to chamber
differentiation. Notably, Tbx20-null embryos showed ectopic activation of Tbx2
across the whole heart myogenic field. Tbx2 encodes a transcriptional repressor
normally expressed in non-chamber myocardium, and in the atrioventricular canal
it has been proposed to inhibit chamber-specific gene expression through
competition with positive factor Tbx5. Our data demonstrate a repressive activity
for Tbx20 and place it upstream of Tbx2 in the cardiac genetic program. Thus,
hierarchical, repressive interactions between Tbx20 and other T-box genes and
factors underlie the primary lineage split into chamber and non-chamber
myocardium in the forming heart, an early event upon which all subsequent
morphogenesis depends. Additional roles for Tbx20 in adult heart integrity and
contractile function were revealed by in-vivo cardiac functional analysis of
Tbx20 heterozygous mutant mice. These data suggest that mutations in human
cardiac transcription factor genes, possibly including TBX20, underlie both
congenital heart disease and adult cardiomyopathies.

PMID: 15843414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Development. 2005 May;132(10):2475-87. Epub 2005 Apr 20.

T-box genes coordinate regional rates of proliferation and regional specification
during cardiogenesis.

Cai CL(1), Zhou W, Yang L, Bu L, Qyang Y, Zhang X, Li X, Rosenfeld MG, Chen J,
Evans S.

Author information: 
(1)Skaggs School of Pharmacy, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Mutations in T-box genes are the cause of several congenital diseases and are
implicated in cancer. Tbx20-null mice exhibit severely hypoplastic hearts and
express Tbx2, which is normally restricted to outflow tract and atrioventricular 
canal, throughout the heart. Tbx20 mutant hearts closely resemble those seen in
mice overexpressing Tbx2 in myocardium, suggesting that upregulation of Tbx2 can 
largely account for the cardiac phenotype in Tbx20-null mice. We provide evidence
that Tbx2 is a direct target for repression by Tbx20 in developing heart. We have
also found that Tbx2 directly binds to the Nmyc1 promoter in developing heart,
and can repress expression of the Nmyc1 promoter in transient transfection
studies. Repression of Nmyc1 (N-myc) by aberrantly regulated Tbx2 can account in 
part for the observed cardiac hypoplasia in Tbx20 mutants. Nmyc1 is required for 
growth and development of multiple organs, including the heart, and
overexpression of Nmyc1 is associated with childhood tumors. Despite its clinical
relevance, the factors that regulate Nmyc1 expression during development are
unknown. Our data present a paradigm by which T-box proteins regulate regional
differences in Nmyc1 expression and proliferation to effect organ morphogenesis. 
We present a model whereby Tbx2 directly represses Nmyc1 in outflow tract and
atrioventricular canal of the developing heart, resulting in relatively low
proliferation. In chamber myocardium, Tbx20 represses Tbx2, preventing repression
of Nmyc1 and resulting in relatively high proliferation. In addition to its role 
in regulating regional proliferation, we have found that Tbx20 regulates
expression of a number of genes that specify regional identity within the heart, 
thereby coordinating these two important aspects of organ development.

PMID: 15843407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Development. 2005 Apr;132(8):1961-70.

Tbx3 can alter limb position along the rostrocaudal axis of the developing
embryo.

Rallis C(1), Del Buono J, Logan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The limbs of the vertebrate embryo form at precise locations along the body and
these positions are fixed across different species. The mechanisms that control
this process are not understood. Ectopic expression of Tbx3, a transcriptional
repressor that belongs to the Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily of T-box transcriptional
regulators, in the forelimb results in a rostral shift in the position of the
limb along the main body axis. By contrast, a transcriptional activator form of
Tbx3 shifts the limb to more caudal locations. We also show that dHand and Gli3, 
genes previously implicated in anteroposterior pre-patterning of the limb-forming
region, are also involved in refining the position of the limbs. Our data suggest
a new role for Tbx3 in positioning the limb along the main body axis through a
genetic interplay between dHand and Gli3.

PMID: 15790970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Cancer Res. 2005 Mar 15;65(6):2260-8.

Tbx2 is overexpressed and plays an important role in maintaining proliferation
and suppression of senescence in melanomas.

Vance KW(1), Carreira S, Brosch G, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Signaling and Development Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, Surrey, 
United Kingdom.

The INK4a and ARF genes found at the CDKN2A locus are key effectors of cellular
senescence that is believed to act as a powerful anticancer mechanism.
Accordingly, mutations in these genes are present in a wide variety of
spontaneous human cancers and CDKN2A germ line mutations are found in familial
melanoma. The TBX2 gene encoding a key developmental transcription factor is
amplified in pancreatic cancer cell lines and preferentially amplified and
overexpressed in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutated breast tumors. Overexpression of Tbx2
and the related factor Tbx3, which is also overexpressed in breast cancer and
melanomas, can suppress senescence in defined experimental systems through
repression of ARF expression. However, it is not known how Tbx2 mediates its
repressive effect nor whether endogenous Tbx2 or Tbx3 perform a similar
antisenescence function in transformed cells. This is a particularly important
question because the loss of CDKN2A in many human cancers would, in principle,
bypass the requirement for Tbx2/3-mediated repression of ARF in suppressing
senescence. We show here that Tbx2 is overexpressed in melanoma cell lines and
that Tbx2 targets histone deacetylase 1 to the p21Cip1 (CDKN1A) initiator.
Strikingly, expression of an inducible dominant-negative Tbx2 (dnTbx2) leads to
displacement of histone deacetylase 1, up-regulation of p21(Cip1) expression, and
the induction of replicative senescence in CDKN2A-null B16 melanoma cells. In
human melanoma cells, expression of dnTbx2 leads to severely reduced growth and
induction of senescence-associated heterochromatin foci. The results suggest that
the activity of endogenous Tbx2 is critically required to maintain proliferation 
and suppress senescence in melanomas.

PMID: 15781639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 25;280(12):11816-28. Epub 2004 Dec 9.

Serum response factor, an enriched cardiac mesoderm obligatory factor, is a
downstream gene target for Tbx genes.

Barron MR(1), Belaguli NS, Zhang SX, Trinh M, Iyer D, Merlo X, Lough JW, Parmacek
MS, Bruneau BG, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

We tested the idea that T-box factors direct serum response factor (SRF) gene
activity early in development. Analysis of SRF-LacZ "knock-in" mice showed highly
restricted expression in early embryonic cardiac and skeletal muscle mesoderm and
neuroectoderm. Examination of the SRF gene for regulatory regions by linking the 
promoter and 5'-flanking sequences, up to 5.5 kb, failed to target LacZ transgene
activity to the heart and the tail pre-somitic mesenchyme. However, linkage of a 
minimal SRF promoter with the SRF 3'-untranslated region (UTR), inundated with
multimeric T-box binding sites (TBEs), restored robust reporter gene activity to 
embryonic heart and tail. Finer dissection of the 3'-UTR to a small cluster of
TBEs also stimulated transgene activity in the cardiac forming region and the
tail, however, when the TBEs contained within these DNA sequences were mutated,
preventing Tbx binding, transgene activity was lost. Tbx2, Tbx5, and the
cardiac-enriched MYST family histone acetyltransferase TIP60, were observed to be
mutual interactive cofactors through the TIP60 zinc finger and the T-box of the
Tbx factors. In SRF-null ES cells, TIP60, Tbx2, and Tbx5 were sufficient to
stimulate co-transfected SRF reporter activity, however this activity required
the presence of the SRF 3'-UTR. SRF gene transactivation was blocked by two
distinct TIP60 mutants, in which either the histone acetyltransferase domain was 
inactivated or the Zn finger-protein binding domain was excised. Our study
supports the idea that SRF embryonic cardiac gene expression is dependent upon
the SRF 3'-UTR enhancer, Tbx2, Tbx5, and TIP60 histone acetyltransferase
activity.

PMID: 15591049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jan;232(1):11-20.

T-box genes and heart development: putting the "T" in heart.

Plageman TF Jr(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, ML7020, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Members of the T-box gene family (Tbx) are essential for normal heart
development, and mutations in human TBX genes cause congenital cardiovascular
malformations. T-box genes have been implicated in early cardiac lineage
determination, chamber specification, valvuloseptal development, and
diversification of the specialized conduction system in vertebrate embryos. These
genes include Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx5, Tbx18, and Tbx20, all of which exhibit
complex temporal spatial regulation in developing cardiac structures. Less is
known about T-box genes in invertebrate heart development, but multiple T-box
genes are expressed in Drosophila cardiac lineages. The molecular hierarchies and
developmental processes controlled by T-box genes in the heart are the focus of
this review.

PMID: 15580613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Gene. 2004 Nov 10;342(1):67-76.

Differential target gene activation by TBX2 and TBX2VP16: evidence for activation
domain-dependent modulation of gene target specificity.

Butz NV(1), Campbell CE, Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, State 
University of New York at Buffalo, 140 Farber Hall, 3435 Main St., Buffalo, NY
14214, USA.

The determinants of in vivo target site selectivity by transcription factors are 
poorly understood. To find targets for the developmentally regulated
transcription factor TBX2, we generated stable transfectants of human embryonic
kidney cells (293) that express a TBX2-ecdysone receptor (EcR) chimeric protein. 
While constitutive expression of TBX2 is toxic to 293 cells, clones expressing
TBX2EcR are viable in the absence of an EcR ligand. Using cDNA arrays and
quantitative PCR, we discovered nine genes whose expression was increased, but no
genes whose expression was reduced, following 24 h of induction with Ponasterone 
A (PonA), a ligand for EcR. Since TBX2 was reported previously to be a
transcriptional repressor, we also generated cell lines expressing a TBX2VP16EcR 
protein which we showed was a potent conditional transcriptional activator in
transient transfection assays. Treatment of these cells with PonA induced the
expression of five genes, none of which were affected in TBX2EcR-expressing
cells. This discordance between TBX2- and TBX2VP16-regulated genes strongly
suggests that specific transactivation domains can be a major determinant of gene
target site selectivity by transcription factors that possess the same
DNA-binding domain.

PMID: 15527967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Development. 2004 Oct;131(20):5041-52.

Tbx2 is essential for patterning the atrioventricular canal and for morphogenesis
of the outflow tract during heart development.

Harrelson Z(1), Kelly RG, Goldin SN, Gibson-Brown JJ, Bollag RJ, Silver LM,
Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Tbx2 is a member of the T-box transcription factor gene family, and is expressed 
in a variety of tissues and organs during embryogenesis. In the developing heart,
Tbx2 is expressed in the outflow tract, inner curvature, atrioventricular canal
and inflow tract, corresponding to a myocardial zone that is excluded from
chamber differentiation at 9.5 days post coitus (dpc). We have used targeted
mutagenesis in mice to investigate Tbx2 function. Mice heterozygous for a Tbx2
null mutation appear normal but homozygous embryos reveal a crucial role for Tbx2
during cardiac development. Morphological defects are observed in development of 
the atrioventricular canal and septation of the outflow tract. Molecular analysis
reveals that Tbx2 is required to repress chamber differentiation in the
atrioventricular canal at 9.5 dpc. Analysis of homozygous mutants also highlights
a role for Tbx2 during hindlimb digit development. Despite evidence that TBX2
negatively regulates the cell cycle control genes Cdkn2a, Cdkn2b and Cdkn1a in
cultured cells, there is no evidence that loss of Tbx2 function during mouse
development results in increased levels of p19(ARF), p16(INK4a), p15(INK4b) or
p21 expression in vivo, nor is there evidence for a genetic interaction between
Tbx2 and p53.

PMID: 15459098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Calcif Tissue Int. 2004 Jun;74(6):561-73.

Tbx2 represses expression of Connexin43 in osteoblastic-like cells.

Chen JR(1), Chatterjee B, Meyer R, Yu JC, Borke JL, Isales CM, Kirby ML, Lo CW,
Bollag RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta,
GA 30912, USA.

Tbx2 belongs to a family of developmental transcription regulatory factors. We
evaluated whether the gap junction protein Connexin43 (Cx43), an important
regulator of osteoblast function and bone development, may be a downstream target
gene regulated by Tbx2. The Cx43 promoter contains direct repeats of the
consensus T-box binding motif, TCACAC, and moreover, Tbx2 and Cx43 show
overlapping expression domains in precursors to bone and in osteoblasts. In vitro
analysis showed that the Cx43 promoter contains two Tbx2 binding sites, and this 
binding was dependent on the TCACAC consensus sequence. Transient transfection
analysis with a Cx43 promoter-driven lacZ reporter construct revealed negative
regulation mediated by these two Tbx2 binding sites in osteoblast-like cells.
Thus, downregulation of Tbx2 led to de-repression of wild-type Cx43 promoter
activity, whereas a promoter construct with mutated binding sites showed no
de-repression. In stably transfected osteosarcoma cells in which expression of
the endogenous Tbx2 gene was downregulated with a Tbx2 antisense construct, a
marked de-repression of the endogenous Cx43 gene was observed. This was
accompanied by a marked increase in the abundance of Cx43 gap junctions and
increased functional gap junction-mediated cell-cell communication. Analysis of
lacZ expression in transgenic mice containing the mutated Cx43 promoter-driven
lacZ construct further suggested de-repression of the Cx43 promoter in limb buds,
a region destined to give rise to long bones of the limbs. Taken together, these 
findings indicate that the promoter of Cx43 is repressible by Tbx2, both in
cultured osteoblast-like cells in vitro and likely in the developing embryo.

PMID: 15354864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Dev Biol. 2004 Sep 1;273(1):106-20.

Tbx5 and Tbx4 transcription factors interact with a new chicken PDZ-LIM protein
in limb and heart development.

Krause A(1), Zacharias W, Camarata T, Linkhart B, Law E, Lischke A, Miljan E,
Simon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Feinberg School of Medicine, Children's Memorial
Institute for Education and Research, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60614,
USA.

The T-domain transcription factors, Tbx5 and Tbx4, play important roles in
vertebrate limb and heart development. To identify interacting and potential
Tbx-regulating proteins, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen with the
C-terminal domain of Tbx5 as bait. We identified a new PDZ-LIM protein composed
of one N-terminal PDZ and three C-terminal LIM domains, which we named chicken
LMP-4. Among the Tbx2, 3, 4, 5 subfamily, we observed exclusive interaction with 
Tbx5 and Tbx4 proteins. Tbx3 nor Tbx2 can substitute for LMP-4 binding. While
chicken LMP-4 associates with Tbx5 or Tbx4, it uses distinct LIM domains to bind 
to the individual proteins. Subcellular co-localization of LMP-4 and Tbx proteins
supports the protein interaction and reveals interference of LMP-4 with Tbx
protein distribution, tethering the transcription factors to the cytoskeleton.
The protein-protein interaction indicates regulation of Tbx function at the level
of transcription factor nuclear localization. During chicken limb and heart
development, Tbx5/LMP-4 and Tbx4/LMP-4 are tightly co-expressed in a temporal and
spatial manner, suggesting that they operate in the same pathway. Surprisingly,
chicken LMP-4 expression domains outside those of Tbx5 in the heart led to the
discovery of Tbx4 expression in the outflow tract and the right ventricle of this
organ. The Tbx4-expressing cells coincide with those of the recently discovered
secondary anterior heart-forming field. The discrete posterior or anterior
expression domains in the heart and the exclusive fore- or hindlimb expression of
Tbx5 and Tbx4, respectively, suggest common pathways in the heart and limbs. The 
identification of a new Tbx5/4-specific binding factor further suggests a novel
mechanism for Tbx transcription factor regulation in development and disease.

PMID: 15302601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2004 Apr;9(2):109-18.

The role of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in mammary development and tumorigenesis.

Rowley M(1), Grothey E, Couch FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

TBX2 and TBX3 are members of a family of genes encoding developmental
transcription factors, characterized by a 200 amino acid DNA binding domain
(T-box). Tbx2 and Tbx3 are closely related T-box proteins that have been
implicated in development of a number of different tissues including the mammary 
gland. TBX3 is required for normal mammary development in mouse models and in
patients with ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS). In addition to a role in development,
TBX2 and TBX3 have been implicated in tumor development through downregulation of
the alternative reading frame (ARF) tumor suppressor and an associated bypass of 
senescence. Here we review the current information on the roles of Tbx2 and Tbx3 
in mammary gland development and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15300007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 1;64(15):5132-9.

TBX3 and its isoform TBX3+2a are functionally distinctive in inhibition of
senescence and are overexpressed in a subset of breast cancer cell lines.

Fan W(1), Huang X, Chen C, Gray J, Huang T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Robert R. Sprague Hall 314,
University of California-Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

TBX3 is a transcription factor of the T-box gene family. Mutations of TBX3 cause 
ulnar-mammary syndrome (MIM 181450) in humans, an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by the absence or underdevelopment of the mammary glands and other 
congenital anomalies. It recently was found that TBX3 was able to immortalize
mouse embryo fibroblast (MEF) cells. In addition, TBX2, a homologue of TBX3, is
active in preventing senescence in rodent cells and was found to be amplified in 
some human breast cancers, suggesting TBX3 plays a role in breast cancer. This
study examined the function of TBX3 and its isoform, TBX3 + 2a. TBX3 + 2a differs
from TBX3 in the DNA binding domain with an extra 20 amino acids produced by
alternative splicing. We first examined the tissue expression and alternative
splicing patterns of these two isoforms. We found that TBX3 and TBX3 + 2a are
widely expressed in humans and mice, and alternative splicing could be tissue
specific and species specific. Overexpression of TBX3 is able to immortalize MEF 
cells, whereas TBX3 + 2a shows an acceleration of senescence, a functional
difference that may be explained by the fact that these two isoforms may have
different downstream targets. TBX3, but not TBX3 + 2a, is able to bind to the
previously identified T-box binding site in a gel shift assay. A subset of human 
breast cancer cell lines overexpresses TBX3. Our results indicate that TBX3 and
TBX3 + 2a are functionally distinctive in inhibition of senescence of MEF cells
and may play a role in breast cancer.

PMID: 15289316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Dev Dyn. 2004 Aug;230(4):743-53.

T-box genes in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis: characterization of cDNAs and
spatial expression.

Takatori N(1), Hotta K, Mochizuki Y, Satoh G, Mitani Y, Satoh N, Satou Y,
Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto, Japan.

Members of the T-box family of transcription factors share an evolutionarily
conserved DNA-binding domain and play significant roles in various processes of
embryonic development. Vertebrate T-box genes are categorized into the following 
five major subfamilies (eight groups), depending on sequence similarities:
Brachyury, Tbx1 (Tbx1/10, Tbx15/18/22, Tbx20), Tbx2/3/4/5 (Tbx2/3 and Tbx4/5),
Tbx6, and Tbr/Eomes/TBX21. Ascidians are primitive chordates, and their tadpole
larva are considered to represent the simplified and basic body plan of
vertebrates. In addition, it has been revealed that the ascidian genome contains 
the basic ancestral complement of genes involved in development. The present
characterization of cDNAs and survey of the Ciona intestinalis draft genome
demonstrated that the Ciona genome contains a single copy gene for each of the
Brachyury, Tbx1/10, Tbx15/18/22, Tbx20, Tbx2/3, and Tbr/Eomes/TBX21 groups, and
at least three copies of the Tbx6 subfamily. Each of the Ciona T-box genes shows 
a characteristic expression pattern, although that of Tbx20 was not determined in
the present study. These results provide basic information that will be useful
for future studies of the function of each gene, genetic cascades of different
T-box genes, and genome-wide surveys of evolutionary changes in the T-box gene
structure and organization in this primitive chordate.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15254908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic. 2003 Oct;2(3):224-33.

The comparative genomics of T-box genes.

Minguillon C(1), Logan M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, NIMR, London, UK.

T-box genes are defined by the presence of a conserved sequence, the so-called
T-box; this codes for the T-domain, which is involved in DNA-binding and protein 
dimerisation. Members of this gene family have been found in all metazoans, from 
diploblasts to humans, and mutations in T-box gene family members in humans have 
been linked to several congenital disorders. Sequencing of the complete genomes
of a range of invertebrate and vertebrate species has allowed the classification 
of individual T-box genes into five subfamilies: Brachyury, T-brain1, Tbx1, Tbx2 
and Tbx6. This review will largely focus on T-box genes identified in organisms
whose genomes have been fully sequenced, emphasising how comparative studies of
the T-box gene family will help to reveal the roles of these genes during
development and in the adult.

PMID: 15239925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Sep;41(1):1-11.

ERBB2, TBX2, RPS6KB1, and MYC alterations in breast tissues of BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutation carriers.

Adem C(1), Soderberg CL, Hafner K, Reynolds C, Slezak JM, Sinclair CS, Sellers
TA, Schaid DJ, Couch F, Hartmann LC, Jenkins RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory Genetics, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Feb;42(2):204-5; author reply 206.

Breast cancer risk is greatly increased in women who carry mutations in the BRCA1
or BRCA2 genes. Because breast cancer initiation is different between BRCA1/2
mutation carriers and women who do not carry mutations, it is possible that the
mechanism of breast cancer progression is also different. Histopathologic and
genetic studies have supported this hypothesis. To test this hypothesis further, 
we utilized a large cohort of women who underwent therapeutic mastectomy (TM) and
contralateral prophylactic mastectomy (PM). From this cohort, we developed case
groups of women with a family history of breast cancer with BRCA1/2 deleterious
mutations, with unclassified variant alterations, and with no detected mutation
and matched these cases with sporadic controls from the same TM and PM cohort.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed on paraffin sections by use of
dual-color probes for ERBB2/CEP17, MYC/CEP8, TBX2/CEP17, and RPS6KB1/CEP17. All
malignant and benign lesions, including putative precursor lesions, were studied.
The invasive cancers from deleterious mutation carriers had a higher prevalence
of duplication of MYC (P = 0.006) and TBX2 (P = 0.0008) compared to controls and 
a lower prevalence of ERBB2 amplification (P = 0.011). Coduplication of MYC and
TBX2 was common in the in situ and invasive lesions from the deleterious mutation
carriers. The odds ratio of having a BRCA1/2 mutation is 31.4 (95% CI = 1.7-569) 
when MYC and TBX2 are coduplicated but ERBB2 is normal. Unclassified variant
carriers/no mutation detected and sporadic controls had a similar prevalence of
alterations, suggesting that hereditary patients with no deleterious mutations
follow a progression pathway similar to that of sporadic cases. With the
exception of one atypical ductal hyperplasia lesion, no putative precursor lesion
showed any detectable alteration of the probes tested. There was no significant
intratumoral heterogeneity of genetic alterations. Our data confirm that a
specific pattern of genomic instability characterizes BRCA1/2-related cancers and
that this pattern has implications for the biology of these cancers. Moreover,
our current and previous results emphasize the interaction between phenotype and 
genotype in BRCA1/2-related breast cancers and that a combination of morphologic 
features and alterations of ERBB2, MYC, and TBX2 may better define mechanisms of 
tumor progression, as well as determine which patients are more likely to carry
BRCA1/2 mutations.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15236312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Dev Biol. 2004 Jul 15;271(2):439-66.

Molecular anatomy of placode development in Xenopus laevis.

Schlosser G(1), Ahrens K.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Bremen, 28334 Bremen, Germany.
gschloss@uni-bremen.de

We analyzed the spatiotemporal pattern of expression of 15 transcription factors 
(Six1, Six4, Eya1, Sox3, Sox2, Pax6, Pax3, Pax2, Pax8, Dlx3, Msx1, FoxI1c, Tbx2, 
Tbx3, Xiro1) during placode development in Xenopus laevis from neural plate to
late tail bud stages. Out of all genes investigated, only the expression of Eya1,
Six1, and Six4 is maintained in all types of placode (except the lens) throughout
embryonic development, suggesting that they may promote generic placodal
properties and that their crescent-shaped expression domain surrounding the
neural plate defines a panplacodal primordium from which all types of placode
originate. Double-labeling procedures were employed to reveal the precise
position of this panplacodal primordium relative to neural plate, neural crest,
and other placodal markers. Already at neural plate stages, the panplacodal
primordium is subdivided into several subregions defined by particular
combinations of transcription factors allowing us to identify the approximate
regions of origin of various types of placode. Whereas some types of placode were
already prefigured by molecularly distinct areas at neural plate stages, the
epibranchial, otic, and lateral line placodes arise from a common posterior
placodal area (characterized by Pax8 and Pax2 expression) and acquire
differential molecular signatures only after neural tube closure. Our findings
argue for a multistep mechanism of placode induction, support a combinatorial
model of placode specification, and suggest that different placodes evolved from 
a common placodal primordium by successive recruitment of new inducers and target
genes.

PMID: 15223346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 May;1015:171-81.

Development of the building plan of the heart.

Moorman AF(1), Soufan AT, Hagoort J, de Boer PA, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Molecular Cardiology Group, Department of Anatomy and
Embryology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
a.f.moorman@amc.uva.nl

In this communication we discuss the formation of the synchronously contracting
chambered heart from a peristaltically contracting linear heart tube. It is
proposed that members of the T-box family of transcription factors play a crucial
role in the formation of the building plan of the formed heart. Tbx5 may confer
venoarterial polarity to the heart tube, whereas Tbx2 initially and Tbx3 in later
developmental stages prevent the cardiac inflow tract, atrioventricular region,
outflow tract, as well as the cardiac inner curvatures from chamber
differentiation. With the exception of the outflow tract that becomes
incorporated into the ventricles, these regions contribute to the cardiac
conduction system.

PMID: 15201158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Dev Biol. 2004 Jun 1;270(1):214-31.

Sonic hedgehog signaling regulates Gli3 processing, mesenchymal proliferation,
and differentiation during mouse lung organogenesis.

Li Y(1), Zhang H, Choi SC, Litingtung Y, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN 37232-8240, USA.

Lack of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling, mediated by the Gli proteins, leads to
severe pulmonary hypoplasia. However, the precise role of Gli genes in lung
development is not well established. We show Shh signaling prevents Gli3
proteolysis to generate its repressor forms (Gli3R) in the developing murine
lung. In Shh(-/-) or cyclopamine-treated wild-type (WT) lung, we found that Gli3R
level is elevated, and this upregulation appears to contribute to defects in
proliferation and differentiation observed in the Shh(-/-) mesenchyme, where Gli3
is normally expressed. In agreement, we found Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) lungs exhibit
enhanced growth potential. Vasculogenesis is also enhanced; in contrast,
bronchial myogenesis remains absent in Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) compared with Shh(-/-) 
lungs. Genes upregulated in Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) relative to Shh(-/-) lung include 
Wnt2 and, surprisingly, Foxf1 whose expression has been reported to be
Shh-dependent. Cyclins D1, D2, and D3 antibody labelings also reveal distinct
expression patterns in the normal and mutant lungs. We found significant
repression of Tbx2 and Tbx3, both linked to inhibition of cellular senescence, in
Shh(-/-) and partial derepression in Shh(-/-); Gli3(-/-) lungs, while Tbx4 and
Tbx5 expressions are less affected in the mutants. Our findings shed light on the
role of Shh signaling on Gli3 processing in lung growth and differentiation by
regulating several critical genes.

PMID: 15136151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Exp Cell Res. 2004 May 1;295(2):281-9.

T-box binding protein type two (TBX2) is an immediate early gene target in
retinoic-acid-treated B16 murine melanoma cells.

Boskovic G(1), Niles RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Joan C. Edwards School of
Medicine, Marshall University, Huntington, WV 25704, USA.

Retinoic acid induces growth arrest and differentiation in B16 mouse melanoma
cells. Using gene arrays, we identified several early response genes whose
expression is altered by retinoic acid. One of the genes, tbx2, is a member of
T-box nuclear binding proteins that are important morphogens in developing
embryos. Increased TBX2 mRNA is seen within 2 h after addition of retinoic acid
to B16 cells. The effect of retinoic acid on gene expression is direct since it
does not require any new protein synthesis. We identified a degenerate retinoic
acid response element (RARE) between -186 and -163 in the promoter region of the 
tbx2 gene. A synthetic oligonucleotide spanning this region was able to drive
increased expression of a luciferase reporter gene in response to retinoic acid; 
however, this induction was lost when a point mutation was introduced into the
RARE. This oligonucleotide also specifically bound RAR in nuclear extracts from
B16 cells. TBX2 expression and its induction by retinoic acid was also observed
in normal human and nonmalignant mouse melanocytes.

PMID: 15093729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Development. 2004 Apr;131(8):1755-63. Epub 2004 Mar 17.

Specification of the otic placode depends on Sox9 function in Xenopus.

Saint-Germain N(1), Lee YH, Zhang Y, Sargent TD, Saint-Jeannet JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The vertebrate inner ear develops from a thickening of the embryonic ectoderm,
adjacent to the hindbrain, known as the otic placode. All components of the inner
ear derive from the embryonic otic placode. Sox proteins form a large class of
transcriptional regulators implicated in the control of a variety of
developmental processes. One member of this family, Sox9, is expressed in the
developing inner ear, but little is known about the early function of Sox9 in
this tissue. We report the functional analysis of Sox9 during development of
Xenopus inner ear. Sox9 otic expression is initiated shortly after gastrulation
in the sensory layer of the ectoderm, in a bilateral patch of cells immediately
adjacent to the cranial neural crest. In the otic placode, Sox9 colocalizes with 
Pax8 one of the earliest gene expressed in response to otic placode inducing
signals. Depletion of Sox9 protein in whole embryos using morpholino antisense
oligonucleotides causes a dramatic loss of the early otic placode markers Pax8
and Tbx2. Later in embryogenesis, Sox9 morpholino-injected embryos lack a
morphologically recognizable otic vesicle and fail to express late otic markers
(Tbx2, Bmp4, Otx2 and Wnt3a) that normally exhibit regionalized expression
pattern throughout the otocyst. Using a hormone inducible inhibitory mutant of
Sox9, we demonstrate that Sox9 function is required for otic placode
specification but not for its subsequent patterning. We propose that Sox9 is one 
of the key regulators of inner ear specification in Xenopus.

PMID: 15084460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Dev Dyn. 2004 Apr;229(4):763-70.

T-box transcription factor Tbx2 represses differentiation and formation of the
cardiac chambers.

Christoffels VM(1), Hoogaars WM, Tessari A, Clout DE, Moorman AF, Campione M.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Molecular Cardiology Group, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Specific regions of the embryonic heart tube differentiate into atrial and
ventricular chamber myocardium, whereas the inflow tract, atrioventricular canal,
inner curvatures, and outflow tract do not. These regions express Tbx2, a
transcriptional repressor. Here, we tested its role in chamber formation. The
temporal and spatial pattern of Tbx2 mRNA and protein expression in mouse hearts 
was found to be complementary to that of chamber myocardium-specific genes Nppa, 
Cx40, Cx43, and Chisel, and was conserved in human. In vitro, Tbx2 repressed the 
activity of regulatory fragments of Cx40, Cx43, and Nppa. Hearts of transgenic
embryos that expressed Tbx2 in the prechamber myocardium completely failed to
form chambers and to express the chamber myocardium-specific genes Nppa, Cx40,
and Chisel, whereas other cardiac genes were normally expressed. These findings
provide the first evidence that Tbx2 is a determinant in the local repression of 
chamber-specific gene expression and chamber differentiation.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15042700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Cancer Res. 2004 Mar 1;64(5):1669-74.

Tbx2 directly represses the expression of the p21(WAF1) cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor.

Prince S(1), Carreira S, Vance KW, Abrahams A, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Signalling and Development Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, Oxted, 
Surrey, United Kingdom.

T-box factors play a crucial role in the development of many tissues, and
mutations in T-box factor genes have been implicated in multiple human disorders.
Some T-box factors have been implicated in cancer; for example, Tbx2 and Tbx3 can
suppress replicative senescence, whereas Tbx3 can cooperate with Myc and Ras in
cellular transformation. The p21(WAF1) cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor plays a 
key role in senescence and in cell cycle arrest after DNA damage. Here, using a
combination of in vitro DNA-binding, transfection, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we show that Tbx2 can bind and repress the p21
promoter in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, small interfering RNA-mediated
down-regulation of Tbx2 expression results in a robust activation of p21
expression. Taken together, these results implicate Tbx2 as a novel direct
regulator of p21 expression and have implications for our understanding of the
role of T-box factors in the regulation of senescence and oncogenesis, as well as
in development.

PMID: 14996726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Neurobiol. 2004 Feb 15;58(3):392-402.

TBX2/TBX3 transcriptional factor homologue controls olfactory adaptation in
Caenorhabditis elegans.

Miyahara K(1), Suzuki N, Ishihara T, Tsuchiya E, Katsura I.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Center, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima 411-8540,
Japan.

Although transcriptional factors are known to play important roles in synaptic
plasticity, their role in olfactory adaptation has not been studied well. Here we
report that Ce-TBX-2, the TBX2/TBX3 transcriptional factor homologue of the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, is involved in olfactory adaptation. Two
missense hypomorphic mutations in this gene confer abnormality in adaptation, but
not chemotaxis, to all the odorants sensed by AWC olfactory neurons. The Ce-tbx-2
gene is expressed in AWB, AWC, ASJ, and many pharyngeal neurons, but expression
in AWC neurons is sufficient for normal adaptation. Unexpectedly, the protein
product is localized mostly in cytoplasm. The AWC neurons in the mutants retain
their characteristic morphology and many marker gene expressions, suggesting that
the mutants are abnormal in neural functions rather than neuronal
differentiation. The results of this study imply that some of the mammalian T-box
family proteins, which play central roles in embryonic development, may also
control functions like neural plasticity in differentiated neurons.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Neurobiol 58: 392-402, 2004

PMID: 14750151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Dev Cell. 2004 Jan;6(1):43-53.

Tbx Genes Specify Posterior Digit Identity through Shh and BMP Signaling.

Suzuki T(1), Takeuchi J, Koshiba-Takeuchi K, Ogura T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara, 630-0101, Japan.

Erratum in
    Dev Cell. 2005 Jun;8(6):971-2.

Despite extensive studies on the anterior-posterior (AP) axis formation of limb
buds, mechanisms that specify digit identities along the AP axis remain obscure. 
Using the four-digit chick leg as a model, we report here that Tbx2 and Tbx3
specify the digit identities of digits IV and III, respectively. Misexpression of
Tbx2 and Tbx3 induced posterior homeotic transformation of digit III to digit IV 
and digit II to digit III, respectively. Conversely, misexpression of their
mutants VP16 Delta Tbx2 and VP16 Delta Tbx3 induced anterior transformation. In
both cases, alterations in the expression of several markers (e.g., BMP2, Shh,
and HoxD genes) were observed. In addition, Tbx2 and Tbx3 rescued Noggin-mediated
inhibition of interdigital BMP signaling, signaling which is pivotal in
establishing digit identities. Hence, we conclude that Tbx3 specifies digit III, 
and the combination of Tbx2 and Tbx3 specifies digit IV, acting together with the
interdigital BMP signaling cascade.

PMID: 14723846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Ann Plast Surg. 2003 Nov;51(5):499-504.

Tension-induced reduction in connexin 43 expression in cranial sutures is linked 
to transcriptional regulation by TBX2.

Borke JL(1), Yu JC, Isales CM, Wagle N, Do NN, Chen JR, Bollag RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology and Maxillofacial Pathology, Medical College of
Georgia, and the Veterans Administration Medical Center, Augusta, GA 30912-1129, 
USA. jborke@mail.mcg.edu

Cranial sutures produce bone at precisely the right rate and time to maintain
homeostasis. Connexin 43 (CX43), a protein important for communication in bone,
is downregulated during cell proliferation and is released from suppression or
upregulated during differentiation. Our previous studies have shown that binding 
sites for the transcription regulatory protein TBX2 are located in the promoter
sequence, upstream of the Cx43 gene. We have shown that TBX2 binding suppresses
Cx43 expression. The current study uses transgenic mice in which the TBX2
promoter has been spliced upstream of the coding sequence for green fluorescent
protein (GFP). This study shows upregulation of TBX2 after stretching. RNA from
stretched and unstretched sutures was used for GeneChip and Western analysis. The
results show an increase in Tbx2 and a decrease in Cx43 gene and protein
expression with stretch. Our findings support a model of strain-regulated bone
formation with feedback inhibition that maintains sutural patency during
development.

PMID: 14595187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Dev Genes Evol. 2003 Oct;213(10):492-9. Epub 2003 Sep 12.

Distinct expression patterns of the two T-box homologues Brachyury and Tbx2/3 in 
the placozoan Trichoplax adhaerens.

Martinelli C(1), Spring J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Biocenter/Pharmacenter, University of Basel,
Klingelbergstrasse 50, 4056 Basel, Switzerland.

Trichoplax adhaerens is the only species known from the phylum Placozoa with one 
of the simplest metazoan body plans. In the small disc-like organism an upper and
a lower epithelium can be distinguished with a less compact third cell layer in
between. When Trichoplax was first described in 1883, the relation of these three
cell layers with ectoderm, endoderm and mesoderm of higher animals was discussed.
Still, little is known about embryonic development of Trichoplax, however, genes 
thought to be specific for mesoderm in bilaterian animals turned out to be
already present in non-bilaterians. Searching for a Brachyury homologue, two
members of the T-box gene family were isolated from Trichoplax, Brachyury and a
Tbx2/3 homologue. The T-box genes encode a transcription factor family
characterized by the DNA-binding T-box domain. T-box genes have been found in all
metazoans so far investigated, but in contrast to other transcription factors
such as the homeobox family, T-box genes are not present in plants or fungi. The 
distinct expression patterns of two T-box genes in Trichoplax point to
non-redundant functions already present at the beginning of animal evolution.
Since the expression patterns derived by in situ hybridization do not overlap
with anatomical structures, it can be concluded that this simple animal has more 
than the four cell types described in the literature. This hidden complexity and 
the unresolved position in relation to Porifera, Cnidaria, Ctenophora and
Bilateria highlight the necessity of the inclusion of Trichoplax in studies of
comparative evolutionary and developmental biology.

PMID: 13680223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Vnitr Lek. 2003 Jul;49(7):529-34.

[Effect of vitamin E therapy on progression of diabetic nephropathy].

[Article in Slovak]

Hirnerová E(1), Krahulec B, Strbová L, Stecová A, Dekrét J, Hájovská A.

Author information: 
(1)II. interná klinika Lekárskej fakulty UK a FN, Bratislava, Slovenská
republika.

Pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy, which belongs to most serious
microangiopathic complications of diabetes, is still not completely clear.
Thromboxan A2 and increased oxidation stress are new factors apparently
associated with pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy. It was the aim of the
contribution to verify the participation of thromboxan A2 and oxidation stress in
the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy, as well as to follow the effects of
treatment with vitamin E on its progression. In 19 diabetic subjects with
microalbuminemia (MA) (age 55.2 +/- 7.6 years), 10 diabetic subjects with
normoalbuminemia (NA) (age 54.4 +/- 6.1 years) and in 10 healthy subjects (age
53.6 +/- 9.4) the authors examined the level of malondialdehyde (MLDA) in serum, 
metabolites of thromboxan A2 (thromboxan B2-TXB2) and prostacyclin PGI2
(6-keto-PGF1 alpha) in urine by means of an RIA method (Isotop, Hungary). The
diabetic patients with microalbuminemia were subsequently administered natural
vitamin E (EVIT, Rodisna, FRG) at the daily dose of 1200 IU for the period of
four months. After two and four months, respectively, MA, MLDA, TXB2 and
6-keto-PGF1 alpha) were examined. The age of the subjects in the two groups was
not significantly different. In diabetic subjects with MA, the authors observed
significantly higher MLDA levels in serum than in the control individuals (0.55
+/- 0.26 vs. 0.22 +/- 0.02 mumol/l, P < 0.001) and a significant difference
occurred also in TBX2 in urine (134.7 +/- 113.8 vs. 27.7 +/- 10.1 ng/12 h, P <
0.001). Increased levels of TXB2 in urine were already present in diabetic
subjects with NA as compared with healthy individuals (69.1 +/- 38.8 vs. 27.7 +/-
10.1 ng/12 h, P < 0.05). The treatment with vitamin E caused a significant
decrease of MA (93.8 +/- 45.6 vs. 67.95 +/- 28.4 micrograms/min, P < 0.05), MLDA 
in serum (0.55 +/- 0.26 vs. 0.32 +/- 0.16 mumol/l, P < 0.001). On the basis of
our results it is possible to suppose the role of oxidation stress and increased 
level of thromboxan A2 in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy. The authors
also confirmed that the treatment with vitamin E favorably decreases
microalbuminemia, while the nephroprotective effect is apparently mediated not
only by the antioxidant action, but also the decrease of thromboxan A2
production.

PMID: 12931434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Dev Genes Evol. 2003 Sep;213(9):421-34. Epub 2003 Jul 24.

Isolation and characterization of two T-box genes from sponges, the
phylogenetically oldest metazoan taxon.

Adell T(1), Grebenjuk VA, Wiens M, Müller WE.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Abteilung Angewandte Molekularbiologie,
Universität Mainz, Duesbergweg 6, 55099 Mainz, Germany.

It is now well established that all metazoan phyla derived from one common
ancestor, the hypothetical Urmetazoa. Due to the basal position of Porifera
(Demospongiae) in the phylogenetic tree of Metazoa, studies on the mechanisms
controlling the development of these animals can provide clues on the
understanding of the origin of multicellular animals and on how the first
organization of the body plan evolved. In this report we describe the isolation
and genomic characterization of two T-box genes from the siliceous sponge
Suberites domuncula. The phylogenetic analysis classifies one into the subfamily 
of Brachyury, Sd-Bra, and the second into the Tbx2 subfamily, Sd-Tbx2. Analyses
of the Sd-Bra and Sd-Tbx2 sequences and their intron-exon structures demonstrate 
their basal position in the phylogeny of the T-box family, and allows us to
hypothesize a model of the phylogenetic evolution of all T-box genes.
Furthermore, we report the presence of two different products of alternative
splicing of Sd-Bra, and demonstrate that they exist in different phosphorylation 
and glycosylation states in the sponge tissue. Sd-Bra expression in tissue and
3D-cell aggregates (primmorphs) is analyzed, suggesting that Sd-Bra might also
have a role in Porifera morphogenesis.

PMID: 12898249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Anim Genet. 2003 Aug;34(4):307-9.

Radiation hybrid mapping and genomic organization of canine TBX2 and TBX4.

Andelfinger G(1), Etter L, Dyment M, Hitte C, Galibert F, Kirkness E, Benson DW.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Genetics, Division of Cardiology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

PMID: 12873224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mech Dev. 2003 May;120(5):561-72.

Coquillette, a sea urchin T-box gene of the Tbx2 subfamily, is expressed
asymmetrically along the oral-aboral axis of the embryo and is involved in
skeletogenesis.

Croce J(1), Lhomond G, Gache C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie du Développement, UMR 7009, CNRS, Université Pierre et Marie
Curie, Observatoire Océanologique, 06230, Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.

Transcription factors of the T-domain family regulate many developmental
processes. We have isolated from the sea urchin a new member of the Tbx2
subfamily: coquillette. Coquillette has a late zygotic expression whose
localization is dynamic: at the blastula stage it is restricted to the aboral
side of most of the presumptive ectoderm and endoderm territories and from
gastrulation on, to the aboral-most primary mesenchyme cells. Perturbation of
coquillette function delays gastrulation and strongly disorganizes the skeleton
of the larva. Coquillette is sensitive to alteration of the oral-aboral (OA) axis
and we identify goosecoid, which controls oral and aboral fates in the ectoderm, 
as a probable upstream regulator. Coquillette appears to be an integral part of
the patterning system along the OA axis.

PMID: 12782273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2003 Apr;78(3):313-22.

The 17q23 amplicon and breast cancer.

Sinclair CS(1), Rowley M, Naderi A, Couch FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

A novel region of amplification in breast tumors was recently identified on
chromosome 17q23. Extensive mapping of the amplicon by Southern blotting and
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in breast cancer cell lines determined 
that the amplicon can be up to 4 Mbp in size and may contain 50 genes. Copy
number analysis at 50-75 kb resolution in breast cancer cell lines and breast
tumors identified several independently amplified regions within the amplicon,
suggesting that a number of genes are selected for amplification because they
independently contribute to tumor formation and progression. Support for this
hypothesis comes from studies demonstrating that many of the amplified genes are 
over-expressed in breast cancer cell lines and tumors, and that the RPS6KB1,
TBX2, and PPM1D genes from the region, that are amplified and over-expressed in
breast tumors and cell lines, contribute to tumor formation and/or tumor
progression. In this review we summarize the structural studies of the amplicon
that have been carried out, we outline the evidence implicating the RPS6KB1,
TBX2, and PPM1D genes as oncogenes, and we describe some of the other candidate
oncogenes from the region.

PMID: 12755490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Development. 2003 Jun;130(12):2681-93.

Loss of Tbx4 blocks hindlimb development and affects vascularization and fusion
of the allantois.

Naiche LA(1), Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, 701 W 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Tbx4 is a member of the T-box family of transcription factor genes, which have
been shown to play important roles in development. We have ablated Tbx4 function 
using targeted mutagenesis in the mouse. Embryos homozygous for the null allele
fail to undergo chorioallantoic fusion and die by 10.5 days post coitus. The
allantoises of Tbx4-mutant embryos are stunted, apoptotic and display abnormal
differentiation. Endothelial cells within mutant allantoises do not undergo
vascular remodeling. Heterozygous embryos show a mild, transient growth defect in
the allantois. Induction of a hindlimb field occurs normally in Tbx4 mutants and 
initial patterning of the hindlimb bud appears normal. However, hindlimb buds
from Tbx4 mutants fail to develop either in vivo or in vitro and do not maintain 
Fgf10 expression in the mesenchyme. The expression of another, closely-linked,
T-box gene, Tbx2, is reduced in both the hindlimb and the allantois of
Tbx4-mutant embryos prior to the development of overt morphological
abnormalities, which suggests that Tbx4 regulates Tbx2 in these tissues.

PMID: 12736212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2003 May;40(3):284-90.

Negative transcriptional regulation of connexin 43 by Tbx2 in rat immature
coronal sutures and ROS 17/2.8 cells in culture.

Borke JL(1), Chen JR, Yu JC, Bollag RJ, Orellana MF, Isales CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology and Maxillofacial Pathology, Medical College of
Georgia, School of Dentistry, Augusta, GA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Tbx2 is a member of the T-box family of transcriptional regulatory
genes with an extensive but not yet fully understood role in embryonic
development. This study explores the potential role of Tbx2 in calvarial
morphogenesis.
OBJECTIVES: To explore the hypothesis that Tbx2 has a negative regulatory effect 
on the expression of connexin 43 (Cx43), a protein necessary for cell-to-cell
communication; document the presence of Tbx2 protein in the developing cranial
sutures; and determine the spatial pattern of expression of this developmentally 
regulated transcription factor in calvariae.
DESIGN: The osteoblast-like cell line ROS 17/2.8 was stably transfected with
sense or antisense Tbx2. Immunohistochemistry and Western blotting was used to
study Tbx2 and Cx43 expression in these cells and sections of embedded developing
coronal sutures.
RESULTS: The ROS 17/2.8 cells transfected with antisense Tbx2 showed a decrease
in expression of Tbx2 protein and an increase in expression of endogenous Cx43.
The reverse is seen with sense-transfected cells. Both of these proteins are
expressed in rat developing coronal sutures. The pattern of Tbx2 expression in
the developing was also reciprocal to the pattern of Cx43 expression. Tbx2
protein is concentrated in the center of the sutural blastema, an area devoid of 
Cx43 protein localization. Conversely, Tbx2 protein expression is low in the
periphery of the sutures, in which there is high Cx43 protein expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these studies suggest that Tbx2 protein is a
negative regulator of Cx43 expression at the transcriptional level in cranial
sutures in vivo.

PMID: 12733958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Development. 2003 May;130(9):1989-99.

LvTbx2/3: a T-box family transcription factor involved in formation of the
oral/aboral axis of the sea urchin embryo.

Gross JM(1), Peterson RE, Wu SY, McClay DR.

Author information: 
(1)Development, Cell and Molecular Biology Group, Box 91000 LSRC, Duke
University, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

T-box family transcription factors have been identified in many organisms and are
frequently associated with patterning events during embryonic development. With
an interest in the molecular basis of patterning in the sea urchin embryo, we
identified several members of the T-box family in Lytechinus variegatus. Here, we
report the cloning and characterization of an ortholog of the Tbx2/3 subfamily,
LvTbx2/3. To characterize the spatial distribution of LvTbx2/3 protein throughout
sea urchin embryogenesis, a polyclonal antiserum was generated. Nuclear
localization of LvTbx2/3 initiated at the mesenchyme blastula stage and protein
was present into the pluteus stage. Localization was asymmetric throughout this
period and costaining with marker genes indicated that asymmetry was about the
oral/aboral (O/A) axis. Asymmetric distribution of LvTbx2/3 was observed in the
aboral territories of all three germ layers. In the skeletogenic mesoderm
lineage, LvTbx2/3 expression was dynamic because expression appeared initially in
all skeletogenic mesenchyme cells (PMCs) but, subsequently, became refined solely
to the aboral ones during skeletogenesis. To determine if the aboral expression
of LvTbx2/3 is linked between germ layers, and to place LvTbx2/3 in the sequence 
of events that specifies the O/A axis, the effects of a series of perturbations
to O/A polarity on LvTbx2/3 expression in each germ layer were examined.
Preventing the nuclear localization of beta-catenin, pharmacological disruption
of the O/A axis with NiCl(2), overexpression of BMP2/4 and disruption of the
extracellular matrix all blocked LvTbx2/3 expression in all germ layers. This
indicates that expression of LvTbx2/3 in the aboral territories of each germ
layer is a common aspect of O/A specification, downstream of the molecular events
that specify the axis. Furthermore, blocking the nuclear localization of
beta-catenin, overexpression of BMP2/4 and disruption of the extracellular matrix
also prevented the oral (stomodael) expression of LvBrachyury (LvBrac) protein,
indicating that the O/A axis is established by a complex series of events. Last, 
the function of LvTbx2/3 in the formation of the O/A axis was characterized by
examining the phenotypic consequences of ectopic expression of LvTbx2/3 mRNA on
embryonic development and the expression of marker genes that identify specific
germ layers and tissues. Ectopic expression of LvTbx2/3 produced profound
morphogenetic defects in derivatives of each germ layer with no apparent loss in 
specification events in those tissues. This indicates that LvTbx2/3 functions as 
a regulator of morphogenetic movements in the aboral compartments of the
ectoderm, endoderm and mesoderm.

PMID: 12642501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2002 Dec;35(4):353-8.

Frequent amplification of 8q24, 11q, 17q, and 20q-specific genes in pancreatic
cancer.

Mahlamäki EH(1), Bärlund M, Tanner M, Gorunova L, Höglund M, Karhu R, Kallioniemi
A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Tampere University Hospital and University of
Tampere, Tampere, Finland. eija.mahlamaki@tays.fi

Genetic changes involved in the development and progression of pancreatic cancer 
are still partly unknown, despite the progress in recent years. In this study,
comparative genomic hybridization analysis in 31 pancreatic cancer cell lines
showed that chromosome arms 8q, 11q, 17q, and 20q are frequently gained in this
tumor type. Copy number analysis of selected genes from these chromosome arms by 
fluorescence in situ hybridization showed amplification of the MYC oncogene in
54% of the cell lines, whereas CCND1 was amplified in 28%. In the 17q arm, the
ERBB2 oncogene was amplified in 20% of the cell lines, TBX2 in 50%, and BIRC5 in 
58%, indicating increased involvement toward the q telomere of chromosome 17. In 
the 20q arm, the amplification frequencies varied from 32% to 83%, with the CTSZ 
gene at 20q13 being most frequently affected. These results illustrate that
amplification of genes from the 8q, 11q, 17q, and 20q chromosome arms is common
in pancreatic cancer.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12378529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Dev Growth Differ. 2002 Aug;44(4):257-71.

Conserved expression control and shared activity between cognate T-box genes Tbx2
and Tbx3 in connection with Sonic hedgehog signaling during Xenopus eye
development.

Takabatake Y(1), Takabatake T, Sasagawa S, Takeshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Human Informatics, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.

Tbx2 and Tbx3 are considered to be cognate genes within a Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily of
T-box genes and are expressed in closely overlapping areas in a variety of
tissues, including the eye. Herein, we show that misexpression of Tbx2 and Tbx3
in Xenopus embryos gave rise to defective eye morphogenesis, which was
reminiscent of the defect caused by attenuated Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling.
Indeed, Tbx2/3 misexpression suppressed Gli1, Gli2, Ptc2 and Pax2, mediators or
targets of Hedgehog (Hh) signals. From these data, Tbx2/3 may have a shared
function in inhibiting Gli-dependent Shh signaling during eye development.
Conversely, the expression of Tbx2/3 was severely affected by both Shh and a
putative dominant negative form of Hh, as well as by both transactivator and
transrepressor forms of Gli-fusion proteins, suggesting that the expression of
Tbx2/3 may be regulated by a Gli-dependent Hh signal transduction pathway.
Because the Shh signal has been considered to play crucial roles in the formation
of the proximal-distal and dorsal-ventral axes in the eyes, these findings about 
the mutual regulatory mechanism between Tbx2/3 and Gli-dependent Hh signaling
provide valuable insight into the cause of the localized expression of Tbx2/3 and
their role during the formation of these axes. In addition, our findings also
imply the conserved regulation and shared activity between the cognate genes of
Tbx2 and Tbx3.

PMID: 12175361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Genesis. 2002 Jun;33(2):86-96.

Axes establishment during eye morphogenesis in Xenopus by coordinate and
antagonistic actions of BMP4, Shh, and RA.

Sasagawa S(1), Takabatake T, Takabatake Y, Muramatsu T, Takeshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Human Informatics, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.

We have examined the roles of BMP4, Shh, and retinoic acid in establishing the
proximal-distal and dorsal-ventral axes in the developing Xenopus eye.
Misexpression of BMP4 caused the absence of an optic stalk and the expansion of
dorsal and distal markers, tbx2/3/5, and pax6, at the expense of ventral and
proximal markers vax2 and pax2. When Shh or Noggin, an antagonist of BMPs, was
misexpressed, the reverse expression patterns of these marker genes were
observed. These results suggest that BMP4 is involved in the specification of not
only dorsal in the optic cup but also distal in the optic vesicle. Because Shh
did not suppress bmp4 expression, unlike Noggin, Shh and BMP4 may
antagonistically regulate common downstream genes in developing eye. We also
found the difference between the effects of Shh and retinoic acid, another
possible ventralizing factor, suggesting that Shh could promote ventralization
independently of retinoic acid. These findings provide important clues to the
coordinate and antagonistic actions of BMP4, Shh, and retinoic acid in axes
specifications of Xenopus eyes.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12112877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Cancer Res. 2002 Jul 1;62(13):3587-91.

TBX2 is preferentially amplified in BRCA1- and BRCA2-related breast tumors.

Sinclair CS(1), Adem C, Naderi A, Soderberg CL, Johnson M, Wu K, Wadum L, Couch
VL, Sellers TA, Schaid D, Slezak J, Fredericksen Z, Ingle JN, Hartmann L, Jenkins
RB, Couch FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The chromosome 17q23 region is frequently amplified in breast tumors. Gain of the
region is present in 50% of BRCA1-associated breast tumors and 87% of
BRCA2-associated breast tumors. The amplification frequency of the RPS6KB1 and
TBX2 oncogenes from this amplicon was compared in 27 BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutant
breast tumors, 15 breast tumors from high-risk patients with no BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutations, and 62 matched sporadic breast tumor controls. TBX2 was determined to 
be preferentially amplified and overexpressed in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutant tumors,
whereas RPS6KB1 was not, suggesting a role for TBX2 amplification in the
development of BRCA1- and BRCA2-associated breast tumors.

PMID: 12097257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Dev Biol. 2002 Jul 15;247(2):237-50.

FGF signaling regulates expression of Tbx2, Erm, Pea3, and Pax3 in the early
nasal region.

Firnberg N(1), Neubüser A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7, Vienna, A-1030,
Austria.

Fgf8 is required for normal development of the nasal region. Here, we have used a
candidate approach to identify genes that are induced in chick nasal mesenchyme
in response to FGF signaling. Using an explant culture system, we show that
expression of the transcription factors Tbx2, Erm, Pea3, and Pax3, but not Pax7, 
in nasal mesenchyme is regulated by ectodermal signals in a stage-dependent
manner. Using beads soaked in recombinant FGF protein and an FGF receptor
antagonist, we furthermore demonstrate that FGF signaling is necessary and
sufficient for expression of Tbx2, Erm, Pea3, and Pax3, but has no effect on Pax7
expression. We also show that, within the nasal mesenchyme, competence to respond
to FGF signaling is initially widespread and uniform but becomes restricted to
regions normally exposed to FGF at later stages of development, coincident with
changes in FGF receptor expression. Finally, we provide evidence that FGF8 also
regulates Erm and Pea3 expression in the nasal placodes. Together, these results 
identify Tbx2, Erm, Pea3, and Pax3 as downstream targets of FGF signaling in the 
facial area and suggest that these genes may mediate some of the effects of FGF8 
during development of the nasal region.

2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12086464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Oncogene. 2002 May 30;21(24):3827-35.

Tbx3 impinges on the p53 pathway to suppress apoptosis, facilitate cell
transformation and block myogenic differentiation.

Carlson H(1), Ota S, Song Y, Chen Y, Hurlin PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Shriners Hospitals for Children, Oregon Health Sciences University, 3101 Sam
Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97201, USA.

Tbx3 is a member of the T-box family of transcription factors. Mutations in Tbx3 
cause ulnar-mammary syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by
upper limb defects, apocrine-gland defects including mammary hypoplasia, and
tooth, hair and genital defects. In cell culture, Tbx3 and its close relative
Tbx2 are capable of immortalizing mouse embryo fibroblasts. We show that
expression of Tbx3 together with Myc or oncogenic Ras (H-Ras(Val17)) leads to
efficient transformation of mouse embryo fibroblasts. Oncogene cooperation by
Tbx3 correlates with an ability of Tbx3 to suppress the induction of p19ARF and
p53 that is typically caused by overexpression Myc and Ras, and to protect
against Myc-induced apoptosis. Whereas Tbx3 is capable of interfering with
apoptosis caused by excessive Myc levels, a Tbx3 mutant lacking its C-terminal
repression domain shows no anti-apoptotic activity and fails to repress levels of
p19ARF or p53. Consistent with an ability to suppress p53 pathway function, we
find that Tbx3, but not a Tbx3 C-terminal mutant, efficiently blocks myogenic
differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts. Our results support the idea that
deregulation and/or excessive levels of Tbx3 may have oncogenic potential in
vivo.

PMID: 12032820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Genes Dev. 2002 May 15;16(10):1234-46.

Cooperative action of Tbx2 and Nkx2.5 inhibits ANF expression in the
atrioventricular canal: implications for cardiac chamber formation.

Habets PE(1), Moorman AF, Clout DE, van Roon MA, Lingbeek M, van Lohuizen M,
Campione M, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Molecular Cardiology Group, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

During heart development, chamber myocardium forms locally from the embryonic
myocardium of the tubular heart. The atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) gene is
specifically expressed in this developing chamber myocardium and is one of the
first hallmarks of chamber formation. We investigated the regulatory mechanism
underlying this selective expression. Transgenic analysis shows that a small
fragment of the ANF gene is responsible for the developmental pattern of
endogenous ANF gene expression. Furthermore, this fragment is able to repress
cardiac troponin I (cTnI) promoter activity selectively in the embryonic
myocardium of the atrioventricular canal (AVC). In vivo inactivation of a T-box
factor (TBE)- or NK2-homeobox factor binding element (NKE) within the ANF
fragment removed the repression in the AVC without affecting its chamber
activity. The T-box family member Tbx2, encoding a transcriptional repressor, is 
expressed in the embryonic myocardium in a pattern mutually exclusive to ANF,
thus suggesting a role in the suppression of ANF. Tbx2 formed a complex with
Nkx2.5 on the ANF TBE-NKE, and was able to repress ANF promoter activity. Our
data provide a potential mechanism for chamber-restricted gene activity in which 
the cooperative action of Tbx2 and Nkx2.5 inhibits expression in the AVC.

PMCID: PMC186286
PMID: 12023302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):26120-7. Epub 2002 May 8.

The T-box repressors TBX2 and TBX3 specifically regulate the tumor suppressor
gene p14ARF via a variant T-site in the initiator.

Lingbeek ME(1), Jacobs JJ, van Lohuizen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 
121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The murine tumor suppressor p19(ARF) (p14(ARF) in humans) is thought to fulfill
an important protective role in preventing primary cells from oncogenic
transformation via its action in the p53 pathway. Several disease-implicated
regulators of p19(ARF) are known to date, among which are the T-box genes TBX2,
which resides on an amplicon in primary breast tumors, and TBX3, which is mutated
in the human developmental disorder Ulnar-Mammary syndrome. Here we identify a
variant T-site, matching 13 of 20 nucleotides of a consensus T-site, as the
essential TBX2/TBX3-binding element in the human p14(ARF) promoter. Mutant
analysis indicates that both the consensus T-box and a C-terminal conserved
repression domain are essential for p14(ARF) repression. Whereas the core
nucleotides required for interaction of the archetypal T-box protein Brachyury
with a consensus T-site are conserved in the variant site, additional flanking
nucleotides contribute to the specificity of TBX2 binding. This is illustrated by
the inability of TBX1A or Xbra to activate via the variant p14(ARF) T-site.
Importantly, this suggests a hitherto unsuspected level of specificity associated
with T-box factors and corresponding recognition sites in regulating their target
genes in vivo.

PMID: 12000749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Arzneimittelforschung. 2002;52(2):97-102.

Effects of antihistamines on leukotriene and cytokine release from dispersed
nasal polyp cells.

Küsters S(1), Schuligoi R, Hüttenbrink KB, Rudert J, Wachs A, Szelenyi I, Peskar 
BA.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Pharmacology, Corporate Research ASTA Medica AG/Arzneimittelwerk
Dresden GmbH, Radebeul, Germany.

In this study the effects of antihistamines on the release of eicosanoids and the
pro-inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha) were compared. 
Enzymatically dispersed cells from human nasal polyps served as an in vitro model
of chronic respiratory mucosal inflammation. Nasal polyp cells (2 x 10(5)/ml)
were sensitized with human IgE pre-incubated azelastine (CAS 58581-89-8),
terfenadine (CAS 50679-08-8), levocabastine (CAS 79516-68-0) or cetirizine (CAS
83881-51-0), and stimulated with anti-human immunoglobulin E (IgE). Thromboxane
B2 (TBX2) and leukotriene C4 (LTC4) were measured by radioimmunoassay (RIA), TNF 
alpha by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Data represent mean values of
% inhibition estimated from the untreated positive control or mean IC50 (n = 5). 
Azelastine and terfenadine inhibited TNF alpha release with IC50 values of 6.2
mumol/l and 4.3 mumol/l, respectively. Terfenadine reduced TXB2 release by 37 +/-
15%, and LTC4 release was decreased by azelastine and terfenadine very potently
by 86% and 100%, respectively. Azelastine shows anti-inflammatory properties in
therapeutically relevant concentrations as assessed by its ability to reduce TNF 
alpha release as well as its ability to inhibit LTC4 production in allergically
stimulated human nasal polyp cells.

PMID: 11878205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Gene. 2002 Jan 23;283(1-2):117-24.

Murine Tbx2 contains domains that activate and repress gene transcription.

Paxton C(1), Zhao H, Chin Y, Langner K, Reecy J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

T-box (Tbx) genes represent a phylogenetically conserved family of transcription 
factors that play important roles during embryonic development. Tbx family
members have been shown to either activate or inhibit gene expression. However,
little is known about the domains within Tbx proteins responsible for mediating
gene transcription. While Tbx2 is known to repress gene expression, the domain(s)
within Tbx2 remains poorly defined. Deletion of the carboxy-terminus of Tbx2,
which contains a domain that is highly conserved with Tbx3 and ET, which has been
demonstrated to contain a repression domain, only minimally diminishes the
ability of Tbx2 to repress gene expression. However, in combination with the
carboxy-terminal truncation, deletion of the amino acids located amino-terminal
to the T-box abolished the ability of Tbx2 to repress gene expression. Both of
these domains were capable of repressing gene expression when linked to the GAL4 
DNA binding domain. In contrast to these two repression domains, the T-box was
capable of weakly activating gene expression depending on the promoter context.
Deletion analysis of the T-box suggests that this activation domain is located in
the amino-terminal end of the T-box. These results reveal a novel transcription
repression domain, confirm the presence of a previously implicated domain, and
suggest a novel role for the T-box. Taken together, these results provide the
basis for understanding the molecular mechanism whereby Tbx2 regulates gene
expression and subsequently controls embryonic development.

PMID: 11867218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Neoplasia. 2001 Nov-Dec;3(6):521-6.

Overexpressed genes/ESTs and characterization of distinct amplicons on 17q23 in
breast cancer cells.

Erson AE(1), Niell BL, DeMers SK, Rouillard JM, Hanash SM, Petty EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109,
USA.

17q23 is a frequent site of gene amplification in breast cancer. Several lines of
evidence suggest the presence of multiple amplicons on 17q23. To characterize
distinct amplicons on 17q23 and localize putative oncogenes, we screened genes
and expressed sequence tags (ESTs) in existing physical and radiation hybrid maps
for amplification and overexpression in breast cancer cell lines by
semiquantitative duplex PCR, semiquantitative duplex RT-PCR, Southern blot, and
Northern blot analyses. We identified two distinct amplicons on 17q23, one
including TBX2 and another proximal region including RPS6KB1 (PS6K) and MUL. In
addition to these previously reported overexpressed genes, we also identified
amplification and overexpression of additional uncharacterized genes and ESTs,
some of which suggest potential oncogenic activity. In conclusion, we have
further defined two distinct regions of gene amplification and overexpression on 
17q23 with identification of new potential oncogene candidates. Based on the
amplification and overexpression patterns of known and as of yet unrecognized
genes on 17q23, it is likely that some of these genes mapping to the discrete
amplicons function as oncogenes and contribute to tumor progression in breast
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC1506561
PMID: 11774034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2001 Dec;42(13):3095-102.

Expression of Drosophila omb-related T-box genes in the developing human and
mouse neural retina.

Sowden JC(1), Holt JK, Meins M, Smith HK, Bhattacharya SS.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College
London, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.
j.sowden@ich.ucl.ac.uk

PURPOSE: To examine the role of Drosophila optomotor blind (omb)-related T-box
genes in development of human and mouse retina.
METHODS: Mouse Tbx2, Tbx3, and Tbx5 and human TBX2 cDNAs were isolated from
retinal cDNA libraries by hybridization to the Drosophila omb gene. Gene
expression patterns in developing retina were analyzed by in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: TBX2/Tbx2, TBX3/Tbx3, and TBX5/Tbx5 were expressed asymmetrically across
the embryonic neural retina with highest levels of mRNA within dorsal and
peripheral retina. The dorsoventral gradient of TBX2 expression disappeared
before the ganglion cell layer (GCL) formed. Its expression then became
restricted to the inner neuroblastic retina and later to the GCL and inner
nuclear layer (INL). The dorsal expression domains of TBX5/Tbx5 and TBX3/Tbx3
were maintained during formation of the GCL. As the retina matured, TBX3/Tbx3
expression was restricted to the INL, and TBX5/Tbx5 was expressed within the GCL.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression pattern of TBX2, TBX3, and TBX5 within the developing
retina supports the idea that the encoded transcription factors play a role in
providing positional information important for topographic mapping and in
differentiation of distinct cell types across the laminar axis of the retina.

PMID: 11726608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Dev Biol. 2001 Jul 15;235(2):489-506.

Defects in pulmonary vasculature and perinatal lung hemorrhage in mice
heterozygous null for the Forkhead Box f1 transcription factor.

Kalinichenko VV(1), Lim L, Stolz DB, Shin B, Rausa FM, Clark J, Whitsett JA,
Watkins SC, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine, Department of
Molecular Genetics, 900 S. Ashland Ave., Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

Decreased pulmonary expression of Forkhead Box f1 (Foxf1) transcription factor
was associated with lethal alveolar hemorrhage in 55% of the Foxf1 +/- newborn
mice. The severity of the pulmonary abnormalities correlates with the levels of
Foxf1 mRNA. Defects in alveolarization and vasculogenesis were observed in
subsets of the Foxf1 +/- mice with relatively low levels of expression from the
normal Foxf1 allele. Lung hemorrhage was coincident with disruption of the
mesenchymal-epithelial cell interfaces in the alveolar and bronchiolar regions of
the lung parenchyma and was associated with increased apoptosis and reduced
surfactant protein B (SP-B) expression. Finally, the lung defect associated with 
the Foxf1 +/- mutation was accompanied by reduced expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), the VEGF receptor 2 (Flk-1), bone morphogenetic
protein 4 (Bmp-4), and the transcription factors of the Brachyury T-Box family
(Tbx2-Tbx5) and Lung Kruppel-like Factor. Reduction in the level of Foxf1 caused 
neonatal pulmonary hemorrhage and abnormalities in alveologenesis, implicating
this transcription factor in the regulation of mesenchyme-epithelial interaction 
critical for lung morphogenesis.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11437453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 May 25;177(1-2):43-54.

Microarray analysis of Tbx2-directed gene expression: a possible role in
osteogenesis.

Chen J(1), Zhong Q, Wang J, Cameron RS, Borke JL, Isales CM, Bollag RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA
30912, USA.

Tbx2 is a member of the developmentally important transcriptional regulatory
T-box gene family, whose target genes have not been well characterized. In an
attempt to identify genes that may be regulated by Tbx2, mouse cDNA microarrays
were used to analyze differential gene expression profiles, comparing stably
transfected NIH3T3 cells overexpressing Tbx2 and vector-transfected controls.
Among 8734 genes, 107 genes were up-regulated by 2-fold or greater, and 66 genes 
were down-regulated by 2-fold or greater. Caveolin, pleiotrophin (osf-1),
osteoblast-specific factor-2 (osf-2) and collagen type I alpha were among the
genes upregulated in the Tbx2-overexpressing cells, whereas cadherin 3, tenascin 
C, and insulin-like growth factor binding protein 10/CYR61 (IBP10) were among the
genes downregulated. Northern blot analysis confirmed the correlation of
expression of several genes, including IBP10 and osf-2, in fibroblast NIH3T3 and 
rat osteosarcoma ROS17/2.8 cells differentially expressing Tbx2. In ROS17/2.8
cells transfected with antisense Tbx2, osf-2 was downregulated, whereas
transfection of sense Tbx2 upregulated this gene. Interestingly, the expression
of pleiotrophin (osf-1) and collagen I alpha with Tbx2 transfection showed an
inverse regulatory correlation between NIH3T3 and ROS17/2.8 cells. Thus, Tbx2 can
act as both a repressor and activator, and the cellular context can influence the
effect on gene expression. Although the data do not address whether Tbx2 directly
mediates the transcriptional effect, a number of candidate genes possess putative
T-box gene regulatory elements. The results support the hypothesis that Tbx2 may 
be an important modulator of bone development. Further functional cluster
analysis indicates that Tbx2 might also be involved in the regulation of cell
cycle and cell adhesion.

PMID: 11377819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Gene. 2000 Nov 27;258(1-2):15-29.

Differential DNA binding and transcription modulation by three T-box proteins, T,
TBX1 and TBX2.

Sinha S(1), Abraham S, Gronostajski RM, Campbell CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, NB40, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

T-box genes encode a family of phylogenetically conserved DNA-binding proteins
that regulate gene expression during embryogenesis. While the developmental
importance of many T-box genes has been well documented, little is known about
how family members differ in their DNA binding properties and ability to modulate
transcription. Here we show that although TBX1, TBX2 and the Xenopus T protein
(Xbra) share only 50-60% identity within their DNA-binding domains they can bind 
the same DNA sequence in vitro. However, the proteins differ in three important
respects. While TBX1 protein binds a palindromic T oligonucleotide as a dimer, as
had been previously reported for Xbra, TBX2 appears to bind the same DNA sequence
as a monomer. Also, T protein/DNA complexes are stabilized in vitro by the
addition of specific antibodies, whereas TBX2/DNA complexes are not stabilized by
antibodies. Most importantly, TBX2 represses while Xbra activates transcription
of the same chimeric reporter plasmid. TBX1, although capable of binding to the
chimeric promoter, has no effect on transcription. Thus, while the DNA binding
domains of T-box proteins share substantial homology, these proteins differ in
both their DNA binding and transcriptional modulation properties. These results
suggest that the various T-box proteins, while highly conserved, likely use
different mechanisms to modulate transcription and may have different targets in 
vivo.

PMID: 11111039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Dev Biol. 2000 Dec 1;228(1):95-105.

Expression of chick Tbx-2, Tbx-3, and Tbx-5 genes during early heart development:
evidence for BMP2 induction of Tbx2.

Yamada M(1), Revelli JP, Eichele G, Barron M, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, 77030, USA.

Expression patterns of Tbx2, -3, and -5 genes were analyzed during chick
embryonic heart development. Transcripts of these three cTbx genes were detected 
in overlapping patterns in the early cardiac crescent. cTbx2 and cTbx3 expression
patterns closely overlapped with that of bmp2. cTbx5 expression diverged from
cTbx2 and bmp2 during the elaboration and folding of the heart tube. In
comparison, cTbx2 expression overlapped significantly with that of bmp2 and bmp4 
during all stages of heart development and during later embryonic stages,
suggestive of a specialized role for Tbx2 in septation. Coexpression of cTbx 2
and cTbx3 genes with bmp2 transcripts raised the possibility that these cTbx
genes might be downstream bmp2 targets. Application of bmp2 selectively induced
cTbx2 and cTbx3 expression in noncardiogenic embryonic tissue, and the bmp
antagonist Noggin down-regulated cTbx2 gene activity. Moreover, the appearance of
murine mTbx2 was blocked in bmp2 null mouse embryos. cTbx2 and to a lesser extent
cTbx3 gene activity appears to be directed by BMPs during early cardiogenesis.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11087629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Nat Genet. 2000 Nov;26(3):291-9.

Senescence bypass screen identifies TBX2, which represses Cdkn2a (p19(ARF)) and
is amplified in a subset of human breast cancers.

Jacobs JJ(1), Keblusek P, Robanus-Maandag E, Kristel P, Lingbeek M, Nederlof PM, 
van Welsem T, van de Vijver MJ, Koh EY, Daley GQ, van Lohuizen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

To identify new immortalizing genes with potential roles in tumorigenesis, we
performed a genetic screen aimed to bypass the rapid and tight senescence arrest 
of primary fibroblasts deficient for the oncogene Bmi1. We identified the T-box
member TBX2 as a potent immortalizing gene that acts by downregulating Cdkn2a
(p19(ARF)). TBX2 represses the Cdkn2a (p19(ARF)) promoter and attenuates E2F1,
Myc or HRAS-mediated induction of Cdkn2a (p19(ARF)). We found TBX2 to be
amplified in a subset of primary human breast cancers, indicating that it might
contribute to breast cancer development.

PMID: 11062467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Cancer Res. 2000 Oct 1;60(19):5340-4.

Multiple genes at 17q23 undergo amplification and overexpression in breast
cancer.

Bärlund M(1), Monni O, Kononen J, Cornelison R, Torhorst J, Sauter G, Kallioniemi
OLLI-P, Kallioniemi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Medical Technology, University of 
Tampere, Finland.

Studies by comparative genomic hybridization imply that amplification of the
chromosomal region 17q22-q24 is common in breast cancer. Here, amplification and 
expression levels of six known genes located at 17q23 were examined in breast
cancer cell lines. Four of them (RAD51C, S6K, PAT1, and TBX2) were found to be
highly amplified and overexpressed. To investigate the involvement of these genes
in vivo, fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of a tissue microarray
containing 372 primary breast cancers was used. S6K, PAT1, and TBX2 were
coamplified in about 10% of tumors, whereas RADS1C amplification was seen in only
3% of tumors. Expression analysis in 12 primary tumors showed that RAD51C and S6K
were consistently expressed in all cases in which they were amplified and also in
some tumors without amplification. These data suggest that 17q23 amplification
results in simultaneous up-regulation of several genes, whose increased
biological activity may jointly contribute to the more aggressive clinical course
observed in patients with 17q23-amplified tumors.

PMID: 11034067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Genomics. 2000 Jul 1;67(1):92-5.

Virtual cloning and physical mapping of a human T-box gene, TBX4.

Yi CH(1), Russ A, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
United Kingdom.

The Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily is one of the largest subgroupings within the T-box gene
family, the members of which encode developmentally critical transcription
factors. TBX4, a human member of the Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily, has been identified
and characterized from a high-throughput genomic sequence. The genomic
organization of TBX4 was elucidated by computational sequence analysis, and the
putative cDNA sequence was assembled. The genomic organization of TBX4 is very
similar to that of TBX5, as is the situation for TBX2 and TBX3. The physical
configuration of the TBX4-TBX2 cluster on human chromosome 17q21-q22 is similar
to that of the TBX5-TBX3 cluster on chromosome 12q23-q24. The assembled TBX4 cDNA
sequence was searched against the EST databases, and a TBX4 EST was identified.

PMID: 10945475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Pigment Cell Res. 2000 Apr;13(2):60-9.

Cyclic AMP a key messenger in the regulation of skin pigmentation.

Buscà R(1), Ballotti R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U385, Faculté de Médecine, Nice, France.

Compelling evidence has been gathered indicating that pro-opiomelanocortin
peptides, alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH) and
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), through the cyclic AMP pathway, play a
pivotal role in melanocyte differentiation and in the regulation of
melanogenesis. Recently, the molecular events linking cAMP to melanogenesis
up-regulation have been elucidated. This cascade involves the activation of
protein kinase A and CREB transcription factor, leading to the up-regulation of
the expression of Microphthalmia associated transcription factor (MITF). MITF has
been found mutated in patients with Waardenburg syndrome 2A, and plays a crucial 
role in melanocyte development. MITF binds and activates melanogenic gene
promoters, thereby increasing their expression which results in an increased
melanin synthesis. Beyond this simplified scheme, It appears that melanogenic
gene expression is controlled by a complex network of regulation involving other 
transcription factors such as Brn2, TBX2, PAX3 and SOX10. Further studies are
required to better understand the respective roles of these factors in the
regulation of melanin synthesis. In addition, other intracellular signaling
pathways, like the phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase pathway, as well as the
molecular cascade of events governed by the small GTP-binding protein Rho, seem
to be involved in the regulation of melanogenesis and melanocyte dendricity.
Finally, it should be mentioned that cAMP activates a melanocyte-specific pathway
leading to MAP kinase activation. MAP kinase, ERK2, phosphorylates MITF, thereby 
targeting the transcription factor to proteasomes for degradation. Thus, in
addition to the complex transcriptional regulation, melanogenesis is also
subjected to a post-translational regulation that controls MITF or tyrosinase
function. Taken together, these complex molecular processes would finally allow a
fine tuning of melanocyte differentiation leading to melanin synthesis.

PMID: 10841026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 21;275(29):21920-7.

The gene encoding the T-box factor Tbx2 is a target for the
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor in melanocytes.

Carreira S(1), Liu B, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Transcription Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, Oxted,
Surrey RH8 OTL, United Kingdom.

Commitment to the melanocyte lineage is characterized by the onset of
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (Mitf) expression. Mitf plays a
fundamental role in melanocyte development, with mice lacking Mitf being entirely
devoid of pigment cells. In the absence of functional Mitf protein, melanoblasts 
expressing Mitf mRNA disappear around 2 days after their first appearance either 
by apoptosis or by losing their identity and adopting an alternative cell fate.
The role of Mitf must therefore be to regulate genes required for melanoblast
survival, proliferation, or the maintenance of melanoblast identity. Yet to date,
Mitf has been shown to regulate genes such as Tyrosinase, Tyrp-1, and Dct, which 
are required for pigmentation, a differentiation-specific process. Because
expression of these genes cannot account for the complete absence of pigment
cells in Mitf-negative mice, Mitf must regulate the expression of other as yet
uncharacterized genes. Here we provide several lines of evidence to suggest that 
Mitf may regulate the expression of the Tbx2 transcription factor, a member of
the T-box family of proteins implicated in the maintenance of cell identity.
First, isolation and sequencing of the entire murine Tbx2 gene revealed that the 
Tbx2 promoter contains a full consensus Mitf recognition element; second, Mitf
could bind the promoter in vitro and activate Tbx2 expression in vivo in an E
box-dependent fashion; and third, Tbx2 is expressed in melanoma cell lines
expressing Mitf, but not in a line in which Mitf expression was not detectable.
Taken together, with the fact that Tbx2 is expressed in Mitf-positive
melanoblasts and melanocytes, but not in Mitf-negative melanoblast precursor
cells, the evidence suggests that the Tbx2 gene may represent one of the first
known targets for Mitf that is not a gene involved directly in the manufacture of
pigment.

PMID: 10770922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mech Dev. 2000 Mar 1;91(1-2):433-7.

Conserved and divergent expression of T-box genes Tbx2-Tbx5 in Xenopus.

Takabatake Y(1), Takabatake T, Takeshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Human Informatics, Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya,
Japan.

We report here the identification of four members of T-box family genes,
Xltbx2-Xltbx5, in Xenopus. Two of them are probable pseudovariant genes of XTbx5 
and ET, a putative Xenopus ortholog of Tbx3. We compared their expression
patterns in both embryos and limbs. In embryos, expression of Xltbx2 and Xltbx3
showed novel diversities, such as Xltbx2 in the neural crest cells and Xltbx3 in 
the ventral spinal cord, together with mutual similarities in the following
regions: dorsal retina, proctoderm, lateral line organ, cement gland and cranial 
ganglia. The patterns in limbs were highly conserved with mouse and chick
orthologs, including the limb-type specific expression of Xltbx4 and Xltbx5. In
addition, RT-PCR analysis showed that they are expressed weakly even in adult
limbs as previously reported in the newt.

PMID: 10704879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Dev Genes Evol. 2000 Feb;210(2):82-91.

The evolution of paired appendages in vertebrates: T-box genes in the zebrafish.

Ruvinsky I(1), Oates AC, Silver LM, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08544, USA.

The presence of two sets of paired appendages is one of the defining features of 
jawed vertebrates. We are interested in identifying genetic systems that could
have been responsible for the origin of the first set of such appendages, for
their subsequent duplication at a different axial level, and/or for the
generation of their distinct identities. It has been hypothesized that four genes
of the T-box gene family (Tbx2-Tbx5) played important roles in the course of
vertebrate limb evolution. To test this idea, we characterized the orthologs of
tetrapod limb-expressed T-box genes from a teleost, Danio rerio. Here we report
isolation of three of these genes, tbx2, tbx4, and tbx5. We found that their
expression patterns are remarkably similar to those of their tetrapod
counterparts. In particular, expression of tbx5 and tbx4 is restricted to
pectoral and pelvic fin buds, respectively, while tbx2 can be detected at the
anterior and posterior margins of the outgrowing fin buds. This, in combination
with conserved expression patterns in other tissues, suggests that the last
common ancestor of teleosts and tetrapods possessed all four of these
limb-expressed T-box genes (Tbx2-Tbx5), and that these genes had already
acquired, and have subsequently maintained, their gene-specific functions.
Furthermore, this evidence provides molecular support for the notion that teleost
pectoral and pelvic fins and tetrapod fore- and hindlimbs, respectively, are
homologous structures, as suggested by comparative morphological analyses.

PMID: 10664151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Dev Genes Evol. 1999 Oct;209(10):625-8.

Expression of Xenopus T-box transcription factor, tbx2 in Xenopus embryo.

Hayata T(1), Kuroda H, Eisaki A, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

We report here the cloning and expression of the Xenopus orthologue of the T-box 
transcription factor gene Tbx2 (optomotor-blind in Drosophila). Tbx2 is first
detected in the ventral mesodermal cells just above the yolk plug at late
gastrula. At the neurula stage it is strongly expressed in the cement gland,
dorsal root ganglia, and otic vesicle region. At the tailbud stage strong Tbx2
expression is observed in the dorsal part of the optic cup and trigeminal
ganglia, and it is also expressed in the branchial arches, heart anlage, nasal
pit, proctodeum, and the region around the pronephros.

PMID: 10552304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 17;274(38):26894-900.

Pax3 and regulation of the melanocyte-specific tyrosinase-related protein-1
promoter.

Galibert MD(1), Yavuzer U, Dexter TJ, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Transcription Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The
Chart, Oxted, Surrey, RH8 OTL, United Kingdom.

Previous work has established that the melanocyte-specific tyrosinase-related
protein-1 (TRP-1) promoter is regulated positively by the
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor Mitf, acting through the conserved
M box and negatively by the T-box factor Tbx2, which can bind two
"melanocyte-specific elements" termed the MSEu and MSEi. Both the MSEu and MSEi, 
which share a 6-base pair GTGTGA consensus, are also recognized by a previously
unidentified melanocyte-specific factor, MSF. Here we show using a combination of
DNA binding assays, proteolytic clipping, and anti-Pax3 antibodies that MSF is
indistinguishable from Pax3, a paired homeodomain transcription factor implicated
genetically in melanocyte development and the regulation of the Mitf promoter.
Consistent with Pax3 being able to bind the TRP-1 promoter, Pax3 is expressed in 
melanocytes and melanomas, and TRP-1 promoter activity is up-regulated by Pax3.
The results identify a novel role for Pax3 in the expression of TRP-1, and the
potential role of Pax3 in the melanocyte lineage is discussed.

PMID: 10480898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Aug 31;96(18):10212-7.

Transcription repression by Xenopus ET and its human ortholog TBX3, a gene
involved in ulnar-mammary syndrome.

He Ml(1), Wen L, Campbell CE, Wu JY, Rao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999 Nov 9;96(23):13589.

T box (Tbx) genes are a family of developmental regulators with more than 20
members recently identified in invertebrates and vertebrates. Mutations in Tbx
genes have been found to cause several human diseases. Our understanding of
functional mechanisms of Tbx products has come mainly from the prototypical
T/Brachyury, which is a transcription activator. We previously discovered ET, a
Tbx gene expressed in Xenopus embryos. We report here that ET is an ortholog of
the human Tbx3 and that ET is a repressor of basal and activated transcription.
Functional dissection of the ET protein reveals a novel transcription-repression 
domain highly conserved among ET, human TBX3, and TBX2. These results reveal a
new transcription repressor domain, show the existence of a subfamily of
transcription repressors in the Tbx superfamily, and provide a basis for
understanding etiology of diseases caused by Tbx3 mutations.

PMCID: PMC17868
PMID: 10468588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;82(3-4):189-91.

Molecular cytogenetic mapping of 24 CEPH YACs and 24 gene-specific large insert
probes to chromosome 17.

Bärlund M(1), Nupponen NN, Karhu R, Tanner MM, Paavola P, Kallioniemi OP,
Kallioniemi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Medical Technology, University of 
Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere (Finland).

Defining boundaries of chromosomal rearrangements at the molecular level would
benefit from landmarks that link the cytogenetic map to physical, genetic, and
transcript maps, as well as from large-insert FISH probes for such loci to detect
numerical and structural rearrangements in metaphase or interphase cells. Here,
we determined the locations of 24 genetically mapped CEPH-Mega YACs along the
FLpter scale (fractional length from p-telomere) by quantitative fluorescence in 
situ hybridization analysis. This generated a set of cytogenetically mapped
probes for chromosome 17 with an average spacing of about 5 cM. We then developed
large-insert YAC, BAC, PAC, or P1 clones to the following 24 known genes, and
determined refined map locations along the same FLpter scale:
pter-TP53-TOP3-cen-TNFAIP1-ERBB2-TOP2A- BRCA1-TCF11-NME1-HLF-ZNF147/CL
N80-BCL5/MPO/SFRS1-TBX2-PECAM1-DDX5/ PRKCA-ICAM2-GH1/PRKAR1A-GRB2-CDK3
/FKHL13-qter. Taken together, these 48 cytogenetically mapped large-insert probes
provide tools for the molecular analysis of chromosome 17 rearrangements, such as
mapping amplification, deletion, and translocation breakpoints in this
chromosome, in cancer and other diseases.

PMID: 9858813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;18(9):5099-108.

Brachyury-related transcription factor Tbx2 and repression of the
melanocyte-specific TRP-1 promoter.

Carreira S(1), Dexter TJ, Yavuzer U, Easty DJ, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Transcription Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, Oxted,
Surrey RH8 0TL, United Kingdom.

Previous work has demonstrated that two key melanocyte-specific elements termed
the MSEu and MSEi play critical roles in the expression of the
melanocyte-specific tyrosinase-related protein 1 (TRP-1) promoter. Both the MSEu 
and MSEi, located at position -237 and at the initiator, respectively, bind a
melanocyte-specific factor termed MSF but are also recognized by a previously
uncharacterized repressor, since mutations affecting either of these elements
result in strong up-regulation of TRP-1 promoter activity in melanoma cells. Here
we demonstrate that repression mediated by the MSEu and MSEi also operates in
melanocytes. We also report that both the MSEu and MSEi are recognized by the
brachyury-related transcription factor Tbx2, a member of the recently described
T-box family, and that Tbx2 is expressed in melanocyte and melanoblast cell lines
but not in melanoblast precursor cells. Although Tbx2 and MSF each recognize the 
TRP-1 MSEu and MSEi motifs, it is binding by Tbx-2, not binding by MSF, that
correlates with repression. Several lines of evidence tend to point to the
brachyury-related transcription factor Tbx2 as being the repressor of TRP-1
expression: both the MSEu and MSEi bind Tbx2, and mutations in either element
that result in derepression of the TRP-1 promoter diminish binding by Tbx2; the
TRP-1 promoter, but not the tyrosinase, microphthalmia, or
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (G3PDH) promoter, is repressed by Tbx2
in cotransfection assays; a high-affinity consensus brachyury/Tbx2-binding site
is able to constitutively repress expression of the heterologous IE110 promoter; 
and a low-affinity brachyury/Tbx2 binding site is able to mediate Tbx2-dependent 
repression of the G3PDH promoter. Although we cannot rule out the presence of an 
additional, as yet unidentified factor playing a role in the negative regulation 
of TRP-1 in vivo, the evidence presented here suggests that Tbx2 most likely is
the previously unidentified repressor of TRP-1 expression and as such is likely
to represent the first example of transcriptional repression by a T-box family
member.

PMCID: PMC109095
PMID: 9710594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mech Dev. 1998 Jun;74(1-2):165-9.

Expression of T-box genes Tbx2-Tbx5 during chick organogenesis.

Gibson-Brown JJ(1), I Agulnik S, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, 701 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

T-box genes encode putative transcription factors implicated in diverse
developmental processes (Papaioannou, V.E. and Silver, L.M., 1998. BioEssays 20, 
9-19). We have previously reported the embryonic expression patterns of T-box
genes in mice (Chapman, D.L., Garvey, N., Hancock, S., Alexiou, M., Agulnik,
S.I., Gibson-Brown, J.J., Cebra-Thomas, J., Bollag, R.J., Silver, L.M.,
Papaioannou, V.E., 1996. Dev. Dyn. 206, 379-390; Chapman, D.L., Agulnik, I.,
Hancock, S., Silver, L.M. and Papaioannou, V.E., 1996. Dev. Biol. 180, 534-542;
Gibson-Brown, J.J., Agulnik, S.I., Chapman, D.L., Alexiou, M., Garvey, N.,
Silver, L.M., Papaioannou, V.E., 1996. Mech. Dev. 56, 93-101). Four of these
genes (Tbx2-Tbx5) are represented in the mouse genome as two cognate, linked gene
pairs (Agulnik, S.I., Garvey, N., Hancock, S., Ruvinsky, I., Chapman, D.L.,
Agulnik, I., Bollag, R., Papaioannou, V.E., Silver, L.M., 1996. Genetics 144,
249-254), and have all been implicated in playing important roles in limb
development (Gibson-Brown, J.J., Agulnik, S.I., Chapman, D.L., Alexiou, M.,
Garvey, N., Silver, L.M., Papaioannou, V.E., 1996. Mech. Dev. 56, 93-101). To
investigate the role of these genes in limb development, we cloned the chicken
orthologs and report functional studies, as well as patterns of expression in the
developing limbs, elsewhere (Gibson-Brown, J.J., Agulnik, S.I., Silver, L.M.,
Niswander, L., Papaioannou, V.E., Development, in press). This report details the
patterns of expression of Tbx2-Tbx5 in chick embryonic tissues other than the
limbs.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved

PMID: 9651516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Development. 1998 Jul;125(13):2499-509.

Involvement of T-box genes Tbx2-Tbx5 in vertebrate limb specification and
development.

Gibson-Brown JJ(1), Agulnik SI, Silver LM, Niswander L, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

We have recently shown in mice that four members of the T-box family of
transcription factors (Tbx2-Tbx5) are expressed in developing limb buds, and that
expression of two of these genes, Tbx4 and Tbx5, is primarily restricted to the
developing hindlimbs and forelimbs, respectively. In this report, we investigate 
the role of these genes in limb specification and development, using the chick as
a model system. We induced the formation of ectopic limbs in the flank of chick
embryos to examine the relationship between the identity of the limb-specific
T-box genes being expressed and the identity of limb structures that subsequently
develop. We found that, whereas bud regions expressing Tbx4 developed
characteristic leg structures, regions expressing Tbx5 developed characteristic
wing features. In addition, heterotopic grafts of limb mesenchyme (wing bud into 
leg bud, and vice versa), which are known to retain the identity of the donor
tissue after transplantation, retained autonomous expression of the appropriate, 
limb-specific T-box gene, with no evidence of regulation by the host bud. Thus
there is a direct relationship between the identity of the structures that
develop in normal, ectopic and recombinant limbs, and the identity of the T-box
gene(s) being expressed. To investigate the regulation of T-box gene expression
during limb development, we employed several other embryological manipulations.
By surgically removing the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) from either wing or leg 
buds, we found that, in contrast to all other genes implicated in the patterning 
of developing appendages, maintenance of T-box gene expression is not dependent
on the continued provision of signals from the AER or the zone of polarizing
activity (ZPA). By generating an ectopic ZPA, by grafting a sonic hedgehog
(SHH)-expressing cell pellet under the anterior AER, we found that Tbx2
expression can lie downstream of SHH. Finally, by grafting a SHH-expressing cell 
pellet to the anterior margin of a bud from which the AER had been removed, we
found that Tbx2 may be a direct, short-range target of SHH. Our findings suggest 
that these genes are intimately involved in limb development and the
specification of limb identity, and a new model for the evolution of vertebrate
appendages is proposed.

PMID: 9609833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mamm Genome. 1998 Jan;9(1):70-3.

Genomic structure of TBX2 indicates conservation with distantly related T-box
genes.

Campbell CE(1), Casey G, Goodrich K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Ohio 44195-5001, USA.

TBX2 is a member of a recently discovered gene family of transcription factors,
named T-box genes after the Brachyury or T gene. Mutations in two of these family
members, TBX5 and TBX3, have recently been shown to be responsible for the
congenital abnormalities associated with Holt Oram syndrome and ulnar-mammary
syndrome respectively, while mutations in T-box genes in other species also
result in developmental abnormalities in the tissues where the gene is normally
expressed. Thus, it likely that other T-box genes are responsible for additional 
human developmental anomalies. Here we report the exon/intron boundaries of TBX2 
and a polymorphism within intron 2 of TBX2 that should be useful for exploring
the involvement of this gene in human genetic disease. We further note that the
exon/intron boundaries of TBX2 are highly conserved within the T-box domain with 
those of both T and TBX5, as well as with a new human T-box gene and more
distantly related genes from Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila. This
observation should facilitate the analysis of the genomic structure of other
members of this gene family. It is also of interest that several members of this 
gene family have an additional intron that is variably present within members of 
at least two different lineages of the T-box family. This observation has
implications regarding the evolution of T-box genes.

PMID: 9434949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Dev Dyn. 1996 Aug;206(4):379-90.

Expression of the T-box family genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, during early mouse development.

Chapman DL(1), Garvey N, Hancock S, Alexiou M, Agulnik SI, Gibson-Brown JJ,
Cebra-Thomas J, Bollag RJ, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicans and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

A novel family of genes, characterized by the presence of a region of homology to
the DNA-binding domain of the Brachyury (T) locus product, has recently been
identified. The region of homology has been named the T-box, and the new mouse
genes that contain the T-box domain have been named T-box 1-6 (Tbx1 through
Tbx6). As the basis for further study of the function and evolution of these
genes, we have examined the expression of 5 of these genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, across a
wide range of embryonic stages from blastocyst through gastrulation and early
organogenesis by in situ hybridization of wholemounts and tissue sections. Tbx3
is expressed earliest, in the inner cell mass of the blastocyst. Four of the
genes are expressed in different components of the mesoderm or mesoderm/endoderm 
during gastrulation (Tbx1 and Tbx3-5). All of these genes have highly specific
patterns of expression during later embryogenesis, notably in areas undergoing
inductive tissue interactions. In several cases there is complementary expression
of different genes in 2 interacting tissues, as in the lung epithelium (Tbx1) and
lung mesenchyme (Tbx2-5), and in mammary buds (Tbx3) and mammary stroma (Tbx2).
Tbx1 shows very little overlap in the sites of expression with the other 4 genes,
in contrast to a striking similarity in expression between members of the 2
cognate gene sets, Tbx2/Tbx3 and Tbx4/Tbx5. This is a clear reflection of the
evolutionary relationship between the 5 genes since the divergence of Tbx1
occurred long before the relatively recent divergence of Tbx2 and 3 and Tbx4 and 
5 from common ancestral genes. These studies are a good indication that the T-box
family of genes has important roles in inductive interactions in many stages of
mammalian embryogenesis.

PMID: 8853987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mech Dev. 1996 May;56(1-2):93-101.

Evidence of a role for T-box genes in the evolution of limb morphogenesis and the
specification of forelimb/hindlimb identity.

Gibson-Brown JJ(1), Agulnik SI, Chapman DL, Alexiou M, Garvey N, Silver LM,
Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Tetrapod fore-and hindlimbs have evolved from the pectoral and pelvic fins of an 
ancient vertebrate ancestor. In this ancestor, the pectoral fin appears to have
arisen following the rostral homeotic recapitulation of an existing pelvic
appendage (Tabin and Laufer (1993), Nature 361, 692-693). Thus the basic
appendage outgrowth program is reiterated in both tetrapod fore- and hindlimbs
and the pectoral and pelvic fins of extant teleost fishes (Sordino et al. (1995) 
Nature 375, 678-681). Recently a novel family of putative transcription factors, 
which includes the T (Brachyury) locus, has been identified and dubbed the
"T-box' family. In mice, all of these genes have expression patterns indicative
of involvement in embryonic induction (Chapman et al. (1996) Dev. Dyn., in
press), and four (Tbx2-Tbx5) are represented as two cognate, linked gene pairs
(Agulnik et al., (1996), Genetics, in press). We now report that, whereas Tbx2
and Tbx3 are expressed in similar spatiotemporal patterns in both limbs, Tbx5 and
Tbx4 expression is primarily restricted to the developing fore- and hindlimb
buds, respectively. These observations suggest that T-box genes have played a
role in the evolution of fin and limb morphogenesis, and that Tbx5 and Tbx4 may
have been divergently selected to play a role in the differential specification
of fore- (pectoral) versus hind- (pelvic) limb (fin) identity.

PMID: 8798150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mamm Genome. 1995 Nov;6(11):793-7.

Identification, characterization, and localization to chromosome 17q21-22 of the 
human TBX2 homolog, member of a conserved developmental gene family.

Law DJ(1), Gebuhr T, Garvey N, Agulnik SI, Silver LM.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109-0674, USA.

The T-box motif is present in a family of genes whose structural features and
expression patterns support their involvement in developmental gene regulation.
Previously, sequence comparisons among the T-box domains of ten vertebrate and
invertebrate T-box (Tbx) genes established a phylogenetic tree with three major
branches. The Tbx2-related branch includes mouse Mm-Tbx2 and Mm-Tbx3, Drosophila 
optomotor-blind (Dm-Omb), and Caenorhabditis elegans Ce-Tbx2 and Ce-Tbx2 and
Ce-Tbx7 genes. From the localization of Mm-Tbx2 to Chromosome (Chr) 11, we
focused our search for the human homolog, Hs-TBX2, within a region of synteny
conservation on Chr 17q. We used Dm-Omb polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers
to amplify a 137-basepair(bp)_ product from human genomic, Chr 17 monochromosome 
hybrid, and fetal kidney cDNA templates. The human PCR product showed 89% DNA
sequence identity and 100% peptide sequence identity to the corresponding T-box
segment of Mm-Tbx2. The putative Hs-TBX2 locus was isolated within a YAC contig
that included three anonymous markers, D17S792, and D17S948, located at Chr
17q21-22. Hybridization-and PCR-based screening of a 15-week fetal kidney cDNA
library yielded several TBX2 clones. Sequence analysis of clone lambda omicron
TBX2-1 confirmed homology to Mm-TBx2-90% DNA sequence identity over 283 nt, and
96% peptide sequence identity over 94 amino acids. Similar analysis of Hs-TBX2
cosmid 154F11 confirmed the cDNA coding sequence and also identified a 1.7-kb
intron located at the same relative position as in Mm-Tbx2. Phylogenetic analyses
of the T-box domain sequences found in several vertebrate and invertebrate
species further suggested that the putative human TBX2 and mouse Tbx2 are true
homologs. Northern blot analysis identified two major TBX2 expression fetal
kidney and lung; and in adult kidney, lung, ovary, prostate, spleen, and testis. 
Reduced expression levels were seen in heart, white blood cells, small intestine,
and thymus. These results suggest that Hs-TBX2 could play important roles in both
developmental and postnatal gene regulation.

PMID: 8597636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Genomics. 1995 Jul 20;28(2):255-60.

Cloning and mapping of a human gene (TBX2) sharing a highly conserved protein
motif with the Drosophila omb gene.

Campbell C(1), Goodrich K, Casey G, Beatty B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio 44195, USA.

We have identified and cloned a human gene (TBX2) that exhibits strong sequence
homology within a putative DNA binding domain to the drosophila optomotor-blind
(omb) gene and lesser homology to the DNA binding domain of the murine brachyury 
or T gene. Unlike omb, which is expressed in neural tissue, or T, which is not
expressed in adult animals, TBX2 is expressed primarily in adult in kidney, lung,
and placenta as multiple transcripts of between approximately 2 and 4 kb. At
least part of this transcript heterogeneity appears to be due to alternative
polyadenylation. This is the first reported human member of a new family of
highly evolutionarily conserved DNA binding proteins, the Tbx or T-box proteins. 
The human gene has been mapped by somatic cell hybrid mapping and chromosomal in 
situ hybridization to chromosome 17q23, a region frequently altered in ovarian
carcinomas.

PMID: 8530034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Genomics. 1995 Jan 1;25(1):214-9.

Conservation of the T-box gene family from Mus musculus to Caenorhabditis
elegans.

Agulnik SI(1), Bollag RJ, Silver LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, New Jersey 08544-1014, 
USA.

Recently, a novel family of genes with a region of homology to the mouse T locus,
which is known to play a crucial, and conserved, role in vertebrate development, 
has been discovered. The region of homology has been named the T-box. The T-box
domain of the prototypical T locus product is associated with sequence-specific
DNA binding activity. In this report, we have characterized four members of the
T-box gene family from the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. All lie in close
proximity to each other in the middle of chromosome III. Homology analysis among 
all completely sequenced T-box products indicates a larger size for the conserved
T-box domain (166 to 203 residues) than previously reported. Phylogenetic
analysis suggests that one C. elegans T-box gene may be a direct ortholog of the 
mouse Tbx2 and Drosophila omb genes. The accumulated data demonstrate the ancient
nature of the T-box gene family and suggest the existence of at least three
separate T-box-containing genes in a common early metazoan ancestor to nematodes 
and vertebrates.

PMID: 7774921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1994 Jun;23(6):922-31.

Protection of reperfused ischemic pig myocardium by nexopamil, a new combined
Ca2+ and serotonin antagonist.

Hohlfeld T(1), Braun M, Strobach H, Schrör K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Germany.

We investigated the ability of a newly developed calcium and serotonin (5-HT2)
antagonist, nexopamil, to protect the heart from ischemia- and
reperfusion-induced myocardial injury. Anesthetized open-chest minipigs were
subjected to 1 h left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) occlusion and 3-h
reperfusion. Thirty minutes before occlusion, one group of pigs (n = 7) received 
nexopamil (0.1 mg/kg intravenously, i.v.) and another group (n = 9) received
vehicle. Nexopamil reduced infarct size (IS: tetrazolium stain) from 47 +/- 4%
(vehicle) to 21 +/- 7% of the ischemic area (p < 0.05). In nexopamil-treated
pigs, this was paralleled by reduced release of creatine kinase (CK) into
coronary venous blood. In addition, nexopamil prevented reperfusion-associated
myocardial contracture. Nexopamil decreased left ventricular peak pressure (LVPP)
and pressure rate index (PRI) immediately before coronary occlusion by 11 and
18%, respectively. Coadministration of methoxamine (2 mg/kg, n = 6) with
nexopamil increased LVPP and PRI to values of vehicle-treated pigs but did not
prevent reduction in infarct size or CK activity in plasma. During reperfusion,
neutrophil granulocytes showed increased formation of reactive oxygen metabolites
(chemiluminescence) after stimulation with zymosan. Neutrophil counts in coronary
venous blood were significantly reduced at 3 h reperfusion. Both changes were
attenuated in nexopamil-treated pigs. Coronary occlusion resulted in increased
platelet reactivity in coronary venous blood (collagen-induced aggregation) that 
was prevented by nexopamil. Nexopamil significantly increased the transcardiac
(coronary venous-arterial) concentration gradients of 6-oxo-prostaglandin F1
alpha (PGF1 alpha) without changing thromboxane (B2 (TBX2) concentrations,
indicating a selective increase in cardiocoronary PGI2 formation. Nexopamil
reduces myocardial injury in reperfused ischemic myocardium. Besides calcium
channel blocking activity, inhibition of ischemia-induced neutrophil activation
and enhanced endogenous PGI2 formation may be factors contributing to the
beneficial effects of nexopamil.

PMID: 7523784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Am J Hematol. 1994 Mar;45(3):224-31.

Effects of interleukin-2 administration on platelet function in cancer patients.

Oleksowicz L(1), Zuckerman D, Mrowiec Z, Puszkin E, Dutcher JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Montefiore Medical Center Hospital, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10467.

Platelet function in 16 patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma and
melanoma was studied sequentially over the first 96 hr of treatment with moderate
and high-dose interleukin-2 (IL-2). During the first 96 hr of therapy, an
increased ex vivo platelet maximal aggregation (MA) response to ADP, epinephrine,
and arachidonic acid was paralleled by a decrease in the peripheral platelet
count. Plasma specimens from patients receiving the moderate dose schedule showed
a significant IL-2 induced secretory response of the platelet alpha-granule
components beta-thromboglobulin (BTG) and platelet factor 4 (PF4) and the
eicosanoid thromboxane B2 (TBX2) as measured by RIA. The increase in TXB2 was
highly correlated with MA when analyzed by bivariate regression analysis, whereas
the addition of PF4 to TXB2 in a multiple regression analysis further increased
their correlation to MA. The observed decrease in peripheral platelet count
correlated significantly with MA and PF4 secretion. High-dose IL-2-treated
patients showed a statistically significant increase in the percentage of large
platelets exceeding 12 fl in diameter and platelet responsiveness to hypotonic
shock. These observations suggest that IL-2 therapy results in a reduced
peripheral platelet pool, with an increased proportion of the remaining pool of
platelets larger, more viable, and activated.

PMID: 8296793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1993 Mar;21(3):353-61.

Effects of a thromboxane synthetase inhibitor, Y-20811, on infarct size,
neutrophil accumulation, and arrhythmias after coronary artery occlusion and
reperfusion in dogs.

Sato N(1), Endo T, Kiuchi K, Hayakawa H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

To examine effects of a new thromboxane synthetase inhibitor, Y-20811, on infarct
size, neutrophil accumulation, and arrhythmias, coronary artery was occluded for 
90 min and reperfused for 6 h in anesthetized dogs. Y-20811 administered
intravenously (i.v.) 30 min before occlusion decreased serum thromboxane B2
(TBX2) formation by 98% 30 min later and by 79% at 6 h after reperfusion.
Ventricular fibrillation (VF) developed in 1 of 15 control and 3 of 10 treated
dogs during occlusion (p = NS), whereas after reperfusion it occurred in 7 of 14 
control and none of seven treated dogs (p < 0.05). The number of arrhythmias
during the first hour of reperfusion was significantly reduced in treated dogs
(134 +/- 74 beats/min in control vs. 14 +/- 4 beats/min in treated dogs, p <
0.05). Hemodynamics, area at risk, and collateral flow to the ischemic region
were similar for the two groups. The extent of myocardial necrosis was 28.0 +/-
10.0% (n = 7) of the area at risk in control dogs and 27.6 +/- 6.2% (n = 7) in
treated dogs (p = NS). The relation between the ratio of myocardial necrosis to
area at risk and collateral flow was similar. The degree of neutrophil
accumulation did not differ but correlated with infarct size (r = 0.85). Thus,
Y-20811 reduced reperfusion arrhythmias but failed to limit infarct size and
neutrophil accumulation after coronary artery occlusion/reperfusion in dogs.

PMID: 7681494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Leukoc Biol. 1993 Feb;53(2):165-72.

Endogenous nitric oxide inhibits the synthesis of cyclooxygenase products and
interleukin-6 by rat Kupffer cells.

Stadler J(1), Harbrecht BG, Di Silvio M, Curran RD, Jordan ML, Simmons RL,
Billiar TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pennsylvania 15261.

Macrophage production of nitric oxide (.N = O) leads to considerable alterations 
of vital metabolic pathways in various target cells. The present study tested
whether .N = O synthesis by Kupffer cells (KCs), the resident macrophages of the 
liver, interferes with the secretory function of these cells. As in other
macrophage-type cells, the combination of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) was a potent stimulus of .N = O synthesis by KC.
Treatment with LPS and IFN-gamma also induced significant production of
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), thromboxane B2 (TBX2), tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-alpha), interleukin-1 (IL-1), and IL-6. Inhibition of .N = O synthesis by
KC. Treatment with LPS and IFN-gamma also induced significant production of
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), thromboxane B2 (TBX2), tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-alpha), interleukin-1 (IL-1), and IL-6. Inhibition of .N = O synthesis by
the L-arginine analogue of NG-monomethyl-L-arginine (NMA) resulted in a further
increase of PGE2, TXB2, and IL-6 but not IL-1 and TNF-alpha production,
indicating specific inhibitory effects of endogenous .N = O synthesis on the
secretory activity of KCs. PGE2 production was most sensitive to the suppressive 
effect of .N = O and increased 24 h after stimulation with LPS and IFN-gamma from
16.3 +/- 4.9 ng/10(6) KCs without NMA to 94.3 +/- 17.9 ng/10(6) KCs with NMA.
This effect of NMA was reversed by a 10-fold increase of the L-arginine
concentration. No recovery of PGE2 production was seen when .N = O synthesis was 
blocked after 24 h. NMA treatment increased cyclooxygenase activity more than
threefold, suggesting that .N = O inhibits PGE2 and TXB2 production through
diminished PGH2 availability. .N = O synthesis did not significantly affect total
protein synthesis or viability of the KCs. These results show that .N = O
influences the production of specific inflammatory mediators by KCs.

PMID: 8445328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Prostaglandins. 1993 Jan;45(1):57-75.

Metabolism of arachidonic acid by caruncular and allantochorionic tissues in cows
with retained fetal membranes (RFM).

Slama H(1), Vaillancourt D, Goff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Reproduction Animale, Universite de Montreal, Faculte
de Medecine Veterinaire St-Hyacinthe, Quebec.

The metabolism of arachidonic acid (AA) by caruncular and allantochorionic
tissues and its regulation was studied in normal cows (n = 13) and those with
retained fetal membranes (RFM; n = 9). Tissues were taken via the vagina about 6 
hours postpartum and incubated for 6 hours in minimum essential medium containing
tritiated AA alone or in the presence of oxytocin, platelet activating factor
(PAF), epidermal growth factor (EGF) or ionophore calcium (A23187). The
metabolites of AA were separated by reverse phase-high pressure-liquid
chromatography. Tissue concentrations of prostaglandin F2 alpha (PGF2 alpha) and 
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and plasma 13,14-dihydro-15-keto-PGF2 alpha (PGFM)
concentration were also measured by radioimmunoassay. For caruncular tissue, less
thromboxane B2 (TXB2) and more 6-keto prostaglandin F1 alpha (PGIM) was
synthesized in tissue from the animals with RFM than in the controls. Oxytocin,
PAF, EGF and A23187 increased only PGIM production in the control animals; A23187
also decreased TBX2 synthesis. For the allantochorion, more PGE2, leukotriene B4 
(LTB4) and PGIM and less TXB2, PGF2 alpha and hydroxyecosatetranoic acids (HETE) 
was synthesized in tissue from cows with RFM than from animals that delivered
normally. All of the substances used in this study increased PGIM, PGF2 alpha and
LTB4 and decreased TXB2 production by the allantochorionic tissue in control
animals. The metabolism of AA by the allantochorionic tissue seems quantitatively
under hormonal control. The metabolism of AA at the level of both maternal and
fetal components of the placenta in cows with RFM differed from that seen in
animals that expelled the membranes normally.

PMID: 8380936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Transplantation. 1992 Jul;54(1):74-80.

Renal hemodynamics, urinary eicosanoids, and endothelin after liver
transplantation.

Textor SC(1), Wilson DJ, Lerman A, Romero JC, Burnett JC Jr, Wiesner R, Dickson
ER, Krom RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905.

Patients with hepatic cirrhosis develop widespread abnormalities in kidney
function and vasoactive hormones. These change rapidly after liver
transplantation during immunosuppression with cyclosporine. The role of changing 
eicosanoid excretion and endothelin levels in regulating renal function after
transplantation in humans remains uncertain. We studied 32 patients with regard
to renal hemodynamics, glomerular filtration, urinary prostacyclin
(6-keto-PG-F1-alpha), thromboxane (TBX2), and endothelin before and during the
first four weeks after orthotopic liver transplantation. Arterial pressure rose
from 106 +/- 2/61 +/- 2 to 146 +/- 4/81 +/- 2 mmHg, (P less than .001), while
renal blood flow fell (686 +/- 38 to 453 +/- 24 ml/min/1.73 m2, P less than .05),
as did GFR. Pretransplant excretion of 6-keto and TBX2 was above that of normal
subjects and fell progressively after transplant, as did plasma renin activity
and aldosterone. The 6-keto levels fell below normal after two weeks. The ratio
of TBX2/6-keto remained elevated compared with normal subjects throughout the
month after transplant (1.54 +/- 0.38 vs. 0.54 +/- 0.07, P less than .01).
Endothelin levels rose during the first week (7.4 +/- 1.4 vs. 12.4 +/- 2.7 pg/ml,
P less than .05), but fell back to baseline thereafter. These results indicate
that high levels of urinary eicosanoids in patients with liver disease fall
rapidly after liver transplantation during CsA immunosuppression. Unlike results 
in many experimental models, these data suggest that renal vasoconstriction in
humans may be associated primarily with suppression in renal prostacyclin
excretion rather than stimulation of thromboxane.

PMID: 1631948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Med. 1992;23(2):81-92.

Indobufen versus dipyridamole plus aspirin in the treatment of patients with
peripheral atherosclerotic disease.

Fabris F(1), Steffan A, Randi ML, Avruscio GP, Cordiano I, Girolami A.

Author information: 
(1)Fourth Chair of Internal Medicine, University of Padua Medical School, Italy.

Twenty-seven patients with peripheral atherosclerotic disease were randomized
into two therapy regimens consisting of indobufen (Indo) (400 mg/day) and
dipyridamole (Dip) (225 mg/day) plus acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) (1 g/day),
respectively. Maximal walking distance (MWD) and ankle-arm systolic pressure
ratios were measured before and after three and six months of therapy; bleeding
time, beta-thromboglobulin (beta-TG), platelet factor 4 (PF4) and serum
thromboxane B2 (TXB2) were also assessed. The two treatment groups showed a
significant and progressive increase in pain-free walking distance at both three 
and six months of therapy, but patients taking indobufen showed a greater
improvement. On the contrary, the pressure doppler ratio at rest was
statistically improved only in the ASA plus Dip group. Basal beta-TG and PF4
levels were normal and no changes occurred during the study in either group,
while in all patients bleeding times showed a significant increase above basal
values and serum TBX2 decreased.

PMID: 1512524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Pol Tyg Lek. 1991 Jan 7-14;46(1-3):18-21.

[Effect of thromboxane A2 synthetase inhibitor and prostacyclin analogue on
arterial blood pressure, fibrinolysis and platelet function in patients with
hypertension].

[Article in Polish]

Nizankowski R(1), Krzanowski M, Musial J, Szczeklik A.

Author information: 
(1)Kliniki Alergii i Immunologii IMW AM, Krakowie.

An effect of the specific thromboxane A2 synthetase inhibitor and stable
prostacyclin analogue on arterial blood hypertension was investigated in 12
patients with spontaneous hypertension of II degree and in 12 healthy subjects.
The patients were given a 3-hour intravenous infusion of Iloprost (Schering) in
the dose of 2 ng/kg b.w. per minute and OKY-046 (ONO, Japan) in a single oral
dose of 400 mg. Iloprost shortened euglobin fibrinolysis time without an effect
on tissue plasminogen activator levels or blood pressure. OKY-046 decreased TBX2 
to undetectable values, increased 6-keto-PGF1 alpha by 8-fold, and significantly 
reduced both systolic and diastolic blood pressures in hypertensive patients.
Such effects may dependent upon an increase in the endogenous prostacyclin or an 
inhibition in thromboxane production in the affected arterial walls. If the
present observations would be confirmed by double blind trial, they would
constitute the base for new pharmacotherapy of hypertension.

PMID: 1726988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Exp Mol Pathol. 1986 Dec;45(3):343-53.

Leukocyte mediated vein injury and thrombosis is reduced by a lipoxygenase
inhibitor.

Schaub RG, Yamashita A.

We have previously demonstrated an in vivo model of deep vein thrombosis which
suggests that the neutrophil promotes vascular injury and thrombosis following
blood flow stasis. Since leukotrienes are potent mediators of vascular injury and
neutrophil (PMN) chemotaxis, we wished to determine if in vivo inhibition of
5-lipoxygenase would reduce neutrophil mediated events in our model. Lipoxygenase
was inhibited in vivo with 2,3-diethyl-4-methoxy,1-naphthalenol acetate
(U-66,855). The in vivo activity of U-66,855 was demonstrated in 4 cats. Each
animal was treated with 5 mg/kg of U-66,855 intravenously. Blood cell leukotriene
B4 (LTB4) and thromboxane A2, via its metabolite thromboxane B2 (TBX2) was
assessed before and 30, 60, and 120 min after dosing. Blood cell LTB4 and TBX2
production was stimulated by A23187 (24 microM) and assayed by radioimmunoassay. 
We exposed and isolated a 3-cm segment of the jugular veins from 10 additional
cats 5 of which were treated with U-66,855 (5 mg/kg, iv). In order to assess the 
effect of stasis, the jugular veins were ligated at the thoracic inlet for 2 hr
after which the veins were perfused, fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde, and prepared
for electron microscopy. U-66,855 reduced LTB4 production significantly (P less
than 0.01), but not TBX2. In untreated cats, PMNs adhered to and migrated
underneath the venous endothelium. Additionally, platelets, fibrin and formed
thrombi were found on the basement membrane exposed by the migrating neutrophils.
In contrast, we observed significantly reduced PMN adhesion as well as no fibrin 
deposition in veins obtained from cats treated with U-66,855. The results suggest
that 5-lipoxygenase inhibition can significantly reduce undesirable
neutrophil/vessel wall interactions.

PMID: 3025012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Pediatr Res. 1984 Sep;18(9):823-6.

Differences in thromboxane production between neonatal and adult platelets in
response to arachidonic acid and epinephrine.

Stuart MJ, Dusse J, Clark DA, Walenga RW.

In this study, we have investigated the possible role of the pro-aggregatory
arachidonic acid (AA) metabolite thromboxane, in the impaired function of
neonatal platelets. In platelet-rich plasma thromboxane production (measured by
radioimmunoassay of thromboxane B2) was not different between neonates and adults
when stimulated by thrombin (at 0.1 or 1.0 U/ml) or collagen (70 micrograms/ml)
although neonatal platelets produced decreased thromboxane (TBX2) postepinephrine
stimulation. In response to 1 U/ml thrombin, adult and neonatal platelet-rich
plasmas produced mean values of 3.41 +/- 0.35 (SEM) and 3.11 +/- 0.49 pmol of
TXB2/10(6) platelets, respectively. Production of TXB2 in response to 0.1 U/ml
thrombin was not dissimilar between neonates (1.01 +/- 0.46 pmol) and adults
(1.04 +/- 0.38 pmol). When collagen was used as the aggregating agent, TXB2
production was also not significantly different with values of 2.44 +/- 0.48 and 
1.90 +/- 0.46 pmol/10(6) platelets produced by adult and neonatal platelet-rich
plasma, respectively. In response to 200 microM epinephrine, adult platelets
produced 1.03 +/- 0.39 pmol TXB2/10(6) platelets while neonatal platelet TXB2
production was significantly decreased (0.15 +/- 0.04; P less than 0.05).
Thromboxane production in response to AA, however, was markedly elevated in
neonatal platelet-rich plasma. When 200 and 400 microM concentrations of AA were 
used as the aggregating stimuli, neonatal platelet rich plasma produced 3.17 +/- 
0.77 and 8.0 +/- 1.47 pmol TXB2/10(6) platelets, respectively. These values were 
significantly elevated P less than 0.02 and less than 0.005) when compared to
mean values of 0.41 +/- 0.10 and 3.32 +/- 0.15 pmol in adult platelet-rich
plasma.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 6435080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Eur J Pharmacol. 1984 Aug 17;103(3-4):211-21.

Augmented thromboxane generation by mesenteric arteries from pancreatectomized
diabetic dogs is coincident with the vascular tone enhancement evoked by Na
arachidonate and prostacyclin.

Sterin-Borda L, Franchi AM, Borda ES, Del Castillo E, Gimeno MF, Gimeno AL.

We studied the relationships between arachidonic acid (AA) metabolism and
contractile responses to Na arachidonate (NaA) and the prostaglandins (PGs) in
mesenteric arteries isolated from sham-operated and totally pancreatectomized
dogs. PGE2 and PGF2 alpha produced a similar dose-dependent relaxation of
mesenteric arteries from normal and diabetic dogs. On the contrary, NaA and
prostacyclin (PGI2) enhanced the resting basal tone of arteries from
pancreatectomized animals but depressed it in arteries from intact normal control
or from sham-operated groups. Inhibitors of thromboxane A2 (TXA2) biosynthesis
abolished in vitro the vasoconstricting effect of NaA and PGI2 in diabetics
whereas inhibitors of PGI2 biosynthesis blocked the vasodilating influence of NaA
in normal mesenteric vessels. Additionally, antagonists of cyclooxygenase
activity prevented both the vasoconstricting and the vasodilating actions of NaA 
in normal and in diabetic arteries, respectively, as well as the PGI2 tone
enhancement in vessels from diabetics. In arteries from pancreatectomized animals
treated with insulin, PGI2 induced a biphasic (constriction and relaxation)
effect of a magnitude between that of effects seen in normal controls or
sham-operated and those in untreated diabetic animals. The basal radioconversion 
of exogenous [1-14C]AA, showed that mesenteric arteries from diabetic dogs
generated more TXB2 than did vessels from intact normal control or sham-operated 
dogs. Moreover, in the presence of exogenous PGI2, the vascular production of
TXB2 from AA in the diabetic group was significantly greater than that of
preparations not exposed to PGI2. The % conversion of AA into PGI2 (assessed as
6-oxo-PGF1 alpha) was similar in normal controls, in sham-operated and in
diabetic vessels. Insulin given in vivo abolished the greater basal conversion of
AA into TBX2 by mesenteric arteries from diabetic dogs and significantly
attenuated the enhanced prostacyclin-evoked generation of thromboxane. The
present results strongly suggest that the abnormal constricting response evoked
by NaA and PGI2 in mesenteric arteries from diabetic dogs could be related to the
generation of TXA2 by vessel walls.

PMID: 6436040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Thromb Haemost. 1983 Dec 30;50(4):857-9.

Transcoronary platelet thromboxane A2 formation without platelet trapping in
patients with coronary stenosis-effect of sulphinpyrazone treatment.

Cortellaro M, Boschetti C, Antoniazzi V, Moreo G, Repetto S, Verna E, Boscarini
M, Limido A, Binaghi G, Polli EE.

Platelet count, and plasma thromboxane B2 (TXB2) and circulating platelet
aggregates (CPA) were determined in the coronary sinus (CS), aortic bulb (AO) and
cubital vein (V) in 21 patients with stable angina and in 6 control subjects
before and after atrial pacing (AP). TXB2 measurements were repeated before and
after AP in 6 of the 21 angina patients after 15 days' sulphinpyrazone treatment.
Platelet count and CPA ratio were similar in angina patients and controls at all 
three sampling sites and were unchanged at AP peak. In the controls, basal TXB2
values in CS, AO and V were not significantly different and were unchanged at AP 
peak. In the angina patients compared with the controls, basal TXB2 values in the
AO, CS and V were not significantly different whereas the CS/AO TBX2 ratio was
significantly higher; at AP-induced ischaemia, CS TXB2 was significantly
increased and the CS/AO TXB2 ratio was increased. A weak but significant direct
correlation was found between CS/AO TXB2 ratio and coronary score.
Sulphinpyrazone treatment reduced CS TXB2 levels at rest and after AP, but not
the ischaemic threshold at AP.

PMID: 6665767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Prostaglandins. 1983 Apr;25(4):511-8.

Fetal-maternal secretion of prostaglandins in the cow.

Gimenez T, Louis TM, Henricks DM.

A study was conducted to measure the blood plasma concentrations of prostaglandin
F2 alpha (PGF2 alpha), 13,14-dihydro-15-keto-prostaglandin F (PGFM),
6-keto-prostaglandin F1 alpha (6-keto), prostaglandin uterine artery, uterine
vein, umbilical artery and umbilical vein in 24 cows from days 80 to 260 of
pregnancy. Blood was collected during surgery and all prostaglandins were
measured using specific radioimmunoassay procedures. Results indicate that PGF2
alpha blood levels are higher in the umbilical vessels and uterine vein than in
the ovarian vein and uterine artery. PGFM and PGE2 showed a trend towards higher 
values in the umbilical than in the maternal vessels, but the levels of 6-keto
and TBX2 were not different among the vessels studied. No differences across time
could be observed in any of the prostaglandins measured, partly due to the great 
variability in blood levels among animals during the same stage of pregnancy.

PMID: 6576447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


