
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Apr 1;6:23662. doi: 10.1038/srep23662.

Mild decrease in TBX20 promoter activity is a potentially protective factor
against congenital heart defects in the Han Chinese population.

Yu LW(1), Wang F(1), Yang XY(2), Sun SN(1), Zheng YF(2), Li BB(2), Gui YH(1),
Wang HY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Institute of Reproduction and Development. Collaborative 
Innovation Center of Genetics and Development, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)The State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering. MOE Key Laboratory of
Contemporary Anthropology, Collaborative Innovation Center of Genetics and
Development, School of Life Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Congenital heart defects (CHDs) are one of the most common human birth defects
worldwide. TBX20 is a crucial transcription factor for the development of
embryonic cardiovascular system. Previous studies have demonstrated that
mutations in the TBX20 coding region contribute to familial and sporadic CHD
occurrence. However, it remains largely unknown whether variants in the TBX20
regulatory region are also related to CHDs. In this study, we sequenced the 2<U+2009>kb 
region upstream of the TBX20 transcription start site in 228 CHD patients and 292
controls in a Han Chinese population. Among the 8 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) identified, six SNPs are in strong linkage disequilibrium and the minor
alleles are associated with lower CHD risk (for rs10235849 chosen as tag SNP,
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0069, OR (95%<U+2009>CI)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.68 (0.51-0.90)). Functional analysis showed that the 
minor alleles have lower transcriptional activity than major alleles in both
human heart tissues and three cell lines. The electrophoretic mobility shift
assay suggested that TBX20 minor alleles may exhibit higher binding affinity with
certain transcription repressors. Our results indicate that a moderately lower
TBX20 activity potentially reduces CHD risk in the Han Chinese population,
providing new insight in the study of CHD etiology.

PMID: 27034249  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Mol Cell Biochem. 2016 Mar;414(1-2):129-36. doi: 10.1007/s11010-016-2666-5. Epub 
2016 Feb 19.

Role of cardiac TBX20 in dilated cardiomyopathy.

Mittal A(1), Sharma R(2), Prasad R(2), Bahl A(1), Khullar M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh, India. (2)Department of Experimental Medicine and
Biotechnology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh, India. (3)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biotechnology,
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India.
madhu.khullar@gmail.com.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is an important cause of heart failure and sudden
cardiac death worldwide. Transcription factor TBX20 has been shown to play a
crucial role in cardiac development and maintenance of adult mouse heart. Recent 
studies suggest that TBX20 may have a role in pathophysiology of DCM. In the
present study, we examined TBX20 expression in idiopathic DCM patients and in an 
animal model of cardiomyopathy, and studied its correlation with
echocardiographic indices of LV function. Endomyocardial biopsies (EMBs) from
intraventricular septal from the right ventricle region were obtained from
idiopathic DCM patients (IDCM, n = 30) and from patients with ventricular septal 
defect (VSD, n = 14) with normal LVEF who served as controls. An animal model of 
DCM was developed by right renal artery ligation in Wistar rats. Cardiac TBX20
mRNA levels were measured by real-time PCR in IDCM, controls, and in rats. The
role of DNA promoter methylation and copy number variation (CNVs) in regulating
TBX20 gene expression was also investigated. Cardiac TBX20 mRNA levels were
significantly increased (8.9 fold, p < 0.001) in IDCM patients and in RAL rats as
compared to the control group. Cardiac TBX20 expression showed a negative
correlation with LVEF (r = -0.71, p < 0.001) and a positive correlation with left
ventricular end-systolic volume (r = 0.39, p = 0.038). No significant difference 
in TBX20 CNVs and promoter methylation was observed between IDCM patients and
control group. Our results suggest a potential role of TBX20 in pathophysiology
of DCM.

PMID: 26895318  [PubMed - in process]


3. Circulation. 2016 Mar 15;133(11):1081-92. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.019357.
Epub 2016 Feb 3.

Overexpression of Tbx20 in Adult Cardiomyocytes Promotes Proliferation and
Improves Cardiac Function After Myocardial Infarction.

Xiang FL(1), Guo M(1), Yutzey KE(2).

Author information: 
(1)From Heart Institute, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, OH (F.-l.X.,
K.E.Y.); and Department of Electrical Engineering and Computing Systems,
University of Cincinnati, OH (M.G.). (2)From Heart Institute, Cincinnati
Children's Medical Center, OH (F.-l.X., K.E.Y.); and Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computing Systems, University of Cincinnati, OH (M.G.).
katherine.yutzey@cchmc.org.

BACKGROUND: Adult mammalian cardiomyocytes (CMs) have the potential to
proliferate, but this is not sufficient to generate adequate CMs after myocardial
infarction (MI). The transcription factor Tbx20 is required for CM proliferation 
during development and adult CM homeostasis. The ability of Tbx20 overexpression 
(Tbx20(OE)) to promote adult CM proliferation and to improve cardiac function
after MI was examined.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Tbx20(OE) was induced specifically in adult mouse
differentiated CMs. Increased CM proliferation and fetal-like characteristics
were found in Tbx20(OE) hearts compared with controls without causing pathology 4
weeks after Tbx20(OE) at baseline. Moreover, Tbx20(OE) in adult CM after MI
significantly improved survival, cardiac function, and infarct size 4 weeks after
MI. Improved cardiac repair, as indicated by increased CM proliferation and
capillary density, was observed in the MI border zone of Tbx20(OE) hearts
compared with controls. Expression of proliferation activator (cyclin D1, E1, and
IGF1) and fetal contractile protein (ssTNI, ßMHC) mRNA was increased whereas
negative cell-cycle regulators (p21, Meis1) were decreased in Tbx20(OE) hearts
compared with controls under both baseline and MI conditions. Tbx20(OE) in adult 
hearts activates multiple proproliferation pathways, including Akt, YAP and BMP. 
Interestingly, p21, Meis1, and a novel cell-cycle inhibitory gene, Btg2, are
directly bound and repressed by Tbx20 with induction of proliferation in neonatal
CM.
CONCLUSIONS: Tbx20(OE), specifically in adult CM, activates multiple cardiac
proliferative pathways, directly represses cell-cycle inhibitory genes p21,
Meis1, and Btg2, promotes adult CM proliferation; and preserves cardiac
performance after MI.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4792775 [Available on 2017-03-15]
PMID: 26841808  [PubMed - in process]


4. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2015 Oct;54(10):860-4.

[Association between Tbx20 gene polymorphism and congenital atrial septal
defects].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma Y, Xiang Y, Li X(1), Yang Y, Ma Y, Xie X, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, the First Affiliated Hospital to Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi 830054, China; Email: LIXM505@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SPN) of Tbx20 gene and congenital atrial septal defects (ASD) in the Xinjiang
Han population.
METHODS: A total of 214 ASD patients and 382 controls were included in the
present study. Two SNPs (rs17675131, rs4720169) in Tbx20 gene were genotyped by
TaqMan SNP genotyping method.
RESULTS: The distribution of the rs17675131 of Tbx20 were significantly different
between normal controls and ASD patients (P = 0.014), in which both the A/G
allele distribution (P = 0.004) and the dominant model (GG vs AG + AA) were
significantly different between the 2 groups (P = 0.007, OR = 0.626). Same is
true for the rs4720169 SNP. Its genotype showed significantly different
distributions between the 2 groups (P = 0.016) specifically for the A/G allele
distribution frequencies (P = 0.016) and the recessive model (AA vs AG + GG) (P =
0.008, OR = 1.96). The A-A haplotype was found to be associated with ASD.
CONCLUSION: Both rs17675131 and rs4720169 of Tbx20 gene are associated with
congenital ASD in the Xinjiang Han population in China.

PMID: 26675025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biol Open. 2015 Nov 18;4(12):1707-14. doi: 10.1242/bio.013565.

The expression of the T-box selector gene midline in the leg imaginal disc is
controlled by both transcriptional regulation and cell lineage.

Svendsen PC(1), Ryu JR(1), Brook WJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, Alberta Children's Hospital Research
Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cumming School of
Medicine, University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary T2N4N1, Alberta,
Canada. (2)Genes and Development Research Group, Alberta Children's Hospital
Research Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cumming
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary
T2N4N1, Alberta, Canada brook@ucalgary.ca.

The Drosophila Tbx20 homologs midline and H15 act as selector genes for ventral
fate in Drosophila legs. midline and H15 expression defines the ventral domain of
the leg and the two genes are necessary and sufficient for the development of
ventral fate. Ventral-specific expression of midline and H15 is activated by
Wingless (Wg) and repressed by Decapentaplegic (Dpp). Here we identify VLE, a
5 kb enhancer that drives ventral specific expression in the leg disc that is
very similar to midline expression. Subdivision of VLE identifies two regions
that mediate both activation and repression and third region that only mediates
repression. Loss- and gain-of-function genetic mosaic analysis shows that the
activating and repressing regions respond to Wg and Dpp signaling respectively.
All three repression regions depend on the activity of
Mothers-against-decapentaplegic, a Drosophila r-Smad that mediates Dpp signaling,
and respond to ectopic expression of the Dpp target genes optomoter-blind and
Dorsocross 3. However, only one repression region is responsive to loss of
schnurri, a co-repressor required for direct repression by Dpp-signaling. Thus,
Dpp signaling restricts midline expression through both direct repression and
through the activation of downstream repressors. We also find that midline and
H15 expression are both subject to cross-repression and feedback inhibition.
Finally, a lineage analysis indicates that ventral midline-expressing cells and
dorsal omb-expressing cells do not mix during development. Together this data
indicates that the ventral-specific expression of midline results from both
transcriptional regulation and from a lack of cell-mixing between dorsal and
ventral cells.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4736030
PMID: 26581591  [PubMed]


6. J Hum Genet. 2016 Feb;61(2):157-62. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.126. Epub 2015 Oct 22.

Genetic mutation analysis in Japanese patients with non-syndromic congenital
heart disease.

Yoshida A(1,)(2), Morisaki H(1,)(2,)(3), Nakaji M(1,)(3), Kitano M(4), Kim KS(5),
Sagawa K(6), Ishikawa S(6), Satokata I(7), Mitani Y(8), Kato H(5), Hamaoka K(9), 
Echigo S(4), Shiraishi I(4), Morisaki T(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Genetics, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular
Center Research Institute, Suita, Japan. (2)Department of Medical Genetics,
National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan. (3)Department of
Molecular Pathophysiology, Osaka University Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Suita, Japan. (4)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, National Cerebral 
and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan. (5)Division of Cardiology, National
Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Pediatric
Cardiology, Fukuoka Children's Hospital Medical Center, Fukuoka, Japan.
(7)Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata,
Japan. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tsu, Japan. (9)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Nephrology, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyoto,
Japan.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defect occurring in
humans and some transcriptional factors have been identified as causative.
However, additional mutation analysis of these genes is necessary to develop
effective diagnostic and medical treatment methods. We conducted sequence
analysis of the coding regions of NKX2.5, GATA4, TBX1, TBX5, TBX20, CFC1 and ZIC3
in 111 Japanese patients with non-syndromic CHD and 9 of their relatives. All
patient samples were also analyzed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification using probes involved in chromosome deletion related to CHD. Five
novel variations of TBX5, GATA4 and TBX20 were detected in 6 of the patients,
whereas none were found in 200 controls. The TBX5 variation p.Pro108Thr, located 
in the T-box domain, was identified in a patient with tricuspid atresia, an
exon-intron boundary variation of GATA4 (IVS4+5G>A) was detected in a Tetralogy
of Fallot patient and an 8p23 microdeletion was detected in one patient with
atrioventricular septal defect and psychomotor delay. A total of seven
non-synonymous polymorphisms were found in the patients and controls.
Accumulation of novel variations of genes involving the cardiac development may
be required for better understanding of CHD.

PMID: 26490186  [PubMed - in process]


7. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2016 Feb 1;54(2):325-32. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2015-0328.

TBX20 loss-of-function mutation associated with familial dilated cardiomyopathy.

Zhao CM, Bing-Sun, Song HM, Wang J, Xu WJ, Jiang JF, Qiu XB, Yuan F, Xu JH, Yang 
YQ.

BACKGROUND: Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a major cause of congestive heart
failure, sudden cardiac death and cardiac transplantation. Aggregating evidence
highlights the genetic origin of DCM. However, DCM is a genetically heterogeneous
disorder, and the genetic components underlying DCM in most cases remain unknown.
METHODS: The coding regions and splicing junction sites of the TBX20 gene were
sequenced in 120 unrelated patients with idiopathic DCM. The available close
relatives of the index patient carrying an identified mutation and 300 unrelated 
ethnically matched healthy individuals used as controls were genotyped for TBX20.
The functional characteristics of the mutant TBX20 were assayed in contrast to
its wild-type counterpart by using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system.
RESULTS: A novel heterozygous TBX20 mutation, p.F256I, was identified in a family
with DCM transmitted in an autosomal dominant fashion, which co-segregated with
DCM in the family with complete penetrance. The missense mutation was absent in
600 control chromosomes and the altered amino acid was completely conserved
evolutionarily among various species. Functional assays revealed that the mutant 
TBX20 had significantly diminished transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the
mutation markedly reduced the synergistic activation of TBX20 with NKX2-5 or
GATA4.
CONCLUSIONS: This study links TBX20 loss-of-function mutation to idiopathic DCM
in humans for the first time, providing novel insight into the molecular
mechanism underpinning DCM.

PMID: 26118961  [PubMed - in process]


8. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2015 Oct;168(7):557-63. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32330. Epub 2015 Jun 16.

A genome-wide association study of suicidal behavior.

Galfalvy H(1,)(2), Haghighi F(1), Hodgkinson C(3), Goldman D(3), Oquendo MA(1),
Burke A(1), Huang YY(1), Giegling I(4), Rujescu D(4), Bureau A(5), Turecki G(6), 
Mann JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York City, New York.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Columbia University, New York City, New York.
(3)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. (4)Psychiatric
Clinic, Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Munich, Germany. (5)Centre de
recherche de l'Institut universitaire en santé mentale de Québec and Département 
de médecine sociale et préventive, Université Laval, Quebec City, Canada.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Genome wide array studies have reported limited success in identifying genetic
markers conferring risk for suicidal behavior (SB). This may be attributable to
study designs with primary outcome other than SB. We performed a GWAS on suicides
and cases with a history of nonfatal suicide attempts compared with psychiatric
controls and healthy volunteers. A consortium of USA, Canadian and German teams
assembled two groups of cases (suicide attempters and suicides, N = 577) and
non-attempter psychiatric and healthy controls (N = 1,233). Logistic regression
was used to test genotype-suicidal behavior association. The test was repeated
separating suicide attempt and completed suicide as outcomes. No SNP reached
genome-wide significance, but several SNPs within STK3, ADAMTS14, PSME2, and
TBX20 genes reached P < 1 × 10(-5) . The top SNPs for the suicide attempt
analysis included two from DPP10, one from CTNNA3 and one from STK32B. In the
suicide analysis we found seven SNPs from the TBX20 gene in the top hits. Pathway
analysis identified the following pathways: "Cellular Assembly and Organization,"
"Nervous System Development and Function," "Cell Death and Survival,"
"Immunological Disease," "Infectious Disease," and "Inflammatory Response." The
top genes in the SB analysis did not overlap with those in the ideation analysis.
No genome wide significant results suggest that susceptibility to SB has genetic 
risk factors with smaller effect sizes. The strongest candidate genes, ADAMTS14, 
and PSME2 (both linked to inflammatory response), STK3 (neuronal cell death), and
TBX20 (brainstem motor neuron development), have not been previously reported in 
association with suicide and warrant further study.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26079190  [PubMed - in process]


9. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 May 1;16:141. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0578-0.

VISIONET: intuitive visualisation of overlapping transcription factor networks,
with applications in cardiogenic gene discovery.

Nim HT(1,)(2), Furtado MB(3), Costa MW(4), Rosenthal NA(5,)(6,)(7), Kitano
H(8,)(9,)(10,)(11), Boyd SE(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Institute (SBI) Australia, Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
3800, Australia. hieu.nim@monash.edu. (2)Australian Regenerative Medicine
Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia. hieu.nim@monash.edu.
(3)Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
3800, Australia. milena.furtado@monash.edu. (4)Australian Regenerative Medicine
Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia.
mauro.dacosta@monash.edu. (5)Systems Biology Institute (SBI) Australia, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia. nadia.rosenthal@monash.edu.
(6)Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
3800, Australia. nadia.rosenthal@monash.edu. (7)National Heart and Lung
Institute, Imperial College London, London, W12 0NN, UK.
nadia.rosenthal@monash.edu. (8)Systems Biology Institute (SBI) Australia, Monash 
University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia. kitano@sbi.jp. (9)Australian
Regenerative Medicine Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800,
Australia. kitano@sbi.jp. (10)Sony Computer Science Laboratories, Inc.,
Higashigotanda, Shinagawa, Tokyo, Japan. kitano@sbi.jp. (11)Okinawa Institute of 
Science and Technology, Onna, Onna-son, Kunigami, Okinawa, Japan. kitano@sbi.jp. 
(12)Systems Biology Institute (SBI) Australia, Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
3800, Australia. sarah.boyd@monash.edu. (13)Australian Regenerative Medicine
Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia.
sarah.boyd@monash.edu.

BACKGROUND: Existing de novo software platforms have largely overlooked a
valuable resource, the expertise of the intended biologist users. Typical data
representations such as long gene lists, or highly dense and overlapping
transcription factor networks often hinder biologists from relating these results
to their expertise.
RESULTS: VISIONET, a streamlined visualisation tool built from experimental
needs, enables biologists to transform large and dense overlapping transcription 
factor networks into sparse human-readable graphs via numerically filtering. The 
VISIONET interface allows users without a computing background to interactively
explore and filter their data, and empowers them to apply their specialist
knowledge on far more complex and substantial data sets than is currently
possible. Applying VISIONET to the Tbx20-Gata4 transcription factor network led
to the discovery and validation of Aldh1a2, an essential developmental gene
associated with various important cardiac disorders, as a healthy adult cardiac
fibroblast gene co-regulated by cardiogenic transcription factors Gata4 and
Tbx20.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate with experimental validations the utility of VISIONET
for expertise-driven gene discovery that opens new experimental directions that
would not otherwise have been identified.

PMCID: PMC4426166
PMID: 25929466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:718786. doi: 10.1155/2015/718786. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Novel mutations in the transcriptional activator domain of the human TBX20 in
patients with atrial septal defect.

Monroy-Muñoz IE(1), Pérez-Hernández N(1), Rodríguez-Pérez JM(1), Muñoz-Medina
JE(2), Angeles-Martínez J(1), García-Trejo JJ(3), Morales-Ríos E(3), Massó F(4), 
Sandoval-Jones JP(5), Cervantes-Salazar J(6), García-Montes JA(7),
Calderón-Colmenero J(5), Vargas-Alarcón G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio
Chávez, 14080 Mexico City, Mexico. (2)Central Laboratory of Epidemiology,
Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, 02900 Mexico City, Mexico. (3)Department of
Biology, Chemistry Faculty, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 04510 Mexico
City, Mexico. (4)Department of Physiology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología
Ignacio Chávez, 14080 Mexico City, Mexico. (5)Department of Pediatric Cardiology,
Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, 14080 Mexico City, Mexico.
(6)Department of Congenital Heart Disease Surgery, Department of Pediatric
Cardiology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, 14080 Mexico City, 
Mexico. (7)Department of Interventional Cardiology, Instituto Nacional de
Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, 14080 Mexico City, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: The relevance of TBX20 gene in heart development has been
demonstrated in many animal models, but there are few works that try to elucidate
the effect of TBX20 mutations in human congenital heart diseases. In these
studies, all missense mutations associated with atrial septal defect (ASD) were
found in the DNA-binding T-box domain, none in the transcriptional activator
domain.
METHODS: We search for TBX20 mutations in a group of patients with ASD or
ventricular septal defect (VSD) using the High Resolution Melting (HRM) method
and DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: We report three missense mutations (Y309D, T370O, and M395R) within the 
transcriptional activator domain of human TBX20 that were associated with ASD.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first association of TBX20 transcriptional activator
domain missense mutations with ASD. These findings could have implications for
diagnosis, genetic screening, and patient follow-up.

PMCID: PMC4365367
PMID: 25834824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mech Dev. 2015 May;136:8-29. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2015.02.005. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

The drosophila T-box transcription factor midline functions within Insulin/Akt
and c-Jun-N terminal kinase stress-reactive signaling pathways to regulate
interommatial bristle formation and cell survival.

Chen QB(1), Das S(1), Visic P(1), Buford KD(1), Zong Y(2), Buti W(1), Odom KR(1),
Lee H(1), Leal SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Biological Sciences, USM, USA. (2)The Department of Polymer 
and High Performance Materials, USM, USA. (3)The Department of Biological
Sciences, USM, USA. Electronic address: sandra.leal@usm.edu.

We recently reported that the T-box transcription factor midline (mid) functions 
within the Notch-Delta signaling pathway to specify sensory organ precursor (SOP)
cell fates in early-staged pupal eye imaginal discs and to suppress apoptosis
(Das et al.). From genetic and allelic modifier screens, we now report that mid
interacts with genes downstream of the insulin receptor(InR)/Akt,
c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) and Notch signaling pathways to regulate
interommatidial bristle (IOB) formation and cell survival. One of the most
significant mid-interacting genes identified from the modifier screen is dFOXO, a
transcription factor exhibiting a nucleocytoplasmic subcellular distribution
pattern. In common with dFOXO, we show that Mid exhibits a nucleocytoplasmic
distribution pattern within WT third-instar larval (3(o)L) tissue homogenates.
Because dFOXO is a stress-responsive factor, we assayed the effects of either
oxidative or metabolic stress responses on modifying the mid mutant phenotype
which is characterized by a 50% loss of IOBs within the adult compound eye. While
metabolic starvation stress does not affect the mid mutant phenotype, either 1<U+2009>mM
paraquat or 20% coconut oil, oxidative stress inducers, partially suppresses the 
mid mutant phenotype resulting in a significant recovery of IOBs. Another
significant mid-interacting gene we identified is groucho (gro). Mid and Gro are 
predicted to act as corepressors of the enhancer-of-split gene complex downstream
of Notch. Immunolabeling WT and dFOXO null 3(o)L eye-antennal imaginal discs with
anti-Mid and anti-Engrailed (En) antibodies indicate that dFOXO is required to
activate Mid and En expression within photoreceptor neurons of the eye disc.
Taken together, these studies show that Mid and dFOXO serve as critical effectors
of cell fate specification and survival within integrated Notch, InR/dAkt, and
JNK signaling pathways during 3(o)L and pupal eye imaginal disc development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4479208 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25748605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Mar 15;183:117-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.01.049. Epub
2015 Jan 27.

Signaling molecules, transcription growth factors and other regulators revealed
from in-vivo and in-vitro models for the regulation of cardiac development.

Meganathan K(1), Sotiriadou I(1), Natarajan K(1), Hescheler J(1), Sachinidis
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology and
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Germany.
(2)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology and
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Germany.
Electronic address: A.Sachinidis@uni-koeln.de.

Several in-vivo heart developmental models have been applied to decipher the
cardiac developmental patterning encompassing early, dorsal, cardiac and visceral
mesoderm as well as various transcription factors such as Gata, Hand, Tin, Dpp,
Pnr. The expression of cardiac specific transcription factors, such as Gata4,
Tbx5, Tbx20, Tbx2, Tbx3, Mef2c, Hey1 and Hand1 are of fundamental significance
for the in-vivo cardiac development. Not only the transcription factors, but also
the signaling molecules involved in cardiac development were conserved among
various species. Enrichment of the bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) in the
anterior lateral plate mesoderm is essential for the initiation of myocardial
differentiation and the cardiac developmental process. Moreover, the expression
of a number of cardiac transcription factors and structural genes initiate
cardiac differentiation in the medial mesoderm. Other signaling molecules such as
TGF-beta, IGF-1/2 and the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) play a significant role 
in cardiac repair/regeneration, ventricular heart development and specification
of early cardiac mesoderm, respectively. The role of the Wnt signaling in cardiac
development is still controversial discussed, as in-vitro results differ
dramatically in relation to the animal models. Embryonic stem cells (ESC) were
utilized as an important in-vitro model for the elucidation of the cardiac
developmental processes since they can be easily manipulated by numerous
signaling molecules, growth factors, small molecules and genetic manipulation.
Finally, in the present review the dynamic role of the long noncoding RNA and
miRNAs in the regulation of cardiac development are summarized and discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25662074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Apr;35(4):1058-66. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2077. Epub 2015 Jan
22.

TBX20 loss-of-function mutation contributes to double outlet right ventricle.

Pan Y(1), Geng R(1), Zhou N(1), Zheng GF(1), Zhao H(1), Wang J(2), Zhao CM(2),
Qiu XB(3), Yang YQ(3), Liu XY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, P.R. China. (2)Department of Cardiology, Tongji
Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200065, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD), the most prevalent birth defect in humans
worldwide, is still a leading non-infectious cause of infant morbidity and
mortality. Increasing evidence demonstrates that genetic risk factors play a key 
role in the pathogenesis of CHD, and more than 50 genes have been linked to
various types of CHD. Nevertheless, CHD is a heterogeneous disorder and the
genetic components underpinning CHD in an overwhelming majority of cases remain
unknown. In the present study, the entire coding exons and flanking introns of
the TBX20 gene, which codes for a T-box transcription factor essential for the
proper development of the heart, were sequenced in a cohort of 146 unrelated
patients with CHD. The available relatives of the index patient harboring an
identified mutation and 200 unrelated ethnically matched healthy individuals used
as the controls were also genotyped for TBX20. The functional characteristics of 
the TBX20 mutation were assayed by using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system.
As a result, a novel heterozygous TBX20 mutation, p.R143W, was identified in an
index patient with double outlet right ventricle (DORV). Genetic analyses of the 
pedigree of the proband revealed that in the family, the mutation co-segregated
with DORV transmitted in an autosomal dominant pattern with complete penetrance. 
The missense mutation was absent in 400 control chromosomes and the altered amino
acid was completely conserved evolutionarily across species. Functional analysis 
revealed that mutant TBX20 had a significantly diminished transcriptional
activity compared with its wild-type counterpart. To the best of our knowledge,
this study is the first to report the association of TBX20 loss-of-function
mutation with increased susceptibility to DORV in humans, which provides novel
insight into the molecular mechanisms responsible for CHD, suggesting potential
implications for the antenatal prophylaxis of CHD.

PMID: 25625280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Genetics. 2015 Mar;199(3):777-91. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.174300. Epub 2015 Jan
21.

Muscle cell fate choice requires the T-box transcription factor midline in
Drosophila.

Kumar RP(1), Dobi KC(2), Baylies MK(2), Abmayr SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri 64110.
(2)Program in Developmental Biology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, New York 10065. (3)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City,
Missouri 64110 Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas
School of Medicine, Kansas City, Kansas 66160 sma@stowers.org.

Drosophila Midline (Mid) is an ortholog of vertebrate Tbx20, which plays roles in
the developing heart, migrating cranial motor neurons, and endothelial cells. Mid
functions in cell-fate specification and differentiation of tissues that include 
the ectoderm, cardioblasts, neuroblasts, and egg chambers; however, a role in the
somatic musculature has not been described. We identified mid in genetic and
molecular screens for factors contributing to somatic muscle morphogenesis. Mid
is expressed in founder cells (FCs) for several muscle fibers, and functions
cooperatively with the T-box protein H15 in lateral oblique muscle 1 and the
segment border muscle. Mid is particularly important for the specification and
development of the lateral transverse (LT) muscles LT3 and LT4, which arise by
asymmetric division of a single muscle progenitor. Mid is expressed in this
progenitor and its two sibling FCs, but is maintained only in the LT4 FC. Both
muscles were frequently missing in mid mutant embryos, and LT4-associated
expression of the transcription factor Krüppel (Kr) was lost. When present, LT4
adopted an LT3-like morphology. Coordinately, mid misexpression caused LT3 to
adopt an LT4-like morphology and was associated with ectopic Kr expression. From 
these data, we concluded that mid functions first in the progenitor to direct
development of LT3 and LT4, and later in the FCs to influence whichever of these 
differentiation profiles is selected. Mid is the first T-box factor shown to
influence LT3 and LT4 muscle identity and, along with the T-box protein
Optomotor-blind-related-gene 1 (Org-1), is representative of a new class of
transcription factors in muscle specification.

Copyright © 2015 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4349071
PMID: 25614583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Physiol Genomics. 2015 Mar;47(3):75-87. doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00115.2014. 
Epub 2014 Dec 29.

Comparative transcriptome profiling in human bicuspid aortic valve disease using 
RNA sequencing.

Padang R(1), Bagnall RD(2), Tsoutsman T(2), Bannon PG(3), Semsarian C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Agnes Ginges Centre for Molecular Cardiology, Centenary Institute, Sydney,
Australia; Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia;
Department of Cardiology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia; Baird 
Institute, Sydney, Australia; and. (2)Agnes Ginges Centre for Molecular
Cardiology, Centenary Institute, Sydney, Australia; Sydney Medical School,
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; (3)Sydney Medical School, University of 
Sydney, Sydney, Australia; Baird Institute, Sydney, Australia; and Department of 
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia. (4)Agnes
Ginges Centre for Molecular Cardiology, Centenary Institute, Sydney, Australia;
Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; Department of
Cardiology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia;
c.semsarian@centenary.org.au.

Intrinsic valvular degeneration and dysfunction is the most common complication
of bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) disease. Phenotypically, it ranges from calcific
aortic stenosis to redundant or prolapsing regurgitant leaflets. The underlying
molecular mechanism underpinning phenotype heterogeneity of valvular degeneration
in BAV is poorly understood. We used RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to identify genes
and pathways responsible for the development of valvular degeneration in BAV,
compared with tricuspid aortic valve (TAV). Comparative transcriptome analysis
was performed on total RNA of aortic valve tissues of patients with diseased BAV 
(n = 5) and calcified TAV (n = 3). RNA-seq findings were validated by RT-qPCR. A 
total of 59 and 177 genes were significantly up- and downregulated, respectively,
in BAV compared with TAV. Hierarchical clustering indicated heterogeneity within 
the BAV group, separating those with heavy calcification (BAVc) from those with
redundant leaflets and/or minimal calcification (BAVr). Interestingly, the gene
expression profile of the BAVc group closely resembled the TAV, with shared up-
and downregulation of inflammatory and NOTCH1 signaling pathways, respectively.
Downregulation of matrix protease ADAMTS9 and protein aggrecan were observed in
BAVr compared with TAV. Dysregulation of fetal gene programs were also present,
with notable downregulation of SEMA6B and SEMA3F in BAVr and BAVc compared with
TAV, respectively. Upregulation of TBX20 was observed exclusively in BAVr
compared with BAVc. In conclusion, diverging molecular mechanisms underpin
phenotype heterogeneity of valvular degeneration in BAV and data from the present
study suggest that there may be shared mechanisms leading to calcification in BAV
and TAV. Recognition of these pathways is fundamental to improve our
understanding of the molecular basis of human BAV disease.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 25547111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 18;9(12):e110752. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110752.
eCollection 2014.

Functional cardiomyocytes derived from Isl1 cardiac progenitors via Bmp4
stimulation.

Cagavi E(1), Bartulos O(2), Suh CY(3), Sun B(4), Yue Z(4), Jiang Z(2), Yue L(4), 
Qyang Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Section of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale School of Medicine, 
Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States of America; Department of Medical
Biology, School of Medicine, Istanbul Medipol University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Section of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale School of Medicine, 
Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States of America. (3)Yale Cardiovascular 
Research Center, Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New
Haven, CT, United States of America; Department of Genetics, Yale School of
Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States of America. (4)Department
of Cell Biology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT, United 
States of America. (5)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Section of
Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale Stem Cell Center, 
Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States of
America; Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United 
States of America; Vascular Biology and Therapeutics Program, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States of America.

As heart failure due to myocardial infarction remains a leading cause of
morbidity worldwide, cell-based cardiac regenerative therapy using cardiac
progenitor cells (CPCs) could provide a potential treatment for the repair of
injured myocardium. As adult CPCs may have limitations regarding tissue
accessibility and proliferative ability, CPCs derived from embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) could serve as an unlimited source of cells with high proliferative
ability. As one of the CPCs that can be derived from embryonic stem cells, Isl1
expressing cardiac progenitor cells (Isl1-CPCs) may serve as a valuable source of
cells for cardiac repair due to their high cardiac differentiation potential and 
authentic cardiac origin. In order to generate an unlimited number of Isl1-CPCs, 
we used a previously established an ESC line that allows for isolation of
Isl1-CPCs by green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression that is directed by the
mef2c gene, specifically expressed in the Isl1 domain of the anterior heart
field. To improve the efficiency of cardiac differentiation of Isl1-CPCs, we
studied the role of Bmp4 in cardiogenesis of Isl1-CPCs. We show an inductive role
of Bmp directly on cardiac progenitors and its enhancement on early cardiac
differentiation of CPCs. Upon induction of Bmp4 to Isl1-CPCs during
differentiation, the cTnT+ cardiomyocyte population was enhanced 2.8±0.4 fold for
Bmp4 treated CPC cultures compared to that detected for vehicle treated cultures.
Both Bmp4 treated and untreated cardiomyocytes exhibit proper
electrophysiological and calcium signaling properties. In addition, we observed a
significant increase in Tbx5 and Tbx20 expression in differentiation cultures
treated with Bmp4 compared to the untreated control, suggesting a link between
Bmp4 and Tbx genes which may contribute to the enhanced cardiac differentiation
in Bmp4 treated cultures. Collectively these findings suggest a cardiomyogenic
role for Bmp4 directly on a pure population of Isl1 expressing cardiac
progenitors, which could lead to enhancement of cardiac differentiation and
engraftment, holding a significant therapeutic value for cardiac repair in the
future.

PMCID: PMC4270687
PMID: 25522363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Pediatr Cardiol. 2015 Apr;36(4):737-42. doi: 10.1007/s00246-014-1073-5. Epub 2014
Dec 9.

Association of TBX20 gene polymorphism with congenital heart disease in Han
Chinese neonates.

Chen J(1), Sun F, Fu J, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, 23
Pingjiang Street, Hexi District, Tianjin, 300211, China.

As a transcription factor mainly expressed in cardiovascular system, T-box 20
(TBX20) plays an important role in embryonic cardiovascular system development
and adult heart function. Previous studies have identified associations of two
SNPs in the T-box DNA-binding domain of TBX20 with congenital heart disease (CHD)
in two Caucasian families, but the associations of TBX20 mutations underlying the
more common populations with CHD remain to be uncovered. In this study, 25
unrelated Chinese Han neonates with CHD and 25 healthy children as controls were 
investigated for TBX20 mutations. SNP genotyping was performed by PCR-DNA
sequencing. The selected SNPs were well genotyped and SNP rs3999941 was found to 
be strongly associated with CHD (p = 0.007). The minor allele of rs3999941 showed
a high-risk factor for CHD (OR 4.24; 95 % CI 1.41-12.71). Besides, we found a new
SNP site located at the 657th nucleotide of the exon 5 of TBX20 gene which may
also be associated with CHD, c.657A>C. The frequency was significantly different 
between two groups (p = 0.011), the minor allele of SNP c.657A>C also showed a
risk factor for CHD (OR 2.56; 95 % CI 1.02-6.46). These findings suggested that
the TC genotype of SNP rs3999941 and AC genotype of the new SNP c.657A>C in the
TBX20 gene may be risk factors for CHD and thus screening of these SNPs may have 
some implications in the prevention and treatment of CHD in Han Chinese children.

PMID: 25487630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Jan 1;584:135-40. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.09.056. Epub
2014 Oct 16.

LGR5/GPR49 is implicated in motor neuron specification in nervous system.

Song SJ(1), Mao XG(2), Wang C(3), Han AG(4), Yan M(5), Xue XY(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, PLA 254 Hospital, Tianjin, China; Department of
Neurosurgery, Hinan Branch of Chinese PLA General Hospital, Haitang Harbor,
Sanya, Hainan Province 572013, China. Electronic address: sjsong254@163.com.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China. Electronic address:
xgmao@hotmail.com. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, PLA 254 Hospital, Tianjin, China. (5)Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi
Province, China. (6)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China.

The biological roles of stem cell marker LGR5, the receptor for the Wnt-agonistic
R-spondins, for nervous system are poorly known. Bioinformatics analysis in
normal human brain tissues revealed that LGR5 is closely related with neuron
development and functions. Interestingly, LGR5 and its ligands R-spondins (RSPO2 
and RSPO3) are specifically highly expressed in projection motor neurons in the
spinal cord, brain stem and cerebral. Inhibition of Notch activity in neural stem
cells (NSCs) increased the percentage of neuronal cells and promoted LGR5
expression, while activation of Notch signal decreased neuronal cells and
inhibited the LGR5 expression. Furthermore, knockdown of LGR5 inhibited the
expression of neuronal markers MAP2, NeuN, GAP43, SYP and CHRM3, and also reduced
the expression of genes that program the identity of motor neurons, including
Isl1, Lhx3, PHOX2A, TBX20 and NEUROG2. Our data demonstrated that LGR5 is highly 
expressed in motor neurons in nervous system and is involved in their development
by regulating transcription factors that program motor neuron identity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25451725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Gene. 2015 Jan 25;555(2):448-57. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.10.045. Epub 2014 Oct
28.

Dinitrophenol modulates gene expression levels of angiogenic, cell survival and
cardiomyogenic factors in bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Ali A(1), Akhter MA(1), Haneef K(1), Khan I(1), Naeem N(1), Habib R(1), Kabir
N(1), Salim A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Panjwani Center for Molecular Medicine and Drug Research, International
Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences, University of Karachi,
Karachi-75270, Pakistan. (2)Dr. Panjwani Center for Molecular Medicine and Drug
Research, International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences, University
of Karachi, Karachi-75270, Pakistan. Electronic address: asmat.salim@iccs.edu.

Various preconditioning strategies influence regeneration properties of stem
cells. Preconditioned stem cells generally show better cell survival, increased
differentiation, enhanced paracrine effects, and improved homing to the injury
site by regulating the expression of tissue-protective cytokines and growth
factors. In this study, we analyzed gene expression pattern of growth factors
through RT-PCR after treatment of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) with a metabolic 
inhibitor, 2,4 dinitrophenol (DNP) and subsequent re-oxygenation for periods of
2, 6, 12 and 24h. These growth factors play important roles in cardiomyogenesis, 
angiogenesis and cell survival. Mixed pattern of gene expression was observed
depending on the period of re-oxygenation. Of the 13 genes analyzed, ankyrin
repeat domain 1 (Ankrd1) and GATA6 were downregulated after DNP treatment and
subsequent re-oxygenations. Ankrd1 expression was, however, increased after 24h
of re-oxygenation. Placental growth factor (Pgf), endoglin (Eng), neuropilin
(Nrp1) and jagged 1 (Jag1) were up-regulated after DNP treatment. Gradual
increase was observed as re-oxygenation advances and by the end of the
re-oxygenation period the expression started to decrease and ultimately regained 
normal values. Epiregulin (Ereg) was not expressed in normal MSCs but its
expression increased gradually from 2 to 24h after re-oxygenation. No change was 
observed in the expression level of connective tissue growth factor (Ctgf) at any
time period after re-oxygenation. Kindlin3, kinase insert domain receptor (Kdr), 
myogenin (Myog), Tbx20 and endothelial tyrosine kinase (Tek) were not expressed
either in normal cells or cells treated with DNP. It can be concluded from the
present study that MSCs adjust their gene expression levels under the influence
of DNP induced metabolic stress. Their levels of expression vary with varying
re-oxygenation periods. Preconditioning of MSCs with DNP can be used for
enhancing the potential of these cells for better regeneration.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Jul;35(7):872-3.

[Association between the SNPs of human Tbx20 gene and congenital atrial septal
defects in Uygur population of Xinjiang region].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma Y, Li X, Yang Y, Ma Y, Xie X, Li H, Liu F.

PMID: 25326924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2014 Sep;15(9):830-7. doi: 10.1631/jzus.B1400062.

A novel variant in TBX20 (p.D176N) identified by whole-exome sequencing in
combination with a congenital heart disease related gene filter is associated
with familial atrial septal defect.

Liu JJ(1), Fan LL, Chen JL, Tan ZP, Yang YF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, the Second Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha 410011, China; Department of Cell Biology, School of
Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha 410013, China; Center of
Clinical Gene Diagnosis and Therapy, the State Key Laboratory of Medical
Genetics, the Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410011,
China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause of birth defects, and its
etiology is not completely understood. Atrial septal defect (ASD) is one of the
most common defects of CHD. Previous studies have demonstrated that mutations in 
the transcription factor T-box 20 (TBX20) contribute to congenital ASD.
Whole-exome sequencing in combination with a CHD-related gene filter was used to 
detect a family of three generations with ASD. A novel TBX20 mutation, c.526G>A
(p.D176N), was identified and co-segregated in all affected members in this
family. This mutation was predicted to be deleterious by bioinformatics programs 
(SIFT, Polyphen2, and MutationTaster). This mutation was also not presented in
the current Single Nucleotide Polymorphism Database (dbSNP) or National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) Exome Sequencing Project (ESP). In conclusion, 
our finding expands the spectrum of TBX20 mutations and provides additional
support that TBX20 plays important roles in cardiac development. Our study also
provided a new and cost-effective analysis strategy for the genetic study in
small CHD pedigree.

PMCID: PMC4162884
PMID: 25183037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 5;9(8):e95453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095453. eCollection 
2014.

Functionally significant, rare transcription factor variants in tetralogy of
Fallot.

Töpf A(1), Griffin HR(1), Glen E(1), Soemedi R(1), Brown DL(1), Hall D(1), Rahman
TJ(1), Eloranta JJ(2), Jüngst C(3), Stuart AG(4), O'Sullivan J(5), Keavney BD(6),
Goodship JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom. (2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Department of
Medicine II, Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg, Germany. (4)Bristol
Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, United Kingdom. (5)Paediatric Cardiology,
Freeman Hospital Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle
upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (6)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; Institute of Cardiovascular
Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: Rare variants in certain transcription factors involved in cardiac
development cause Mendelian forms of congenital heart disease. The purpose of
this study was to systematically assess the frequency of rare transcription
factor variants in sporadic patients with the cardiac outflow tract malformation 
tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We sequenced the coding, 5'UTR, and 3'UTR regions of twelve 
transcription factor genes implicated in cardiac outflow tract development
(NKX2.5, GATA4, ISL1, TBX20, MEF2C, BOP/SMYD1, HAND2, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXH, FOXA2
and TBX1) in 93 non-syndromic, non-Mendelian TOF cases. We also analysed Illumina
Human 660W-Quad SNP Array data for copy number variants in these genes; none were
detected. Four of the rare variants detected have previously been shown to affect
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays: FOXC1 p.P297S, FOXC2 p.Q444R, FOXH1 
p.S113T and TBX1 p.P43_G61del PPPPRYDPCAAAAPGAPGP. Two further rare variants,
HAND2 p.A25_A26insAA and FOXC1 p.G378_G380delGGG, A488_491delAAAA, affected
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays. Each of these six functionally
significant variants was present in a single patient in the heterozygous state;
each of the four for which parental samples were available were maternally
inherited. Thus in the 93 TOF cases we identified six functionally significant
mutations in the secondary heart field transcriptional network.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study indicates that rare genetic variants in the secondary
heart field transcriptional network with functional effects on protein function
occur in 3-13% of patients with TOF. This is the first report of a functionally
significant HAND2 mutation in a patient with congenital heart disease.

PMCID: PMC4122343
PMID: 25093829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Nov;115(11):1868-76. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24856.

Bone morphogenetic protein-10 induces cardiomyocyte proliferation and improves
cardiac function after myocardial infarction.

Sun L(1), Yu J, Qi S, Hao Y, Liu Y, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 
Xi'an 710032, China.

Heart disease is among the leading causes of death worldwide, and the limited
proliferation of mammalian cardiomyocytes prevents heart regeneration in response
to injury. Bone morphogenetic protein-10 (BMP10) exerts multiple roles in various
developmental events; however, the effect of BMP10 and the underlying mechanism
involved in cardiac repair remains unclear. After stimulation with the
recombinant BMP10, an obvious dose-dependent cardiomyocyte proliferation and
reentry of differentiated mammalian cardiomyocytes into the cell cycle was
observed. Furthermore, BMP10 stimulation strikingly enhanced Tbx20 expression.
Further analysis demonstrated that T-box 20 (Tbx20) was involved in BMP10-induced
proliferation of differentiated cardiomyocytes as preconditioning with Tbx20
siRNA significantly attenuated BMP10-induced DNA synthesis. In vivo, BMP10
induced rat cardiomyocyte DNA synthesis and cytokinesis. After myocardial
infarction (MI), BMP10 stimulated cardiomyocyte cell-cycle reentry and mitosis,
resulting in the decrease of infarct size and improvement of cardiac repair.
Taken together, these data indicated that BMP10 stimulated cardiomyocyte
proliferation and repaired cardiac function after heart injury. Consequently,
BMP10 may be a potential target for innovative strategies against heart failure.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24906204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dev Biol. 2014 Jun 15;390(2):191-207. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.03.008. Epub 2014
Mar 27.

AcvR1-mediated BMP signaling in second heart field is required for arterial pole 
development: implications for myocardial differentiation and regional identity.

Thomas PS(1), Rajderkar S(1), Lane J(1), Mishina Y(1), Kaartinen V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan - Ann
Arbor, 1011 N. University Ave, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (2)Department of
Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan - Ann Arbor, 1011 N.
University Ave, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. Electronic address: vesak@umich.edu.

BMP signaling plays an essential role in second heart field-derived heart and
arterial trunk development, including myocardial differentiation, right
ventricular growth, and interventricular, outflow tract and aortico-pulmonary
septation. It is mediated by a number of different BMP ligands, and receptors,
many of which are present simultaneously. The mechanisms by which they regulate
morphogenetic events and degree of redundancy amongst them have still to be
elucidated. We therefore assessed the role of BMP Type I receptor AcvR1 in
anterior second heart field-derived cell development, and compared it with that
of BmpR1a. By removing Acvr1 using the driver Mef2c[AHF]-Cre, we show that AcvR1 
plays an essential role in arterial pole morphogenesis, identifying defects in
outflow tract wall and cushion morphology that preceded a spectrum of septation
defects from double outlet right ventricle to common arterial trunk in mutants.
Its absence caused dysregulation in gene expression important for myocardial
differentiation (Isl1, Fgf8) and regional identity (Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx20, Tgfb2).
Although these defects resemble to some degree those in the equivalent Bmpr1a
mutant, a novel gene knock-in model in which Bmpr1a was expressed in the Acvr1
locus only partially restored septation in Acvr1 mutants. These data show that
both BmpR1a and AcvR1 are needed for normal heart development, in which they play
some non-redundant roles, and refine our understanding of the genetic and
morphogenetic processes underlying Bmp-mediated heart development important in
human congenital heart disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4057048
PMID: 24680892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Circ Res. 2014 Apr 25;114(9):1422-34. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.302530. Epub
2014 Mar 20.

Cardiogenic genes expressed in cardiac fibroblasts contribute to heart
development and repair.

Furtado MB(1), Costa MW, Pranoto EA, Salimova E, Pinto AR, Lam NT, Park A, Snider
P, Chandran A, Harvey RP, Boyd R, Conway SJ, Pearson J, Kaye DM, Rosenthal NA.

Author information: 
(1)From the Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute (M.B.F., M.W.C., E.A.P.,
E.S., A.R.P., A.C., N.A.R.), Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology
(A.R.P., R.B.), and Monash Biomedical Imaging (J.P.), Monash University,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia (N.T.L., D.M.K.); Department of Pediatrics,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis (P.S., S.J.C.); and Victor
Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, Australia
(R.P.H.).

RATIONALE: Cardiac fibroblasts are critical to proper heart function through
multiple interactions with the myocardial compartment, but appreciation of their 
contribution has suffered from incomplete characterization and lack of
cell-specific markers.
OBJECTIVE: To generate an unbiased comparative gene expression profile of the
cardiac fibroblast pool, identify and characterize the role of key genes in
cardiac fibroblast function, and determine their contribution to myocardial
development and regeneration.
METHODS AND RESULTS: High-throughput cell surface and intracellular profiling of 
cardiac and tail fibroblasts identified canonical mesenchymal stem cell and a
surprising number of cardiogenic genes, some expressed at higher levels than in
whole heart. While genetically marked fibroblasts contributed heterogeneously to 
interstitial but not cardiomyocyte compartments in infarcted hearts,
fibroblast-restricted depletion of one highly expressed cardiogenic marker, T-box
20, caused marked myocardial dysmorphology and perturbations in scar formation on
myocardial infarction.
CONCLUSIONS: The surprising transcriptional identity of cardiac fibroblasts, the 
adoption of cardiogenic gene programs, and direct contribution to cardiac
development and repair provoke alternative interpretations for studies on more
specialized cardiac progenitors, offering a novel perspective for reinterpreting 
cardiac regenerative therapies.

PMCID: PMC4083003
PMID: 24650916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Circ J. 2014;78(5):1224-33. Epub 2014 Mar 19.

Transcription profiles of the ductus arteriosus in Brown-Norway rats with
irregular elastic fiber formation.

Hsieh YT(1), Liu NM, Ohmori E, Yokota T, Kajimura I, Akaike T, Ohshima T, Goda N,
Minamisawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Medical Bioscience, Waseda University.

BACKGROUND: Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is one of the most common congenital
cardiovascular defects in children. The Brown-Norway (BN) inbred rat presents a
higher frequency of PDA. A previous study reported that 2 different quantitative 
trait loci on chromosomes 8 and 9 were significantly linked to PDA in this
strain. Nevertheless, the genetic or molecular mechanisms underlying PDA
phenotypes in BN rats have not been fully investigated yet.
METHODS AND RESULTS: It was found that the elastic fibers were abundant in the
subendothelial area but scarce in the media even in the closed ductus arteriosus 
(DA) of full-term BN neonates. DNA microarray analysis identified 52 upregulated 
genes (fold difference >2.5) and 23 downregulated genes (fold difference <0.4)
when compared with those of F344 control neonates. Among these genes, 8 (Tbx20,
Scn3b, Stac, Sphkap, Trpm8, Rup2, Slc37a2, and RGD1561216) are located in
chromosomes 8 and 9. Interestingly, it was also suggested that the significant
decrease in the expression levels of the PGE2-specfic receptor, EP4, plays a
critical role in elastogenesis in the DA.
CONCLUSIONS: BN rats exhibited dysregulation of elastogenesis in the DA. DNA
microarray analysis identified the candidate genes including EP4 involved in the 
DNA phenotype. Further investigation of these newly identified genes will
hopefully clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying the irregular formation of 
elastic fibers in PDA.

PMID: 24647370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2013;32(5):1137-50. doi: 10.1159/000354514. Epub 2013 Nov
11.

T-box20 suppresses oxidized low-density lipoprotein-induced human vascular
endothelial cell injury by upregulation of PPAR-<U+03B3>.

Shen T(1), Zhu Y, Patel J, Ruan Y, Chen B, Zhao G, Cao Y, Pang J, Guo H, Li H,
Man Y, Wang S, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Geriatrics, BeijingHospital and Beijing Institute of
Geriatrics, Ministry of Health, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammation disease which is initiated 
by endothelial cell injury Oxidized low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL) is directly 
associated with chronic vascular inflammation. Many transcription factors take
part in the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis. As a transcription
factor mainly expressed in cardiovascular system, T-box20 (Tbx20) plays an
important role in embryonic cardiovascular system development and homeostasis.
However, the role of Tbx20 in endothelial cell injury and atherosclerosis is
still not clear. We showed that Tbx20 might affect ox-LDL-induced inflammatory
responses in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs).
METHODS AND RESULTS: First, Tbx20 expression was down regulated in the C57BL/6
mice with high-fat diet-induced artery injury, which was accompanied by elevated 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and cell adhesion molecule expression.
Second, ox-LDL led to concurrent decreased Tbx20 expression and increased levels 
of ROS and adhesion molecules in the HUVECs. Third, over-expression of Tbx20 by
adenovirus reduced ox-LDL-induced HUVEC injury via attenuation of ROS generation 
and cell adhesion molecule expression. Fourth, knock down of Tbx20 by siRNA
significantly increased adhesion molecule expression and decreased cell
viability. Moreover, Tbx20 could directly regulate PPAR-<U+03B3> expression, as shown by
Tbx20 knock down and PPAR-<U+03B3> inhibition, which significantly reversed Tbx20's
HUVEC protection effect.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that misregulation of Tbx20 could reduce
HUVEC tolerance of ox-LDL-induced cell injury, suggesting that Tbx20 might be a
crucial regulator and potential therapeutic target for atherosclerosis.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24247152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Proteome Res. 2013 Dec 6;12(12):5395-409. doi: 10.1021/pr400818c. Epub 2013 Oct
3.

A Gro/TLE-NuRD corepressor complex facilitates Tbx20-dependent transcriptional
repression.

Kaltenbrun E(1), Greco TM, Slagle CE, Kennedy LM, Li T, Cristea IM, Conlon FL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biology and Genetics, University of North Carolina , Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, United States.

The cardiac transcription factor Tbx20 has a critical role in the proper
morphogenetic development of the vertebrate heart, and its misregulation has been
implicated in human congenital heart disease. Although it is established that
Tbx20 exerts its function in the embryonic heart through positive and negative
regulation of distinct gene programs, it is unclear how Tbx20 mediates proper
transcriptional regulation of its target genes. Here, using a combinatorial
proteomic and bioinformatic approach, we present the first characterization of
Tbx20 transcriptional protein complexes. We have systematically investigated
Tbx20 protein-protein interactions by immunoaffinity purification of tagged Tbx20
followed by proteomic analysis using GeLC-MS/MS, gene ontology classification,
and functional network analysis. We demonstrate that Tbx20 is associated with a
chromatin remodeling network composed of TLE/Groucho corepressors, members of the
Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex, the chromatin remodeling
ATPases RUVBL1/RUVBL2, and the T-box repressor Tbx18. We determined that the
interaction with TLE corepressors is mediated via an eh1 binding motif in Tbx20. 
Moreover, we demonstrated that ablation of this motif results in a failure to
properly assemble the repression network and disrupts Tbx20 function in vivo.
Importantly, we validated Tbx20-TLE interactions in the mouse embryonic heart,
and identified developmental genes regulated by Tbx20-TLE binding, thereby
confirming a primary role for a Tbx20-TLE repressor complex in embryonic heart
development. Together, these studies suggest a model in which Tbx20 associates
with a Gro/TLE-NuRD repressor complex to prevent inappropriate gene activation
within the forming heart.

PMCID: PMC4042526
PMID: 24024827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mech Dev. 2013 Nov-Dec;130(11-12):577-601. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2013.08.001. Epub
2013 Aug 17.

The Drosophila T-box transcription factor Midline functions within the
Notch-Delta signaling pathway to specify sensory organ precursor cell fates and
regulates cell survival within the eye imaginal disc.

Das S(1), Chen QB, Saucier JD, Drescher B, Zong Y, Morgan S, Forstall J,
Meriwether A, Toranzo R, Leal SM.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern Mississippi,
United States.

We report that the T-box transcription factor Midline (Mid), an evolutionary
conserved homolog of the vertebrate Tbx20 protein, functions within the
Notch-Delta signaling pathway essential for specifying the fates of sensory organ
precursor (SOP) cells. These findings complement an established history of
research showing that Mid regulates the cell-fate specification of diverse cell
types within the developing heart, epidermis and central nervous system. Tbx20
has been detected in unique neuronal and epithelial cells of embryonic eye
tissues in both mice and humans. However, the mechanisms by which either Mid or
Tbx20 function to regulate cell-fate specification or other critical aspects of
eye development including cell survival have not yet been elucidated. We have
also gathered preliminary evidence suggesting that Mid may play an indirect, but 
vital role in selecting SOP cells within the third-instar larval eye disc by
regulating the expression of the proneural gene atonal. During subsequent pupal
stages, Mid specifies SOP cell fates as a member of the Notch-Delta signaling
hierarchy and is essential for maintaining cell viability by inhibiting apoptotic
pathways. We present several new hypotheses that seek to understand the role of
Mid in regulating developmental processes downstream of the Notch receptor that
are critical for specifying unique cell fates, patterning the adult eye and
maintaining cellular homeostasis during eye disc morphogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4500660
PMID: 23962751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 25;8(7):e70149. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070149. Print 2013.

Lack of genetic interaction between Tbx20 and Tbx3 in early mouse heart
development.

Gavrilov S(1), Harvey RP, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York, United States of America.

Members of the T-box family of transcription factors are important regulators
orchestrating the complex regionalization of the developing mammalian heart.
Individual mutations in Tbx20 and Tbx3 cause distinct congenital heart
abnormalities in the mouse: Tbx20 mutations result in failure of heart looping,
developmental arrest and lack of chamber differentiation, while hearts of Tbx3
mutants progress further, loop normally but show atrioventricular convergence and
outflow tract defects. The two genes have overlapping areas of expression in the 
atrioventricular canal and outflow tract of the heart but their potential genetic
interaction has not been previously investigated. In this study we produced
compound mutants to investigate potential genetic interactions at the earliest
stages of heart development. We find that Tbx20; Tbx3 double heterozygous mice
are viable and fertile with no apparent abnormalities, while double homozygous
mutants are embryonic lethal by midgestation. Double homozygous mutant embryos
display abnormal cardiac morphogenesis, lack of heart looping, expression
patterns of cardiac genes and time of death that are indistinguishable from Tbx20
homozygous mutants. Prior to death, the double homozygotes show an overall
developmental delay similar to Tbx3 homozygous mutants. Thus the effects of Tbx20
are epistatic to Tbx3 in the heart but Tbx3 is epistatic to Tbx20 with respect to
developmental delay.

PMCID: PMC3723716
PMID: 23936153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Oct 9;168(4):3704-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.06.018. Epub
2013 Jul 17.

Tbx20 functions as an important regulator of estrogen-mediated cardiomyocyte
protection during oxidative stress.

Shen T(1), Yang C, Ding L, Zhu Y, Ruan Y, Cheng H, Qin W, Huang X, Zhang H, Man
Y, Liu D, Wang S, Bian Y, Xiao C, Zhao Y, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Geriatrics, Beijing Hospital and Beijing Institute of
Geriatrics, Ministry of Health, Beijing 100730, China.

BACKGROUND: As a transcription factor mainly expressed in cardiovascular system, 
T-box 20 (Tbx20) plays an important role in embryonic cardiovascular system
development and adult heart function. Here, we determined the mechanism by which 
Tbx20 regulates cardiomyocyte apoptosis and cardiomyopathies.
METHODS: We analyzed Tbx20 expression levels and apoptosis rates in normal and
heart failure human autopsy heart samples. Female C57BL/6 mice were
ovariectomized and treated with 17ß-estradiol to determine Tbx20 expression
levels. ROS production, TUNEL, DNA laddering, qRT-PCR, Western blot,
immunohistochemistry and ChIP analyses were performed on male C57BL/6 transverse 
aortic constriction-induced heart failure samples and on neonatal rat ventricular
myocytes that were treated with H2O2 to investigate the role of Tbx20 in
estrogen-mediated heart protection.
RESULTS: Tbx20 expression was down regulated during heart failure, accompanied by
elevated cardiomyocyte apoptotic levels in humans and mice. H2O2 led to a
concurrent decrease in Tbx20 expression and increase in apoptosis in cultured
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. Tbx20 overexpression reduced H2O2-induced
cardiomyocyte apoptosis and was associated with a profound inhibition of p38MAPK,
Bax and caspase3 and the activation of Bcl-2. Estrogen was able to protect
cardiomyocytes from H2O2-induced apoptosis by upregulating Tbx20 expression in a 
concentration-dependent manner. Tbx20 silencing increased oxidative
stress-induced apoptosis in H9c2 cells. Moreover, Tbx20 directly regulated Esrra 
expression to enhance the heart-protective effect of estrogen.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that Tbx20 functions as an important
regulator of estrogen-mediated cardiomyocyte protection during oxidative stress, 
suggesting that estorgen-Tbx20-ERR-a may represent a crucial regulatory cascade
and a potential therapeutic target for heart failure.

© 2013.

PMID: 23871353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Development. 2013 Aug;140(15):3176-87. doi: 10.1242/dev.092502. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Tbx20 acts upstream of Wnt signaling to regulate endocardial cushion formation
and valve remodeling during mouse cardiogenesis.

Cai X(1), Zhang W, Hu J, Zhang L, Sultana N, Wu B, Cai W, Zhou B, Cai CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, The Mindich Child Health
and Development Institute, and The Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Cardiac valves are essential to direct forward blood flow through the cardiac
chambers efficiently. Congenital valvular defects are prevalent among newborns
and can cause an immediate threat to survival as well as long-term morbidity.
Valve leaflet formation is a rigorously programmed process consisting of
endocardial epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT), mesenchymal cell
proliferation, valve elongation and remodeling. Currently, little is known about 
the coordination of the diverse signals that regulate endocardial cushion
development and valve elongation. Here, we report that the T-box transcription
factor Tbx20 is expressed in the developing endocardial cushions and valves
throughout heart development. Ablation of Tbx20 in endocardial cells causes
severe valve elongation defects and impaired cardiac function in mice. Our study 
reveals that endocardial Tbx20 is crucial for valve endocardial cell
proliferation and extracellular matrix development, but is not required for
initiation of EMT. Elimination of Tbx20 also causes aberrant Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling in the endocardial cushions. In addition, Tbx20 regulates Lef1, a key
transcriptional mediator for Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, in this developmental
process. Our study suggests a model in which Tbx20 regulates the Wnt pathway to
direct endocardial cushion maturation and valve elongation, and provides new
insights into the etiology of valve defects in humans.

PMCID: PMC3931733
PMID: 23824573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2013 Sep;62:203-13. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.05.018. Epub
2013 Jun 7.

Tbx20 promotes cardiomyocyte proliferation and persistence of fetal
characteristics in adult mouse hearts.

Chakraborty S(1), Sengupta A, Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Presidency University, Kolkata 700073, India.

While differentiated cardiomyocytes proliferate prior to birth, adult
cardiomyocytes in mammals exhibit relatively little proliferative activity. The
T-box transcription factor Tbx20 is necessary and sufficient to promote prenatal 
cardiomyocyte proliferation, and Tbx20 also is required for adult cardiac
homeostasis. The ability of Tbx20 to promote post-natal and adult cardiomyocyte
proliferation was examined in mice with cardiomyocyte-specific Tbx20
gain-of-function beginning in the fetal period. In adult hearts, increased Tbx20 
expression promotes cardiomyocyte proliferation and results in increased numbers 
of small, cycling, mononucleated cardiomyocytes, marked by persistent expression 
of fetal contractile protein genes. In adult cardiomyocytes in vivo and in
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes in culture, Tbx20 promotes the activation of
BMP2/pSmad1/5/8 and PI3K/AKT/GSK3ß/ß-catenin signaling pathways concomitant with 
increased cell proliferation. Inhibition of PI3K/AKT/GSK3ß/ß-catenin signaling
reduces, but does not eliminate, Tbx20-mediated increases in cell proliferation, 
providing evidence for parallel regulatory pathways downstream of BMP/Smad1/5/8
signaling in promoting cardiomyocyte proliferation after birth. Thus, Tbx20
overexpression beginning in the fetal period activates multiple cardiac
proliferative pathways after birth and maintains adult cardiomyocytes in an
immature state in vivo.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23751911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59444. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059444. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

DNA methylation profiles at precancerous stages associated with recurrence of
lung adenocarcinoma.

Sato T(1), Arai E, Kohno T, Tsuta K, Watanabe S, Soejima K, Betsuyaku T, Kanai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Tokyo, Japan.

The aim of this study was to clarify the significance of DNA methylation
alterations at precancerous stages of lung adenocarcinoma. Using single-CpG
resolution Infinium array, genome-wide DNA methylation analysis was performed in 
36 samples of normal lung tissue obtained from patients without any primary lung 
tumor, 145 samples of non-cancerous lung tissue (N) obtained from patients with
lung adenocarcinomas, and 145 samples of tumorous tissue (T). Stepwise
progression of DNA methylation alterations from normal lung tissue to
non-cancerous lung tissue obtained from patients with lung adenocarcinomas, and
then tumorous tissue samples, was observed at 3,270 CpG sites, suggesting that
non-cancerous lung tissue obtained from patients with lung adenocarcinomas was at
precancerous stages with DNA methylation alterations. At CpG sites of 2,083
genes, DNA methylation status in samples of non-cancerous lung tissue obtained
from patients with lung adenocarcinomas was significantly correlated with
recurrence after establishment of lung adenocarcinomas. Among such
recurrence-related genes, 28 genes are normally unmethylated (average ß-values
based on Infinium assay in normal lung tissue samples was less than 0.2) and
their DNA hypermethylation at precancerous stages was strengthened during
progression to lung adenocarcinomas (<U+0394>ß(T-N)>0.1). Among these 28 genes, we
focused on 6 for which implications in transcription regulation, apoptosis or
cell adhesion had been reported. DNA hypermethylation of the ADCY5, EVX1, GFRA1, 
PDE9A, and TBX20 genes resulted in reduced mRNA expression in tumorous tissue
samples. 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment of lung cancer cell lines restored the 
mRNA expression levels of these 5 genes. Reduced mRNA expression in tumorous
tissue samples was significantly correlated with tumor aggressiveness. These data
suggest that DNA methylation alterations at precancerous stages determine tumor
aggressiveness and outcome through silencing of specific genes.

PMCID: PMC3609833
PMID: 23544068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Apr;31(2):138-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2012.12.002.
Epub 2012 Dec 17.

Morphology of the facial motor nuclei in a rat model of autism during early
development.

Oyabu A(1), Tashiro Y, Oyama T, Ujihara K, Ohkawara T, Ida-Eto M, Narita M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy II, Graduate School of Medicine, Mie University, Japan.

The development of facial nuclei in animal models of disease is poorly
understood, but autism is sometimes associated with facial palsy. In the present 
study, to investigate migration of facial neurons and initial facial nucleus
formation in an animal model of autism, rat embryos were treated with valproic
acid (VPA) in utero at embryonic day (E) 9.5 and their facial nuclei were
analyzed by in situ hybridization at E13.5, E14.5 and E15.5. Signals for Tbx20,
which is expressed in early motor neurons, appeared near the floor plate at the
level of the vestibular ganglion and extended caudolaterally, where they became
ovoid in shape. This pattern of development was similar between control and
VPA-exposed embryos. However, measurements of the migratory pathway and the size 
of the facial nuclei revealed that exposure to VPA hindered the caudal migration 
of neurons to the facial nuclei. Signals for cadherin 8, which is expressed in
mature facial nuclei, revealed that exposure to VPA caused a significant
reduction in the size of the facial nuclei. Our findings provide the first
quantitative description of tangential migration and nucleus formation in the
developing hindbrain in a rat model of autism.

Copyright © 2012 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23253376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048176. Epub 2012 Oct 25.

In vitro site selection of a consensus binding site for the Drosophila
melanogaster Tbx20 homolog midline.

Najand N(1), Ryu JR, Brook WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, Alberta Children's Hospital Research
Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

We employed in vitro site selection to identify a consensus binding sequence for 
the Drosophila melanogaster Tbx20 T-box transcription factor homolog Midline. We 
purified a bacterially expressed T-box DNA binding domain of Midline, and used it
in four rounds of precipitation and polymerase-chain-reaction based
amplification. We cloned and sequenced 54 random oligonucleotides selected by
Midline. Electromobility shift-assays confirmed that 27 of these could bind the
Midline T-box. Sequence alignment of these 27 clones suggests that Midline binds 
as a monomer to a consensus sequence that contains an AGGTGT core. Thus, the
Midline consensus binding site we define in this study is similar to that defined
for vertebrate Tbx20, but differs from a previously reported Midline binding
sequence derived through site selection.

PMCID: PMC3485041
PMID: 23133562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Apr;1833(4):783-94. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.10.004.
Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Evolution and development of the building plan of the vertebrate heart.

Jensen B(1), Wang T, Christoffels VM, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology and Physiology, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Early cardiac development involves the formation of a heart tube, looping of the 
tube and formation of chambers. These processes are highly similar among all
vertebrates, which suggest the existence of evolutionary conservation of the
building plan of the heart. From the jawless lampreys to man, T-box transcription
factors like Tbx5 and Tbx20 are fundamental for heart formation, whereas Tbx2 and
Tbx3 repress chamber formation on the sinu-atrial and atrioventricular borders.
Also, electrocardiograms from different vertebrates are alike, even though the
fish heart only has two chambers whereas the mammalian heart has four chambers
divided by septa and in addition has much higher heart rates. We conclude that
most features of the high-performance hearts of mammals and birds can be traced
back to less developed traits in the hearts of ectothermic vertebrates. This
article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Cardiomyocyte biology: Cardiac
pathways of differentiation, metabolism and contraction.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Dev Biol. 2012 Sep 15;369(2):319-29. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.07.004. Epub 2012 
Jul 16.

The Tbx20 homolog Midline represses wingless in conjunction with Groucho during
the maintenance of segment polarity.

Formaz-Preston A(1), Ryu JR, Svendsen PC, Brook WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, Alberta Children's Hospital Research
Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Calgary, Canada.

The regulation of the segment polarity gene wingless is essential for the correct
patterning of the Drosophila ectoderm. We have previously shown that the
asymmetric activation of wingless downstream of Hedghog-signaling depends on the 
T-box transcription factors, midline and H15. Hedgehog activates wingless
anterior to the Hedgehog domain. midline/H15 are responsible in part for
repressing wingless in cells posterior to the Hedgehog expressing cells. Here, we
show that Midline binds the Groucho co-repressor directly via the engrailed
homology-1 domain and requires an intact engrailed-homology-1 domain to repress
wingless. In contrast, the regulation of Serrate, a second target of midline
repression, is not dependent on the engrailed-homology-1 domain. Furthermore, we 
identify a midline responsive region of the wingless cis-regulatory region and
show that Midline binds to sequences within this region. Mutating these sequences
in transgenic reporter constructs results in ectopic reporter expression in the
midline-expression domain, consistent with wingless being a direct target of
Midline repression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22814213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. BMC Med Genomics. 2012 Jun 6;5:20. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-5-20.

LINE-1 methylation status and its association with tetralogy of fallot in
infants.

Sheng W(1), Wang H, Ma X, Qian Y, Zhang P, Wu Y, Zheng F, Chen L, Huang G, Ma D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

BACKGROUND: Methylation levels of long interspersed nucleotide elements (LINE-1) 
are representative of genome-wide methylation status and play an important role
in maintaining genomic stability and gene expression. To derive insight into the 
association between genome-wide methylation status and tetralogy of fallot (TOF),
we compared the methylation status of LINE-1 element between TOF patients and
controls. The methylation of the NKX 2-5, HAND 1, and TBX 20 promoter regions was
also evaluated.
METHODS: Genomic DNA from right ventricular tissue samples was obtained from 32
patients with TOF and 15 control subjects. Sequenom MassARRAY platform was
performed to examine the methylation levels of LINE-1, NKX2-5, HAND1 and TBX20.
Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare differences in methylation levels between
two groups.
RESULTS: The methylation level of LINE-1 was significantly lower in patients with
TOF, with a median of 57.95% (interquartile range [IQR]: 56.10%-60.04%), as
opposed to 59.70% in controls (IQR: 59.00%-61.30%; P = 0.0021). The highest
LINE-1 methylation level was 61.3%. The risk of TOF increased in subjects with
the lowest methylation levels (less than or equal to 59.0%; OR = 14.7, 95% CI:
1.8-117.7, P = 0.014) and in those with medium methylation levels (59.0%-61.3%;
OR = 2.0, 95% CI: 0.3-14.2, P = 0.65). An ROC curve analysis showed a relatively 
high accuracy of using the LINE-1 methylation level in predicting the presence of
TOF (AUC = 0.78, 95% CI: 0.65-0.91; P = 0.002). The association of the LINE-1
methylation level with TOF was only observed in males (P = 0.006) and not in
females (P = 0.25). Neither age nor gender was found to be associated with the
LINE-1 methylation level in patients or controls. Higher methylation levels of
NKX2-5 and HAND1 and lower methylation levels of TBX20 were also observed in
patients with TOF than in controls. No association was found between the
methylation levels of NKX2-5, HAND1 and TBX 20 with the LINE-1 methylation level.
CONCLUSIONS: Lower LINE-1 methylation levels are associated with increased risk
of TOF and may provide important clues for the development of TOF.

PMCID: PMC3408368
PMID: 22672592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35539. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035539. Epub 2012 Apr 19.

Deficient signaling via Alk2 (Acvr1) leads to bicuspid aortic valve development.

Thomas PS(1), Sridurongrit S, Ruiz-Lozano P, Kaartinen V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common congenital cardiac anomaly in
humans. Despite recent advances, the molecular basis of BAV development is poorly
understood. Previously it has been shown that mutations in the Notch1 gene lead
to BAV and valve calcification both in human and mice, and mice deficient in
Gata5 or its downstream target Nos3 have been shown to display BAVs. Here we show
that tissue-specific deletion of the gene encoding Activin Receptor Type I (Alk2 
or Acvr1) in the cushion mesenchyme results in formation of aortic valve defects 
including BAV. These defects are largely due to a failure of normal development
of the embryonic aortic valve leaflet precursor cushions in the outflow tract
resulting in either a fused right- and non-coronary leaflet, or the presence of
only a very small, rudimentary non-coronary leaflet. The surviving adult mutant
mice display aortic stenosis with high frequency and occasional aortic valve
insufficiency. The thickened aortic valve leaflets in such animals do not show
changes in Bmp signaling activity, while Map kinase pathways are activated.
Although dysfunction correlated with some pro-osteogenic differences in gene
expression, neither calcification nor inflammation were detected in aortic valves
of Alk2 mutants with stenosis. We conclude that signaling via Alk2 is required
for appropriate aortic valve development in utero, and that defects in this
process lead to indirect secondary complications later in life.

PMCID: PMC3334911
PMID: 22536403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(4):e1002629. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002629. Epub 2012 Apr 
19.

Epigenome-wide scans identify differentially methylated regions for age and
age-related phenotypes in a healthy ageing population.

Bell JT(1), Tsai PC, Yang TP, Pidsley R, Nisbet J, Glass D, Mangino M, Zhai G,
Zhang F, Valdes A, Shin SY, Dempster EL, Murray RM, Grundberg E, Hedman AK, Nica 
A, Small KS; MuTHER Consortium, Dermitzakis ET, McCarthy MI, Mill J, Spector TD, 
Deloukas P.

Collaborators: Ahmadi KR, Ainali C, Barrett A, Bataille V, Bell JT, Buil A,
Deloukas P, Dermitzakis ET, Dimas AS, Durbin R, Glass D, Grundberg E, Hassanali
N, Hedman ÅK, Ingle C, Knowles D, Krestyaninova M, Lindgren CM, Lowe CE, McCarthy
MI, Meduri E, di Meglio P, Min JL, Montgomery SB, Nestle FO, Nica AC, Nisbet J,
O'Rahilly S, Parts L, Potter S, Sekowska M, Shin SY, Small KS, Soranzo N, Spector
TD, Surdulescu G, Travers ME, Tsaprouni L, Tsoka S, Wilk A, Yang TP, Zondervan
KT.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
jordana.bell@kcl.ac.uk

Age-related changes in DNA methylation have been implicated in cellular
senescence and longevity, yet the causes and functional consequences of these
variants remain unclear. To elucidate the role of age-related epigenetic changes 
in healthy ageing and potential longevity, we tested for association between
whole-blood DNA methylation patterns in 172 female twins aged 32 to 80 with age
and age-related phenotypes. Twin-based DNA methylation levels at 26,690 CpG-sites
showed evidence for mean genome-wide heritability of 18%, which was supported by 
the identification of 1,537 CpG-sites with methylation QTLs in cis at FDR 5%. We 
performed genome-wide analyses to discover differentially methylated regions
(DMRs) for sixteen age-related phenotypes (ap-DMRs) and chronological age
(a-DMRs). Epigenome-wide association scans (EWAS) identified age-related
phenotype DMRs (ap-DMRs) associated with LDL (STAT5A), lung function (WT1), and
maternal longevity (ARL4A, TBX20). In contrast, EWAS for chronological age
identified hundreds of predominantly hyper-methylated age DMRs (490 a-DMRs at FDR
5%), of which only one (TBX20) was also associated with an age-related phenotype.
Therefore, the majority of age-related changes in DNA methylation are not
associated with phenotypic measures of healthy ageing in later life. We
replicated a large proportion of a-DMRs in a sample of 44 younger adult MZ twins 
aged 20 to 61, suggesting that a-DMRs may initiate at an earlier age. We next
explored potential genetic and environmental mechanisms underlying a-DMRs and
ap-DMRs. Genome-wide overlap across cis-meQTLs, genotype-phenotype associations, 
and EWAS ap-DMRs identified CpG-sites that had cis-meQTLs with evidence for
genotype-phenotype association, where the CpG-site was also an ap-DMR for the
same phenotype. Monozygotic twin methylation difference analyses identified one
potential environmentally-mediated ap-DMR associated with total cholesterol and
LDL (CSMD1). Our results suggest that in a small set of genes DNA methylation may
be a candidate mechanism of mediating not only environmental, but also genetic
effects on age-related phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3330116
PMID: 22532803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Gene. 2012 May 25;500(1):28-31. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.03.055. Epub 2012 Mar
21.

Genetic analysis of the TBX20 gene promoter region in patients with ventricular
septal defects.

Qiao Y(1), Wanyan H, Xing Q, Xie W, Pang S, Shan J, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong, China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common human birth defect. The
morbidity and mortality of CHD patients are significantly higher than normal
population even after surgical correction of cardiac defects, which is likely
caused by genetic defects. To date, genetic causes for CHD remain largely
unknown. TBX20 gene encodes a T-box transcription factor that plays pivotal roles
in cardiac morphogenesis and is required for maintaining adult heart function and
maturation. Mutations in TBX20 gene have been reported in familiar and sporadic
CHD patients. However, the promoter region of TBX20 gene has not been genetically
analyzed in CHD patients. As TBX20 functions as a dosage-dependent regulator
during the heart development, we hypothesized that the sequence variants within
the promoter region of the TBX20 gene may contribute to CHD. In this study, we
bi-directionally sequenced the promoter region of the TBX20 gene in 265 patients 
with ventricular septal defects (VSD) and 242 controls. Within the promoter
region of the TBX20 gene, one single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), rs336284
(g.4740T>C), and one novel heterozygous variant g.4741 G>A, which was linked with
rs336284 (g.4740 T>C), were found in both VSD patients and controls with similar 
frequencies. A novel heterozygous variant, g.4932 G>A, was found in one VSD
patient, but in none of controls, which significantly inhibited the
transcriptional activities of TBX20 gene promoter, suggesting that the variant
may contribute to the VSD etiology. Therefore, our data provides new information 
with respect to TBX20 gene mutations in CHD patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22465533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 May 15;21(10):2194-204. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds034. Epub 2012
Feb 10.

Dual transcriptional activator and repressor roles of TBX20 regulate adult
cardiac structure and function.

Sakabe NJ(1), Aneas I, Shen T, Shokri L, Park SY, Bulyk ML, Evans SM, Nobrega MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
nsakabe@uchicago.edu

The ongoing requirement in adult heart for transcription factors with key roles
in cardiac development is not well understood. We recently demonstrated that
TBX20, a transcriptional regulator required for cardiac development, has key
roles in the maintenance of functional and structural phenotypes in adult mouse
heart. Conditional ablation of Tbx20 in adult cardiomyocytes leads to a rapid
onset and progression of heart failure, with prominent conduction and
contractility phenotypes that lead to death. Here we describe a more
comprehensive molecular characterization of the functions of TBX20 in adult mouse
heart. Coupling genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation and transcriptome
analyses (RNA-Seq), we identified a subset of genes that change expression in
Tbx20 adult cardiomyocyte-specific knockout hearts which are direct downstream
targets of TBX20. This analysis revealed a dual role for TBX20 as both a
transcriptional activator and a repressor, and that each of these functions
regulates genes with very specialized and distinct molecular roles. We also show 
how TBX20 binds to its targets genome-wide in a context-dependent manner, using
various cohorts of co-factors to either promote or repress distinct genetic
programs within adult heart. Our integrative approach has uncovered several novel
aspects of TBX20 and T-box protein function within adult heart. Sequencing data
accession number (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo): GSE30943.

PMCID: PMC3335310
PMID: 22328084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30677. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030677. Epub 2012 Jan 27.

ISL1 directly regulates FGF10 transcription during human cardiac outflow
formation.

Golzio C(1), Havis E, Daubas P, Nuel G, Babarit C, Munnich A, Vekemans M, Zaffran
S, Lyonnet S, Etchevers HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina,
United States of America.

The LIM homeodomain gene Islet-1 (ISL1) encodes a transcription factor that has
been associated with the multipotency of human cardiac progenitors, and in mice
enables the correct deployment of second heart field (SHF) cells to become the
myocardium of atria, right ventricle and outflow tract. Other markers have been
identified that characterize subdomains of the SHF, such as the fibroblast growth
factor Fgf10 in its anterior region. While functional evidence of its essential
contribution has been demonstrated in many vertebrate species, SHF expression of 
Isl1 has been shown in only some models. We examined the relationship between
human ISL1 and FGF10 within the embryonic time window during which the linear
heart tube remodels into four chambers. ISL1 transcription demarcated an
anatomical region supporting the conserved existence of a SHF in humans, and
transcription factors of the GATA family were co-expressed therein. In
conjunction, we identified a novel enhancer containing a highly conserved ISL1
consensus binding site within the FGF10 first intron. ChIP and EMSA demonstrated 
its direct occupation by ISL1. Transcription mediated by ISL1 from this FGF10
intronic element was enhanced by the presence of GATA4 and TBX20 cardiac
transcription factors. Finally, transgenic mice confirmed that endogenous factors
bound the human FGF10 intronic enhancer to drive reporter expression in the
developing cardiac outflow tract. These findings highlight the interest of
examining developmental regulatory networks directly in human tissues, when
possible, to assess candidate non-coding regions that may be responsible for
congenital malformations.

PMCID: PMC3267757
PMID: 22303449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 May;16(5):972-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2012.01529.x.

Probing the polygenic basis of cardiomyopathies in Drosophila.

Qian L(1), Bodmer R.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Aging Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

In trying to understand the causes for congenital heart disease and
cardiomyopathies, it is difficult to study polygenic interactions that contribute
to the severity of the disease, which is in part due to genetic complexity and
generation time of higher organisms that hinder efficient screening for modifiers
of primary causes of heart disease. The adult Drosophila heart has recently been 
established as a model to probe genetic interactions that lead to cardiac
dysfunction in this genetically simple and short-lived organism. This has made it
possible to systematically and efficiently screen for polygenic modulators of
heart dysfunction inflicted by known heart disease genes. As heart development
and fundamental aspects of cardiac physiology show remarkable evolutionary
conservation, it has become possible to uncover new heart disease candidates by
using Drosophila genetic tools in combination with sensitive heart function
assays. Here, we review the discovery of several new genes, genetic pathways, and
interactions that will help understand human heart disease. For example,
interactions between cardiogenic transcription factors, discovered in Drosophila,
are also critical for adult heart function in flies and mammals. These include
interactions between tinman/Nkx2-5 and neuromancer/Tbx20, which led to the
discovery of possibly disease-causing familial variants in human TBX20. A new
genetic pathway from tinman/Nkx2-5 to Cdc42, involving the microRNA miR-1, was
recently discovered in flies and subsequently validated to function similarly in 
mouse heart. Thus, the fly heart has proven to be a useful discovery tool for
screening genetic interactions that are otherwise difficult to conduct.

© 2012 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2012 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3337951
PMID: 22268758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Circ Res. 2012 Feb 17;110(4):578-87. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.261172. Epub
2012 Jan 12.

Bmp signaling exerts opposite effects on cardiac differentiation.

de Pater E(1), Ciampricotti M, Priller F, Veerkamp J, Strate I, Smith K,
Lagendijk AK, Schilling TF, Herzog W, Abdelilah-Seyfried S, Hammerschmidt M,
Bakkers J.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiac development and genetics group, Hubrecht Institute for Developmental
Biology and Stem Cell Research, Uppsalalaan 8, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
j.bakkers@hubrecht.eu

RATIONALE: The importance for Bmp signaling during embryonic stem cell
differentiation into myocardial cells has been recognized. The question when and 
where Bmp signaling in vivo regulates myocardial differentiation has remained
largely unanswered.
OBJECTIVE: To identify when and where Bmp signaling regulates cardiogenic
differentiation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here we have observed that in zebrafish embryos, Bmp
signaling is active in cardiac progenitor cells prior to their differentiation
into cardiomyocytes. Bmp signaling is continuously required during somitogenesis 
within the anterior lateral plate mesoderm to induce myocardial differentiation. 
Surprisingly, Bmp signaling is actively repressed in differentiating myocardial
cells. We identified the inhibitory Smad6a, which is expressed in the cardiac
tissue, to be required to inhibit Bmp signaling and thereby promote expansion of 
the ventricular myocardium.
CONCLUSION: Bmp signaling exerts opposing effects on myocardial differentiation
in the embryo by promoting as well as inhibiting cardiac growth.

PMID: 22247485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29758. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029758. Epub 2011 Dec 29.

Twist1 directly regulates genes that promote cell proliferation and migration in 
developing heart valves.

Lee MP(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America.

Twist1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is expressed in
mesenchymal precursor populations during embryogenesis and in metastatic cancer
cells. In the developing heart, Twist1 is highly expressed in endocardial cushion
(ECC) valve mesenchymal cells and is down regulated during valve differentiation 
and remodeling. Previous studies demonstrated that Twist1 promotes cell
proliferation, migration, and expression of primitive extracellular matrix (ECM) 
molecules in ECC mesenchymal cells. Furthermore, Twist1 expression is induced in 
human pediatric and adult diseased heart valves. However, the Twist1 downstream
target genes that mediate increased cell proliferation and migration during early
heart valve development remain largely unknown. Candidate gene and global gene
profiling approaches were used to identify transcriptional targets of Twist1
during heart valve development. Candidate target genes were analyzed for
evolutionarily conserved regions (ECRs) containing E-box consensus sequences that
are potential Twist1 binding sites. ECRs containing conserved E-box sequences
were identified for Twist1 responsive genes Tbx20, Cdh11, Sema3C, Rab39b, and
Gadd45a. Twist1 binding to these sequences in vivo was determined by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, and binding was detected in ECCs but not late 
stage remodeling valves. In addition identified Twist1 target genes are highly
expressed in ECCs and have reduced expression during heart valve remodeling in
vivo, which is consistent with the expression pattern of Twist1. Together these
analyses identify multiple new genes involved in cell proliferation and migration
that are differentially expressed in the developing heart valves, are responsive 
to Twist1 transcriptional function, and contain Twist1-responsive regulatory
sequences.

PMCID: PMC3248441
PMID: 22242143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 1;363(1):234-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.034. Epub 2011
Dec 29.

Tbx20 regulation of cardiac cell proliferation and lineage specialization during 
embryonic and fetal development in vivo.

Chakraborty S(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)The Heart Institute, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH
45229, USA.

TBX20 gain-of-function mutations in humans are associated with congenital heart
malformations and myocardial defects. However the effects of increased Tbx20
function during cardiac chamber development and maturation have not been reported
previously. CAG-CAT-Tbx20 transgenic mice were generated for Cre-dependent
induction of Tbx20 in myocardial lineages in the developing heart.
ßMHCCre-mediated overexpression of Tbx20 in fetal ventricular cardiomyocytes
results in increased thickness of compact myocardium, induction of cardiomyocyte 
proliferation, and increased expression of Bmp10 and pSmad1/5/8 at embryonic day 
(E) 14.5. ßMHCCre-mediated Tbx20 overexpression also leads to increased
expression of cardiac conduction system (CCS) genes Tbx5, Cx40, and Cx43
throughout the ventricular myocardium. In contrast, Nkx2.5Cre mediated
overexpression of Tbx20 in the embryonic heart results in reduced cardiomyocyte
proliferation, increased expression of a cell cycle inhibitor, p21(CIP1), and
decreased expression of Tbx2, Tbx5, and N-myc1 at E9.5, concomitant with
decreased phospho-ERK1/2 expression. Together, these analyses demonstrate that
Tbx20 differentially regulates cell proliferation and cardiac lineage
specification in embryonic versus fetal cardiomyocytes. Induction of pSmad1/5/8
at E14.5 and inhibition of dpERK expression at E9.5 are consistent with selective
Tbx20 regulation of these pathways in association with stage-specific effects on 
cardiomyocyte proliferation. Together, these in vivo data support distinct
functions for Tbx20 in regulation of cardiomyocyte lineage maturation and cell
proliferation at embryonic and fetal stages of heart development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3296120
PMID: 22226977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2011 Dec;43(12):957-69. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmr098.

Dihydrofolate reductase is required for the development of heart and outflow
tract in zebrafish.

Sun S(1), Gui Y, Jiang Q, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Folic acid is very important for embryonic development and folic acid inhibition 
can cause congenital heart defects in vertebrates. Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR)
is a key enzyme in folate-mediated metabolism. The dysfunction of DHFR disrupts
the key biological processes which folic acid participates in. DHFR gene is
conserved during vertebrate evolution. It is important to investigate the roles
of DHFR in cardiac developments. In this study, we showed that DHFR knockdown
resulted in the abnormal developments of zebrafish embryos in the early stages.
Obvious malformations in heart and outflow tract (OFT) were also observed in DHFR
knockdown embryos. DHFR overexpression rescued the abnormal phenotypes in the
DHFR knockdown group. DHFR knockdown had negative impacts on the expressions of
NKX2.5 (NK2 transcription factor-related 5), MEF2C (myocyte-specific enhancer
factor 2C), TBX20 (T-box 20), and TBX1 (T-box 1) which are important
transcriptional factors during cardiac development process, while DHFR
overexpression had positive effects. DHFR was required for Hedgehog pathway. DHFR
knockdown caused reduced cell proliferation and increased apoptosis, while its
overexpression promoted cell proliferation and inhibited apoptosis. Taken
together, our study suggested that DHFR plays crucial roles in the development of
heart and OFT in zebrafish by regulating gene transcriptions and affecting cell
proliferation and apoptosis.

PMID: 22113051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Clin Invest. 2011 Dec;121(12):4640-54. doi: 10.1172/JCI59472. Epub 2011 Nov 14.

Tbx20 regulates a genetic program essential to adult mouse cardiomyocyte
function.

Shen T(1), Aneas I, Sakabe N, Dirschinger RJ, Wang G, Smemo S, Westlund JM, Cheng
H, Dalton N, Gu Y, Boogerd CJ, Cai CL, Peterson K, Chen J, Nobrega MA, Evans SM.

Author information: 
(1)Skaggs School of Pharmacy, UCSD, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

Human mutations in or variants of TBX20 are associated with congenital heart
disease, cardiomyopathy, and arrhythmias. To investigate whether cardiac disease 
in patients with these conditions results from an embryonic or ongoing
requirement for Tbx20 in myocardium, we ablated Tbx20 specifically in adult
cardiomyocytes in mice. This ablation resulted in the onset of severe
cardiomyopathy accompanied by arrhythmias, with death ensuing within 1 to 2 weeks
of Tbx20 ablation. Accounting for this dramatic phenotype, we identified
molecular signatures that posit Tbx20 as a central integrator of a genetic
program that maintains cardiomyocyte function in the adult heart. Expression of a
number of genes encoding critical transcription factors, ion channels, and
cytoskeletal/myofibrillar proteins was downregulated consequent to loss of Tbx20.
Genome-wide ChIP analysis of Tbx20-binding regions in the adult heart revealed
that many of these genes were direct downstream targets of Tbx20 and uncovered a 
previously undescribed DNA-binding site for Tbx20. Bioinformatics and in vivo
functional analyses revealed a cohort of transcription factors that, working with
Tbx20, integrated multiple environmental signals to maintain ion channel gene
expression in the adult heart. Our data provide insight into the mechanisms by
which mutations in TBX20 cause adult heart disease in humans.

PMCID: PMC3223071
PMID: 22080862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Toxicol Sci. 2011 Oct;36(5):569-85.

Analysis of altered gene expression specific to embryotoxic chemical treatment
during embryonic stem cell differentiation into myocardiac and neural cells.

Suzuki N(1), Ando S, Sumida K, Horie N, Saito K.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Science Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical Co., Ltd., Osaka,
Japan. suzukin7@sc.sumitomo-chem.co.jp

Embryonic stem cells (ES cells), pluripotent cells derived from the inner cell
mass of blastocysts, differentiate in vitro into a variety of cell types
representing all three germ layers. They therefore constitute one of the most
promising in vitro tools for developmental toxicology. To assess the
developmental toxicity of chemicals using ES cells easily, identification of
effective marker genes is a high priority. We report here altered gene expression
during ES cell differentiation into myocardiac and neural cells on treatment with
some embryotoxic and non-embryotoxic chemicals. Decreases in several
undifferentiated markers such as Oct3/4 and Nanog, and elevated expression of
genes associated with heart development or the central nervous system,
respectively, were found on microarray analysis. Under differentiation of ES
cells into myocardic cells, 107 genes were substantially up-regulated. Decrease
in the expression of 13 genes of these (Hand1, Pim2, Tbx20, Myl4, Myl7, Hbb-bh1, 
Hba-a1, Col1a2, Hba-x, Cmya1, Pitx2, Smyd1 and Adam19) was observed specifically 
by embryotoxic chemicals. Of the 107 genes up-regulated under differentiation
into neurons, 22 genes (Map2, Cpe, Marcks, Ptbp2, Sox11, Tubb2b, Vim, Arx, Emx2, 
Pax6, Basp1, Ddr1, Ndn, Sfrp, Ttc3, Ubqln2, Six3, Dcx, L1cam, Reln, Wnt1 and
Nnat) showed reduced expression specifically by embryotoxic chemicals. Almost all
gene sets identified in this study are known to be indispensable for
differentiation and development of heart and brain tissues, and thus may serve in
early detection or prediction of embryotoxicity of chemicals in vitro.

PMID: 22008533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Dev Biol. 2011 Dec 15;360(2):381-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.023. Epub 2011 
Oct 1.

Myocardial Tbx20 regulates early atrioventricular canal formation and endocardial
epithelial-mesenchymal transition via Bmp2.

Cai X(1), Nomura-Kitabayashi A, Cai W, Yan J, Christoffels VM, Cai CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Center for Molecular
Cardiology of the Child Health and Development Institute, the Black Family Stem
Cell Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

During early embryogenesis, the formation of the cardiac atrioventricular canal
(AVC) facilitates the transition of the heart from a linear tube into a chambered
organ. However, the genetic pathways underlying this developmental process are
poorly understood. The T-box transcription factor Tbx20 is expressed
predominantly in the AVC of early heart tube. It was shown that Tbx20 activates
Nmyc1 and suppresses Tbx2 expression to promote proliferation and specification
of the atrial and ventricular chambers, yet it is not known if Tbx20 is involved 
in early AVC development. Here, we report that mice lacking Tbx20 in the AVC
myocardium fail to form the AVC constriction, and the endocardial
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is severely perturbed. Tbx20 maintains
expression of a variety of genes, including Bmp2, Tbx3 and Hand1 in the AVC
myocardium. Intriguingly, we found Bmp2 downstream genes involved in the EMT
initiation are also downregulated. In addition, re-expression of Bmp2 in the AVC 
myocardium substantially rescues the EMT defects resulting from the lack of
Tbx20, suggesting Bmp2 is one of the key downstream targets of Tbx20 in AVC
development. Our data support a complex signaling network with Tbx20 suppressing 
Tbx2 in the AVC myocardium but also indirectly promoting Tbx2 expression through 
Bmp2. The spatiotemporal expression of Tbx2 in the AVC appears to be balanced
between these two opposing signals. Overall, our study provides genetic evidence 
that Tbx20 has essential roles in regulating AVC development that coordinate
early cardiac chamber formation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3217163
PMID: 21983003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 21;286(42):36820-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.279679. Epub 2011
Sep 2.

Tbx20 transcription factor is a downstream mediator for bone morphogenetic
protein-10 in regulating cardiac ventricular wall development and function.

Zhang W(1), Chen H, Wang Y, Yong W, Zhu W, Liu Y, Wagner GR, Payne RM, Field LJ, 
Xin H, Cai CL, Shou W.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein 10 (BMP10) belongs to the TGFß-superfamily.
Previously, we had demonstrated that BMP10 is a key regulator for ventricular
chamber formation, growth, and maturation. Ablation of BMP10 leads to hypoplastic
ventricular wall formation, and elevated levels of BMP10 are associated with
abnormal ventricular trabeculation/compaction and wall maturation. However, the
molecular mechanism(s) by which BMP10 regulates ventricle wall growth and
maturation is still largely unknown. In this study, we sought to identify the
specific transcriptional network that is potentially mediated by BMP10. We
analyzed and compared the gene expression profiles between a-myosin heavy chain
(aMHC)-BMP10 transgenic hearts and nontransgenic littermate controls using
Affymetrix mouse exon arrays. T-box 20 (Tbx20), a cardiac transcription factor,
was significantly up-regulated in aMHC-BMP10 transgenic hearts, which was
validated by quantitative RT-PCR and in situ hybridization. Ablation of BMP10
reduced Tbx20 expression specifically in the BMP10-expressing region of the
developing ventricle. In vitro promoter analysis demonstrated that BMP10 was able
to induce Tbx20 promoter activity through a conserved Smad binding site in the
Tbx20 promoter proximal region. Furthermore, overexpression of Tbx20 in
myocardium led to dilated cardiomyopathy that exhibited ventricular
hypertrabeculation and an abnormal muscular septum, which phenocopied genetically
modified mice with elevated BMP10 levels. Taken together, our findings
demonstrate that the BMP10-Tbx20 signaling cascade is important for ventricular
wall development and maturation.

PMCID: PMC3196085
PMID: 21890625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Sep 9;412(4):513-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.08.010. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Alternative splicing of T-box transcription factor genes.

DeBenedittis P(1), Jiao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

T-box (TBX) transcription factors are an ancient gene family with critical roles 
in embryogenesis. Currently, TBX3, TBX5, and TBX20 are TBX genes defined to have 
multiple protein isoforms created by alternative splicing and characterized by
expression and functional studies. These proteins are important for development
as mutations lead to severe developmental disorders in humans and mice.
Cumulative studies suggest that alternative splicing of these genes can regulate 
TBX activities during multiple biological processes including cardiogenesis, limb
development, and cancer mechanisms. This mini-review focuses on how alternative
splicing adds complexity to transcriptional regulation of target genes controlled
by TBX transcription factors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3171624
PMID: 21856288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Dev Biol. 2011 Oct 15;358(2):368-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.07.037. Epub 2011 
Aug 4.

GATA5 interacts with GATA4 and GATA6 in outflow tract development.

Laforest B(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et Différentiation Cardiaque, Programme de
Biologie Moléculaire, Université de Montréal, Montréal QC, Canada H3C 3J7.

Members of the GATA family of transcription factors are critical regulators of
heart development and mutations in 2 of them, GATA4 and GATA6 are associated with
outflow tract and septal defects in human. The heart expresses 3 GATA factors,
GATA4, 5 and 6 in a partially overlapping pattern. Here, we report that compound 
Gata4/Gata5 and Gata5/Gata6 mutants die embryonically or perinatally due to
severe congenital heart defects. Almost all Gata4(+/-)Gata5(+/-) mutant embryos
have double outlet right ventricles (DORV), large ventricular septal defects
(VSD) as well as hypertrophied mitral and tricuspid valves. Only 25% of double
compound Gata4/Gata5 heterozygotes survive to adulthood and these mice have
aortic stenosis. Compound loss of a Gata5 and a Gata6 allele also leads to DORVs 
associated with subaortic VSDs. Expression of several transcription factors
important for endocardial and myocardial cell differentiation, such as Tbx20,
Mef2c, Hey1 and Hand2, was reduced in compound heterozygote embryos. These
findings suggest the existence of important genetic interactions between Gata5
and the 2 other cardiac GATA factors in endocardial cushion formation and outflow
tract morphogenesis. The data identify GATA5 as a potential genetic modifier of
congenital heart disease and provide insight for elucidating the genetic basis of
an important class of human birth defects.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21839733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jun 3;409(2):338-43. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.05.020. Epub 2011 May 8.

Characterization of the novel interaction between muskelin and TBX20, a critical 
cardiogenic transcription factor.

Debenedittis P(1), Harmelink C, Chen Y, Wang Q, Jiao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

The genetic regulation necessary for the formation of a four-chambered heart is
tightly regulated by transcription factors such as TBX20, a member of the T-box
(TBX) transcription factor family. TBX20 is critical for proper cardiogenesis and
is expressed in the heart throughout development. Missense mutations in TBX20
have been found in patients with congenital heart defects (CHD). Characterization
of modifiers of TBX20 activity will help elucidate the genetic mechanisms of
heart development and CHD. A yeast two-hybrid assay screening an embryonic mouse 
heart cDNA library with TBX20b as bait was used to identify potential modifiers
of TBX20 activity and identified an interaction with muskelin (MKLN1), a
primarily cytoplasmic protein with potential roles in signal transduction
machinery scaffolding and nucleocytoplasmic protein shuttling. In cellular
studies, MKLN1 directly binds to the T-box DNA-binding domain of only the TBX20b 
isoform by its kelch repeats domain. Immunostaining of mammalian cells
transfected with tagged TBX20b and MKLN1 revealed colocalization primarily in the
cytoplasm. Immunohistochemistry analysis of embryonic mouse hearts reveals
coexpression in the developing endocardial valvular and myocardial
interventricular cells. This novel interaction between TBX20b and MKLN1 may help 
elucidate new regulatory mechanisms within heart development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3119198
PMID: 21586270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Jul 15;91(2):212-22. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr112. Epub 2011 Apr 
14.

Mechanisms of T-box gene function in the developing heart.

Greulich F(1), Rudat C, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, OE5250, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

The multi-chambered mammalian heart arises from a simple tube by polar
elongation, myocardial differentiation and morphogenesis. Members of the large
family of T-box (Tbx) transcription factors have been identified as crucial
players that act in distinct subprogrammes during cardiac regionalization. Tbx1
and Tbx18 ensure elongation of the cardiac tube at the anterior and posterior
pole, respectively. Tbx1 acts in the pharyngeal mesoderm to maintain
proliferation of mesenchymal precursor cells for formation of a myocardialized
and septated outflow tract. Tbx18 is expressed in the sinus venosus region and is
required for myocardialization of the caval veins and the sinoatrial node. Tbx5
and Tbx20 function in the early heart tube and independently activate the chamber
myocardial gene programme, whereas Tbx2 and Tbx3 locally repress this programme
to favour valvuloseptal and conduction system development. Here, we summarize
that these T-box factors act in different molecular circuits and control target
gene expression using diverse molecular strategies including binding to distinct 
protein interaction partners.

PMID: 21498422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Nov;20(11):1973-83. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0490. Epub 2011
Apr 3.

Canonical WNT signaling enhances stem cell expression in the developing heart
without a corresponding inhibition of cardiogenic differentiation.

Martin LK(1), Mezentseva NV, Bratoeva M, Ramsdell AF, Eisenberg CA, Eisenberg LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.

WNT signaling has been shown to influence the development of the heart. Although 
recent data suggested that canonical WNTs promote the emergence and expansion of 
cardiac progenitors in the pregastrula embryo, it has long been accepted that
once gastrulation begins, canonical WNT signaling needs to be suppressed for
cardiac development to proceed. Yet, this latter supposition appears to be odds
with the expression of multiple canonical WNTs in the developing heart. The
present study examining the effect of ectopic canonical WNT signaling on
cardiogenesis in the developing frog was designed to test the hypothesis that
heart formation is dependent on the inhibition of canonical WNT activity at the
onset of gastrulation. Here we report that cardiac differentiation of explanted
precardiac tissue from the dorsal marginal zone was not suppressed by exposure to
WNT1 protein, although expression of Tbx5, Tbx20, and Nkx2.5 was selectively
reduced. Pharmacological activation of WNT signaling in intact embryos using the 
GSK3 inhibitor SB415286 did not prevent the formation of an anatomically normal
and functionally sound heart, with the only defect observed being lower levels of
the cardiac transcription factor Nkx2.5. In both the explant and whole embryo
studies, expression of muscle genes and proteins was unaffected by ectopic
canonical WNT signaling. In contrast, canonical Wnt signaling upregulated
expression of the cardiac stem cell marker c-kit and pluripotency genes Oct25 and
Oct60. However, this regulatory stimulation of stem cells did not come at the
expense of blocking cardiac progenitors from differentiating.

PMCID: PMC3202895
PMID: 21351874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2010 May;20(4):109-14. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2010.09.004.

Tbx20, Smads, and the atrioventricular canal.

Singh R(1), Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule, D-30625 Hannover,
Germany.

Specification of chamber and nonchamber myocardium in the forming vertebrate
heart is a crucial lineage decision on which most of the functional architecture 
of the mature organ is built. Members of the T-box (Tbx) gene family are decisive
players in this early myocardial dichotomy by either promoting (Tbx5, Tbx20) or
inhibiting (Tbx2, Tbx3) the chamber gene program in the early heart tube. Because
Tbx5 and Tbx20 are widely expressed in the linear heart tube, localized
expression of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in regions fated to become primary myocardium of the 
atrioventricular canal and outflow tract is crucial to localize the chambers.
Here, we will review recent findings that suggest an important role for Tbx20 and
Bmp2/Smad signaling in restricting Tbx2 activation to the atrioventricular canal 
and outflow tract. Surprisingly, Tbx20 does not act as a direct transcriptional
repressor of Tbx2 but sequesters receptor-activated Smad factors of the Bmp
signaling pathway to prevent precocious Tbx2 transcription.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21335279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Nat Commun. 2011 Feb 8;2:187. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1187.

Chromatin remodelling complex dosage modulates transcription factor function in
heart development.

Takeuchi JK(1), Lou X, Alexander JM, Sugizaki H, Delgado-Olguín P, Holloway AK,
Mori AD, Wylie JN, Munson C, Zhu Y, Zhou YQ, Yeh RF, Henkelman RM, Harvey RP,
Metzger D, Chambon P, Stainier DY, Pollard KS, Scott IC, Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California
94158, USA.

Dominant mutations in cardiac transcription factor genes cause human inherited
congenital heart defects (CHDs); however, their molecular basis is not
understood. Interactions between transcription factors and the
Brg1/Brm-associated factor (BAF) chromatin remodelling complex suggest potential 
mechanisms; however, the role of BAF complexes in cardiogenesis is not known. In 
this study, we show that dosage of Brg1 is critical for mouse and zebrafish
cardiogenesis. Disrupting the balance between Brg1 and disease-causing cardiac
transcription factors, including Tbx5, Tbx20 and Nkx2-5, causes severe cardiac
anomalies, revealing an essential allelic balance between Brg1 and these cardiac 
transcription factor genes. This suggests that the relative levels of
transcription factors and BAF complexes are important for heart development,
which is supported by reduced occupancy of Brg1 at cardiac gene promoters in Tbx5
haploinsufficient hearts. Our results reveal complex dosage-sensitive
interdependence between transcription factors and BAF complexes, providing a
potential mechanism underlying transcription factor haploinsufficiency, with
implications for multigenic inheritance of CHDs.

PMCID: PMC3096875
PMID: 21304516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Dev Biol. 2011 Apr 1;352(1):164-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.032. Epub 2011
Feb 3.

Evolutionary implications of morphogenesis and molecular patterning of the blind 
gut in the planarian Schmidtea polychroa.

Martín-Durán JM(1), Romero R.

Author information: 
(1)Universitat de Barcelona, Departament de Genètica, Avda. Diagonal 645, E-08028
Barcelona, Spain. chemamartin@ub.edu

The formation of a through-gut was a key innovation in the evolution of
metazoans. There is still controversy regarding the origin of the anus and how it
may have been either gained or lost during evolution in different bilaterian
taxa. Thus, the study of groups with a blind gut is of great importance for
understanding the evolution of this organ system. Here, we describe the
morphogenesis and molecular patterning of the blind gut in the sexual triclad
Schmidtea polychroa. We identify and analyze the expression of goosecoid,
commonly associated with the foregut, and the GATA, ParaHox and T-box genes,
members of which commonly are associated with gut regionalization. We show that
GATA456a is expressed in the blind gut of triclads, while GATA456b is localized
in dorsal parenchymal cells. Goosecoid is expressed in the central nervous
system, and the unique ParaHox gene identified, Xlox, is detected in association 
with the nervous system. We have not isolated any brachyury gene in the T-box
complement of S. polychroa, which consists of one tbx1/10, three tbx2/3 and one
tbx20. Furthermore, the absence of genes like brachyury and caudal is also
present in other groups of Platyhelminthes. This study suggests that GATA456, in 
combination with foxA, is a gut-specific patterning mechanism conserved in the
triclad S. polychroa, while the conserved gut-associated expression of foregut,
midgut and hindgut markers is absent. Based on these data and the deviations in
spiral cleavage found in more basal flatworms, we propose that the lack of an
anus is an innovation of Platyhelminthes. This may be associated with loss of gut
gene expression or even gene loss.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21295562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Gene Expr Patterns. 2011 Mar-Apr;11(3-4):239-43. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2010.12.006. 
Epub 2010 Dec 24.

Amphioxus Tbx6/16 and Tbx20 embryonic expression patterns reveal ancestral
functions in chordates.

Belgacem MR(1), Escande ML, Escriva H, Bertrand S.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS FRE 3355, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Observatoire océanologique, F-66650
Banyuls-sur-Mer, France.

T-box transcription factors are found in all metazoans and play diverse roles
during embryogenesis. In the cephalochordate amphioxus, nine T-box genes were
previously identified. In this work we undertook the analysis of the embryonic
expression pattern of Tbx6/16 and Tbx20, the last two T-box genes for which no
such data are available. We found that Tbx6/16 is expressed in the unsegmented
paraxial mesoderm, in a subpopulation of neurons, and in the tail epidermis.
Comparison with the expression patterns of the different vertebrate orthologues
indicates a conserved role of those genes in posterior mesoderm formation in
chordates. Tbx20 expression is detected in the ventral mesoderm of amphioxus
embryos, in cells that are proposed to be precursors of the amphioxus myocardium,
in some neurons of the neural tube, and in the pre-oral pit which is thought to
be the homologue of the vertebrate adenohypophysis. In vertebrates, Tbx20 is also
one of the first genes expressed in the embryonic heart field, suggesting that
the function of this gene in heart development has been conserved during chordate
evolution.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21185952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Dev Dyn. 2011 Jan;240(1):86-95. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22495.

Tinman is a direct activator of midline in the Drosophila dorsal vessel.

Ryu JR(1), Najand N, Brook WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.

Heart development requires a conserved core of transcription factors comprised of
Nkx2.5, GATA and T-box family transcription factors. In Drosophila melanogaster, 
the Nkx2.5 gene tinman acts upstream of many cardiac genes including the Tbx20
homolog midline, a critical regulator of heart development in both flies and
vertebrates. By testing genomic fragments containing clusters of consensus
Tinman-binding sites, we identified a 4.3 kb fragment 5' of midline that directs 
reporter expression in all midline-expressing heart cells and a 1.7 kb
subfragment that drives reporter expression in mid-expressing heart cells that
maintain tin expression. Both fragments direct reporter gene expression in
response to tinman in transgenic embryos and in transient transfection assays in 
Drosophila S2 cells. Mutation of two Tinman binding sites (Tin1 and Tin2) reduces
or abolishes cardiac expression in derivatives of the 1.7 kb fragment. We
conclude that Tin is a direct regulator of midline in fly heart development.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21108319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Dev Dyn. 2011 Jan;240(1):211-20. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22493.

Cell autonomous requirement of endocardial Smad4 during atrioventricular cushion 
development in mouse embryos.

Song L(1), Zhao M, Wu B, Zhou B, Wang Q, Jiao K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

Atrioventricular (AV) cushions are the precursors of AV septum and valves. In
this study, we examined roles of Smad4 during AV cushion development using a
conditional gene inactivation approach. We found that endothelial/endocardial
inactivation of Smad4 led to the hypocellular AV cushion defect and that both
reduced cell proliferation and increased apoptosis contributed to the defect.
Expression of multiple genes critical for cushion development was down-regulated 
in mutant embryos. In collagen gel assays, the number of mesenchymal cells formed
is significantly reduced in mutant AV explants compared to that in control
explants, suggesting that the reduction of cushion mesenchyme formation in
mutants is unlikely secondary to their gross vasculature abnormalities. Using a
previously developed immortal endocardial cell line, we showed that Smad4 is
required for BMP signaling- stimulated upregulation of Tbx20 and Gata4.
Therefore, our data collectively support the cell-autonomous requirement of
endocardial Smad4 in regulating AV cushion development.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3020975
PMID: 21089072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Eur J Med Genet. 2011 Jan-Feb;54(1):89-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2010.09.006. Epub 
2010 Oct 8.

Large de novo deletion of 7p15.1 to 7p12.1 involving the imprinted gene GRB10
associated with a complex phenotype including features of Beckwith Wiedemann
syndrome.

Naik S, Riordan-Eva E, Thomas NS, Poole R, Ashton M, Crolla JA, Temple IK.

We present an infant with a de novo cytogenetically visible interstitial deletion
of approximately 21.9Mb involving chromosome bands 7p15.1-7p12.1, with the loss
of 119 genes confirmed by array CGH. The infant had a ventricular septal defect, 
hand and skull anomalies, and hyperglycaemia compatible with haploinsufficiency
of TBX20, GLI3, and GCK genes, respectively. In addition, the infant had some
features reminiscent of Beckwith Wiedemann syndrome including macroglossia,
umbilical hernia, and a relatively large birth weight and we speculate that this 
is due to the deletion of GRB10, an imprinted gene on chromosome 7. This report
illustrates how knowledge of genes within a deleted interval facilitates optimal 
medical management, can explain observed phenotypes, and stimulates research
questions.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20933618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2010 Dec;14(6):797-802. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2010.0028.
Epub 2010 Sep 27.

GATA4 mutations in 357 unrelated patients with congenital heart malformation.

Butler TL(1), Esposito G, Blue GM, Cole AD, Costa MW, Waddell LB, Walizada G,
Sholler GF, Kirk EP, Feneley M, Harvey RP, Winlaw DS.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre for Children, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead,
Australia.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) represents one of the most common birth defects,
but the genetic causes remain largely unknown. Mutations in GATA4, encoding a
zinc finger transcription factor with a pivotal role in heart development, have
been associated with CHD in several familial cases and a small subset of sporadic
patients. To estimate the pathogenetic role of GATA4 in CHD, we screened for
mutations in 357 unrelated patients with different congenital heart
malformations. In addition to nine synonymous changes, we identified two known
(A411V and D425N) and two novel putative mutations (G69D and P163R) in five
patients with atrial or ventricular septal defects that were not seen in control 
subjects. The four mutations did not show altered GATA4 transcriptional activity 
in synergy with the transcription factors NKX2-5 and TBX20. Our data expand the
spectrum of mutations associated with cardiac septal defects but do not support
GATA4 mutations as a common cause of CHD.

PMID: 20874241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Dev Biol. 2010 Nov 1;347(1):167-79. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.08.021. Epub 2010
Sep 6.

Twist1 promotes heart valve cell proliferation and extracellular matrix gene
expression during development in vivo and is expressed in human diseased aortic
valves.

Chakraborty S(1), Wirrig EE, Hinton RB, Merrill WH, Spicer DB, Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)The Heart Institute, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH
45229, USA.

During embryogenesis the heart valves develop from undifferentiated mesenchymal
endocardial cushions (EC), and activated interstitial cells of adult diseased
valves share characteristics of embryonic valve progenitors. Twist1, a class II
basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, is expressed during early EC 
development and is down-regulated later during valve remodeling. The requirements
for Twist1 down-regulation in the remodeling valves and the consequences of
prolonged Twist1 activity were examined in transgenic mice with persistent
expression of Twist1 in developing and mature valves. Persistent Twist1
expression in the remodeling valves leads to increased valve cell proliferation, 
increased expression of Tbx20, and increased extracellular matrix (ECM) gene
expression, characteristic of early valve progenitors. Among the ECM genes
predominant in the EC, Col2a1 was identified as a direct transcriptional target
of Twist1. Increased Twist1 expression also leads to dysregulation of fibrillar
collagen and periostin expression, as well as enlarged hypercellular valve
leaflets prior to birth. In human diseased aortic valves, increased Twist1
expression and cell proliferation are observed adjacent to nodules of
calcification. Overall, these data implicate Twist1 as a critical regulator of
valve development and suggest that Twist1 influences ECM production and cell
proliferation during disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2950232
PMID: 20804746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Development. 2010 Jun;137(11):1919-29. doi: 10.1242/dev.043588.

The BMP pathway acts to directly regulate Tbx20 in the developing heart.

Mandel EM(1), Kaltenbrun E, Callis TE, Zeng XX, Marques SR, Yelon D, Wang DZ,
Conlon FL.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina McAllister Heart Institute, UNC-Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

TBX20 has been shown to be essential for vertebrate heart development. Mutations 
within the TBX20 coding region are associated with human congenital heart
disease, and the loss of Tbx20 in a wide variety of model systems leads to
cardiac defects and eventually heart failure. Despite the crucial role of TBX20
in a range of cardiac cellular processes, the signal transduction pathways that
act upstream of Tbx20 remain unknown. Here, we have identified and characterized 
a conserved 334 bp Tbx20 cardiac regulatory element that is directly activated by
the BMP/SMAD1 signaling pathway. We demonstrate that this element is both
necessary and sufficient to drive cardiac-specific expression of Tbx20 in
Xenopus, and that blocking SMAD1 signaling in vivo specifically abolishes
transcription of Tbx20, but not that of other cardiac factors, such as Tbx5 and
MHC, in the developing heart. We further demonstrate that activation of Tbx20 by 
SMAD1 is mediated by a set of novel, non-canonical, high-affinity SMAD-binding
sites located within this regulatory element and that phospho-SMAD1 directly
binds a non-canonical SMAD1 site in vivo. Finally, we show that these
non-canonical sites are necessary and sufficient for Tbx20 expression in Xenopus,
and that reporter constructs containing these sites are expressed in a
cardiac-specific manner in zebrafish and mouse. Collectively, our findings define
Tbx20 as a direct transcriptional target of the BMP/SMAD1 signaling pathway
during cardiac maturation.

PMCID: PMC2867324
PMID: 20460370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2010 Jun;88(6):480-6. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20654.

Elevated glucose induces congenital heart defects by altering the expression of
tbx5, tbx20, and has2 in developing zebrafish embryos.

Liang J(1), Gui Y, Wang W, Gao S, Li J, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Maternal diabetes increases the risk of congenital heart defects in
infants, and hyperglycemia acts as a major teratogen. Multiple steps of cardiac
development, including endocardial cushion morphogenesis and development of
neural crest cells, are challenged under elevated glucose conditions. However,
the direct effect of hyperglycemia on embryo heart organogenesis remains to be
investigated.
METHODS: Zebrafish embryos in different stages were exposed to D-glucose for 12
or 24 hr to determine the sensitive window during early heart development. In the
subsequent study, 6 hr post-fertilization embryos were treated with either 25
mmol/liter D-glucose or L-glucose for 24 hr. The expression of genes was analyzed
by whole-mount in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: The highest incidence of cardiac malformations was found during 6-30 hpf
exposure periods. After 24 hr exposure, D-glucose-treated embryos exhibited
significant developmental delay and diverse cardiac malformations, but embryos
exposed to L-glucose showed no apparent phenotype. Further investigation of the
origin of heart defects showed that cardiac looping was affected earliest, while 
the specification of cardiac progenitors and heart tube assembly were complete.
Moreover, the expression patterns of tbx5, tbx20, and has2 were altered in the
defective hearts.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that elevated glucose alone induces cardiac
defects in zebrafish embryos by altering the expression pattern of tbx5, tbx20,
and has2 in the heart. We also show the first evidence that cardiac looping is
affected earliest during heart organogenesis. These research results are
important for devising preventive and therapeutic strategies aimed at reducing
the occurrence of congenital heart defects in diabetic pregnancy.

2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20306498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2010 May;25(3):192-7. doi: 10.1097/HCO.0b013e328337b4ce.

The molecular genetics of congenital heart disease: a review of recent
developments.

Wolf M(1), Basson CT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Critical Care, Department of Pediatrics, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, New York 10065, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Our understanding of the interactions of genes and pathways
during heart development continues to expand with our knowledge of the genetic
basis of congenital heart disease. Along with the discovery of specific genes
that cause lesions, recent research has focused on the interactions of some
previously identified genes. This review focuses on the progress made during the 
last year.
RECENT FINDINGS: T-box, NK, and GATA transcription factors have known
associations with a variety of syndromic and isolated congenital heart defects.
Discovery of novel interactions of GATA and T-box transcription factors
highlights the direction of recent research. In addition, the critical yet
somewhat redundant roles of nkx2.5 and nkx2.7, along with the interaction of
nkx2.7 with tbx20, have been elucidated. The contributions of still other
transcription factor classes are being elucidated. Further understanding of
22q11.2 deletion and microduplication syndromes and their genetic interactions
has also been studied. Recent work also highlights PTPN11 and NOTCH1 in Noonan
syndrome.
SUMMARY: The recent developments in the genetics of congenital heart disease are 
reviewed. In many cases, it is the novel interactions of previously known genes
that highlight this year's developments. These interactions will ultimately lead 
to better understanding of downstream transcriptional or signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2930935
PMID: 20186050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Pediatr Cardiol. 2010 Apr;31(3):414-21. doi: 10.1007/s00246-009-9616-x. Epub 2009
Dec 29.

Transcriptional regulation of heart valve progenitor cells.

Chakraborty S(1), Combs MD, Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical
Center, ML 7020, 240 Albert Sabin Way, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The development and normal function of the heart valves requires complex
interactions among signaling molecules, transcription factors and structural
proteins that are tightly regulated in time and space. Here we review the roles
of critical transcription factors that are required for specific aspects of
normal valve development. The early progenitors of the heart valves are localized
in endocardial cushions that express transcription factors characteristic of
mesenchyme, including Twist1, Tbx20, Msx1 and Msx2. As the valve leaflets mature,
they are composed of complex stratified extracellular matrix proteins that are
regulated by the transcriptional functions of NFATc1, Sox9, and Scleraxis. Each
of these factors has analogous functions in differentiation of related connective
tissue lineages. Together, the precise timing and localized functions of specific
transcription factors control cell proliferation, differentiation, elongation,
and remodeling processes that are necessary for normal valve structure and
function. In addition, there is increasing evidence that these same transcription
factors contribute to congenital, as well as degenerative, valve disease.

PMCID: PMC2837124
PMID: 20039031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Med Genet. 2010 Apr;47(4):230-5. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.069997. Epub 2009 Sep
16.

A gain-of-function TBX20 mutation causes congenital atrial septal defects, patent
foramen ovale and cardiac valve defects.

Posch MG(1), Gramlich M, Sunde M, Schmitt KR, Lee SH, Richter S, Kersten A,
Perrot A, Panek AN, Al Khatib IH, Nemer G, Mégarbané A, Dietz R, Stiller B,
Berger F, Harvey RP, Ozcelik C.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité - Universitätsmedizin,
Berlin, Germany. maximilian.posch@charite.de

BACKGROUND: Ostium secundum atrial septal defects (ASDII) account for
approximately 10% of all congenital heart defects (CHD), and mutations in cardiac
transcription factors, including TBX20, were identified as an underlying cause
for ASDII. However, very little is known about disease penetrance in families and
functional consequences of inherited TBX20 mutations.
METHODS: The coding region of TBX20 was directly sequenced in 170 ASDII patients.
Functional consequences of one novel mutation were investigated by surface
plasmon resonance, CD spectropolarymetry, fluorescence spectrophotometry,
luciferase assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: We found a novel mutation in a highly conserved residue in the T-box DNA
binding domain (I121M) segregating with CHD in a three generation kindred. Four
mutation carriers revealed cardiac phenotypes in terms of cribriform ASDII, large
patent foramen ovale or cardiac valve defects. Interestingly, tertiary
hydrophobic interactions within the mutant TBX20 T-box were significantly altered
leading to a more dynamic structure of the protein. Moreover, Tbx20-I121M
resulted in a significantly enhanced transcriptional activity, which was further 
increased in the presence of co-transcription factors GATA4/5 and NKX2-5.
Occupancy of DNA binding sites on target genes was also increased.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that TBX20-I121M adopts a more fluid tertiary structure
leading to enhanced interactions with cofactors and more stable transcriptional
complexes on target DNA sequences. Our data, combined with that of others,
suggest that human ASDII may be related to loss-of-function as well as
gain-of-function TBX20 mutations.

PMCID: PMC2981023
PMID: 19762328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Circ Res. 2009 Aug 28;105(5):442-52. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.196063. Epub
2009 Aug 6.

Tbx20 interacts with smads to confine tbx2 expression to the atrioventricular
canal.

Singh R(1), Horsthuis T, Farin HF, Grieskamp T, Norden J, Petry M, Wakker V,
Moorman AF, Christoffels VM, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, OE5250, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

RATIONALE: T-box transcription factors play critical roles in the coordinated
formation of the working chambers and the atrioventricular canal (AVC). Tbx2
patterns embryonic myocardial cells to form the AVC and suppresses their
differentiation into chamber myocardium. Tbx20-deficient embryos, which fail to
form chambers, ectopically express Tbx2 throughout the entire heart tube,
providing a potential mechanism for the function of Tbx20 in chamber
differentiation.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the mechanism of Tbx2 suppression by Tbx20 and to
investigate the involvement of Tbx2 in Tbx20-mediated chamber formation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We generated Tbx20 and Tbx2 single and double knockout
embryos and observed that loss of Tbx2 did not rescue the Tbx20-deficient heart
from failure to form chambers. However, Tbx20 is required to suppress Tbx2 in the
developing chambers, a prerequisite to localize its strong
differentiation-inhibiting activity to the AVC. We identified a bone
morphogenetic protein (Bmp)/Smad-dependent Tbx2 enhancer conferring
AVC-restricted expression and Tbx20-dependent chamber suppression of Tbx2 in
vivo. Unexpectedly, we found in transfection and localization studies in vitro
that both Tbx20 and mutant isoforms of Tbx20 unable to bind DNA attenuate
Bmp/Smad-dependent activation of Tbx2 by binding Smad1 and Smad5 and sequestering
them from Smad4.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that Tbx20 directly interferes with Bmp/Smad
signaling to suppress Tbx2 expression in the chambers, thereby confining Tbx2
expression to the prospective AVC region.

PMID: 19661464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Development. 2009 Aug;136(16):2689-93. doi: 10.1242/dev.037911. Epub 2009 Jul 15.

The Tbx20 homologs midline and H15 specify ventral fate in the Drosophila
melanogaster leg.

Svendsen PC(1), Formaz-Preston A, Leal SM, Brook WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary, Calgary AB,
Canada.

Regional fates in the developing limbs of Drosophila melanogaster are controlled 
by selector gene transcription factors. Ventral fate in the fly leg is specified 
by the expression of the ligand Wingless. We present evidence that midline and
H15, members of the Tbx20 class of T-box transcription factors, are key mediators
of the Wingless signal in the formation of the ventral region of the fly leg.
midline and H15 are restricted to identical ventral domains of expression through
activation by Wingless and repression by the dorsal signal Decapentaplegic.
midline and H15 function redundantly and cell autonomously in the formation of
ventral-specific structures. Conversely, midline is sufficient to induce ventral 
fate. Finally, the induction of ectopic ventral fate by mid is compromised when
Wingless signaling is attenuated, suggesting that Wingless acts both upstream and
in parallel with midline/H15 to specify ventral fate. Based on these results, we 
propose that midline and H15 may be considered as the selector genes for ventral 
leg fate.

PMID: 19605497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Dev Biol. 2009 Sep 1;333(1):121-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.06.025. Epub 2009
Jun 27.

Tbx2 misexpression impairs deployment of second heart field derived progenitor
cells to the arterial pole of the embryonic heart.

Dupays L(1), Kotecha S, Angst B, Mohun TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

Tbx2 is a member of the T-box family of transcription factors that play important
roles during heart development. In the embryonic heart tube, Tbx2 is expressed in
non-chamber myocardium (outflow tract and interventricular canal) and has been
shown to block chamber formation. We have developed a genetic system to
conditionally misexpress Tbx2 in the embryonic mouse heart at early stages of
development. We show that Tbx2 expression throughout the myocardium of the heart 
tube both represses proliferation and impairs secondary heart field (SHF)
progenitor cell deployment into the outflow tract (OFT). Repression of
proliferation is accompanied by the upregulation of Ndrg2 and downregulation of
Ndrg4 expression, both genes believed to be involved in cell growth and
proliferation. Impaired deployment of SHF cells from the pharyngeal mesoderm is
accompanied by downregulation of the cell adhesion molecules Alcam and N-cadherin
in the anterior part of the embryonic heart. Tbx2 misexpression also results in
downregulation of Tbx20 within the OFT, indicating complex and region-specific
transcriptional cross-regulation between the two T-box genes.

PMID: 19563797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Dev Cell. 2009 Jun;16(6):909-16. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.04.014.

Hedgehog and Bmp polarize hematopoietic stem cell emergence in the zebrafish
dorsal aorta.

Wilkinson RN(1), Pouget C, Gering M, Russell AJ, Davies SG, Kimelman D, Patient
R.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Molecular Hematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are first detected in the floor of the embryonic 
dorsal aorta (DA), and we investigate the signals that induce the HSC program
there. We show that while continued Hedgehog (Hh) signaling from the overlying
midline structures maintains the arterial program characteristic of the DA roof, 
a ventral Bmp4 signal induces the blood stem cell program in the DA floor. This
patterning of the DA by Hh and Bmp is the mirror image of that in the neural
tube, with Hh favoring dorsal rather than ventral cell types, and Bmp favoring
ventral rather than dorsal. With the majority of current data supporting a model 
whereby HSCs derive from arterial endothelium, our data identify the signal
driving this conversion. These findings are important for the study of the
production of HSCs from embryonic stem cells and establish a paradigm for the
development of adult stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3210643
PMID: 19531361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Sep 1;18(17):3153-63. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp254. Epub 2009 Jun 
3.

Partial loss of GATA factor Pannier impairs adult heart function in Drosophila.

Qian L(1), Bodmer R.

Author information: 
(1)NASCR Center, Burnham Institute for Medical Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The GATA transcription factor encoded by pannier (pnr) is a critical regulator of
heart progenitor formation in Drosophila. Mutations in GATA4, the mammalian
homolog of pnr, have also been implicated in causing human cardiac disease in a
haploinsufficient manner. Mouse models of Gata4 loss-of-function and
gain-of-function studies underscored the importance of Gata4 in regulating
cardiac progenitor cells specification and differentiation. However, it is not
known whether pnr/Gata4 is directly involved in establishing and maintaining
adult heart physiology because of the lethality associated with defective heart
function and redundancy among various GATA factors in vertebrates. Here, we took 
advantage of the Drosophila heart model to examine the function of pnr in adult
heart physiology. We found that pnr heterozygous mutants result in defective
cardiac performance in response to electrical pacing of the heart as well as in
elevated arrhythmias. Adult-specific disruption of pnr function using a
dominant-negative form pnrEnR revealed a cardiac autonomous requirement of pnr in
regulating heart physiology. Moreover, we identified Tbx20/neuromancer (nmr) as a
potential downstream mediator of pnr in regulating cardiac performance and rhythm
regularity, based on the observation that overexpression of nmr genes, but not of
tinman, partially rescues the adult defects in pnr mutants. We conclude that pnr 
is not only essential for early cardiac progenitor formation, along with tinman
and T-box factors, but also plays an important role in establishing and/or
maintaining proper heart function, which is partially through another key
regulator Tbx20/nmr.

PMCID: PMC2722980
PMID: 19494035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Mol Biol. 2009 Jun 12;389(3):606-18. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.04.056. Epub 2009 
May 3.

Conformational stability and DNA binding specificity of the cardiac T-box
transcription factor Tbx20.

Macindoe I(1), Glockner L, Vukasin P, Stennard FA, Costa MW, Harvey RP, Mackay
JP, Sunde M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University of Sydney, Sydney,
NSW 2006, Australia.

The transcription factor Tbx20 acts within a hierarchy of T-box factors in
lineage specification and morphogenesis in the mammalian heart and is mutated in 
congenital heart disease. T-box family members share a approximately 20-kDa
DNA-binding domain termed the T-box. The question of how highly homologous T-box 
proteins achieve differential transcriptional control in heart development, while
apparently binding to the same DNA sequence, remains unresolved. Here we show
that the optimal DNA recognition sequence for the T-box of Tbx20 corresponds to a
T-half-site. Furthermore, we demonstrate using purified recombinant domains that 
distinct T-boxes show significant differences in the affinity and kinetics of
binding and in conformational stability, with the T-box of Tbx20 displaying
molten globule character. Our data highlight unique features of Tbx20 and suggest
mechanistic ways in which cardiac T-box factors might interact synergistically
and/or competitively within the cardiac regulatory network.

PMID: 19414016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2009;4(1):e4249. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004249. Epub 2009 Jan 22.

Nkx2.7 and Nkx2.5 function redundantly and are required for cardiac morphogenesis
of zebrafish embryos.

Tu CT(1), Yang TC, Tsai HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Nkx2.7 is the tinman-related gene, as well as orthologs of Nkx2.5 and
Nkx-2.3. Nkx2.7 and Nkx2.5 express in zebrafish heart fields of lateral plate
mesoderm. The temporal and spatial expression patterns of Nkx2.7 are similar to
those of Nkx2.5, but their functions during cardiogenesis remain unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, Nkx2.7 is demonstrated to compensate for
Nkx2.5 loss of function and play a predominant role in the lateral development of
the heart, including normal cardiac looping and chamber formation. Knocking down 
Nkx2.5 showed that heart development was normal from 24 to 72 hpf. However, when 
knocking down either Nkx2.7 or Nkx2.5 together with Nkx2.7, it appeared that the 
heart failed to undergo looping and showed defective chambers, although embryos
developed normally before the early heart tube stage. Decreased ventricular
myocardium proliferation and defective myocardial differentiation appeared to
result from late-stage up-regulation of bmp4, versican, tbx5 and tbx20, which
were all expressed normally in hearts at an early stage. We also found that tbx5 
and tbx20 were modulated by Nkx2.7 through the heart maturation stage because an 
inducible overexpression of Nkx2.7 in the heart caused down-regulation of tbx5
and tbx20. Although heart defects were induced by overexpression of an injection 
of 150-pg Nkx2.5 or 5-pg Nkx2.7 mRNA, either Nkx2.5 or Nkx2.7 mRNA rescued the
defects induced by Nkx2.7-morpholino(MO) and Nkx2.5-MO with Nkx2.7-MO.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: Therefore, we conclude that redundant activities of
Nkx2.5 and Nkx2.7 are required for cardiac morphogenesis, but that Nkx2.7 plays a
more critical function, specifically indicated by the gain-of-function and
loss-of- function experiments where Nkx2.7 is observed to regulate the
expressions of tbx5 and tbx20 through the maturation stage.

PMCID: PMC2626283
PMID: 19158954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 16;105(50):19833-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0808705105. Epub 2008 Dec 11.

Transcription factor neuromancer/TBX20 is required for cardiac function in
Drosophila with implications for human heart disease.

Qian L(1), Mohapatra B, Akasaka T, Liu J, Ocorr K, Towbin JA, Bodmer R.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Aging Program, Del E. Webb Neuroscience, Aging and Stem Cell
Research Center (NASCR), Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 10901 North
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jul 28;106(30):12561.

neuromancer/Tbx20 (nmr) genes are cardiac T-box transcription factors that are
evolutionarily conserved from flies to humans. Along with other known congenital 
heart disease genes, including tinman/Nkx2-5, dorsocross/Tbx5/6, and
pannier/Gata4/6, they are important for specification and morphogenesis of the
embryonic heart. The Drosophila heart has proven to be an excellent model to
study genes involved in establishing and maintaining the structural integrity of 
the adult heart, as well as genes involved in maintaining physiological function.
Using this model, we have identified nmr as a gene required in adult fly hearts
for the maintenance of both normal myofibrillar architecture and cardiac
physiology. Moreover, we have discovered synergistic interactions between nmr and
other cardiac transcription factors, including tinman/Nkx2-5, in regulating
cardiac performance, rhythmicity, and cardiomyocyte structure, reminiscent of
similar interactions in mice. This suggests a remarkably conserved role for this 
network of cardiac transcription factors in the genetic control of the adult
heart. In addition, nmr-tinman interactions also influence the expression of
potential downstream effectors, such as ion channels. Interestingly, genetic
screening of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and congenital heart disease
has revealed TBX20 variants in three sporadic and two familial cases that were
not found in controls. These findings suggest that the fly heart might serve as
an identifier of candidate genes involved in human heart disease.

PMCID: PMC2605007
PMID: 19074289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Eur J Med Genet. 2008 Nov-Dec;51(6):580-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2008.09.001. Epub 
2008 Sep 12.

T-box transcription factor TBX20 mutations in Chinese patients with congenital
heart disease.

Liu C(1), Shen A, Li X, Jiao W, Zhang X, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Beijing Children's Hospital Affiliated to
Capital Medical University, Beijing, PR China.

Despite animal studies having demonstrated that Tbx20 is essential for heart
development, few studies have been conducted about TBX20 and congenital heart
disease (CHD) in humans. Recently two TBX20 mutations have been associated with
human heart defects in two Caucasian families, but TBX20 mutations underlying the
more common isolated forms of CHD are still unknown. To explore this question and
to analyze the association between TBX20 and susceptibility to CHD 203 Chinese
patients with a variety of predominantly sporadic CHD and 300 control subjects
were investigated for TBX20 mutations. The exon 2-6 contributing to the T-box
DNA-binding domain and their flanking intron sequences were amplified by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and then were sequenced after purification. Three
non-synonymous mutations (A63T, I121F, and T262M) were identified in 3 patients, 
which were not seen in 300 controls. I121F and T262M mutations occurred within
the highly conserved T-box DNA-binding domain. Two synonymous sequence variants
(N222N, T262T) and one intervening variant (IVS2-5insCT) were observed in 3
patients but not in the controls. In addition, eight SNPs were observed both in
patients and controls and four (S167S, P177P, A181A, and I219I) of them are
novel. These data indicate that the frequency of TBX20 missense mutations
occurred in Chinese CHD children is low, but they probably contribute to the risk
of atrial septal defect (ASD), total anomalous pulmonary venous connection
(TAPVC) and tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) in a small subset of Chinese. The findings 
provide the first insight into TBX20 mutations for TOF and TAPVC. Functional
study involved in the new sequence variants should be subject of further
investigation.

PMID: 18834961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Circulation. 2008 Jul 29;118(5):507-17. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.778795.
Epub 2008 Jul 14.

Generation of functional murine cardiac myocytes from induced pluripotent stem
cells.

Mauritz C(1), Schwanke K, Reppel M, Neef S, Katsirntaki K, Maier LS, Nguemo F,
Menke S, Haustein M, Hescheler J, Hasenfuss G, Martin U.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Research Laboratories for Biotechnology and Artificial Organs,
Carl-Neuberg Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2008 Jul 29;118(5):472-5.

BACKGROUND: The recent breakthrough in the generation of induced pluripotent stem
(iPS) cells, which are almost indistinguishable from embryonic stem (ES) cells,
facilitates the generation of murine disease- and human patient-specific stem
cell lines. The aim of this study was to characterize the cardiac differentiation
potential of a murine iPS cell clone in comparison to a well-established murine
ES cell line.
METHODS AND RESULTS: With the use of a standard embryoid body-based
differentiation protocol for ES cells, iPS cells as well as ES cells were
differentiated for 24 days. Although the analyzed iPS cell clone showed a delayed
and less efficient formation of beating embryoid bodies compared with the ES cell
line, the differentiation resulted in an average of 55% of spontaneously
contracting iPS cell embryoid bodies. Analyses on molecular, structural, and
functional levels demonstrated that iPS cell-derived cardiomyocytes show typical 
features of ES cell-derived cardiomyocytes. Reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction analyses demonstrated expression of marker genes typical for
mesoderm, cardiac mesoderm, and cardiomyocytes including Brachyury, mesoderm
posterior factor 1 (Mesp1), friend of GATA2 (FOG-2), GATA-binding protein 4
(GATA4), NK2 transcription factor related, locus 5 (Nkx2.5), T-box 5 (Tbx5),
T-box 20 (Tbx20), atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), myosin light chain 2 atrial
transcripts (MLC2a), myosin light chain 2 ventricular transcripts (MLC2v),
alpha-myosin heavy chain (alpha-MHC), and cardiac troponin T in differentiation
cultures of iPS cells. Immunocytology confirmed expression of
cardiomyocyte-typical proteins including sarcomeric alpha-actinin, titin, cardiac
troponin T, MLC2v, and connexin 43. iPS cell cardiomyocytes displayed spontaneous
rhythmic intracellular Ca(2+) fluctuations with amplitudes of Ca(2+) transients
comparable to ES cell cardiomyocytes. Simultaneous Ca(2+) release within clusters
of iPS cell-derived cardiomyocytes indicated functional coupling of the cells.
Electrophysiological studies with multielectrode arrays demonstrated
functionality and presence of the beta-adrenergic and muscarinic signaling
cascade in these cells.
CONCLUSIONS: iPS cells differentiate into functional cardiomyocytes. In contrast 
to ES cells, iPS cells allow derivation of autologous functional cardiomyocytes
for cellular cardiomyoplasty and myocardial tissue engineering.

PMID: 18625890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Dev Biol. 2008 Sep 1;321(1):150-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.06.013. Epub 2008
Jun 16.

DM-GRASP/ALCAM/CD166 is required for cardiac morphogenesis and maintenance of
cardiac identity in first heart field derived cells.

Gessert S(1), Maurus D, Brade T, Walther P, Pandur P, Kühl M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ulm University,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, D-89081 Ulm, Germany.

Vertebrate heart development requires specification of cardiac precursor cells,
migration of cardiac progenitors as well as coordinated cell movements during
looping and septation. DM-GRASP/ALCAM/CD166 is a member of the neuronal
immunoglobulin domain superfamily of cell adhesion molecules and was recently
suggested to be a target gene of non-canonical Wnt signalling. Loss of DM-GRASP
function did not affect specification of cardiac progenitor cells. Later during
development, expression of cardiac marker genes in the first heart field of
Xenopus laevis such as Tbx20 and TnIc was reduced, whereas expression of the
second heart field marker genes Isl-1 and BMP-4 was unaffected. Furthermore, loss
of DM-GRASP function resulted in defective cell adhesion and cardiac
morphogenesis. Additionally, expression of DM-GRASP can rescue the phenotype that
results from the loss of non-canonical Wnt11-R signalling suggesting that
DM-GRASP and non-canonical Wnt signalling are functionally coupled during cardiac
development.

PMID: 18598690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Circ Res. 2008 Jun 6;102(11):1340-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.169565. Epub
2008 May 8.

Transcription factor Tbx3 is required for the specification of the
atrioventricular conduction system.

Bakker ML(1), Boukens BJ, Mommersteeg MT, Brons JF, Wakker V, Moorman AF,
Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 Jun 6;102(11):1295-7.

The cardiac conduction system consists of distinctive heart muscle cells that
initiate and propagate the electric impulse required for coordinated contraction.
The conduction system expresses the transcriptional repressor Tbx3, which is
required for vertebrate development and controls the formation of the sinus node.
In humans, mutations in Tbx3 cause ulnar-mammary syndrome. Here, we investigated 
the role of Tbx3 in the molecular specification of the atrioventricular
conduction system. Expression analysis revealed early delineation of the
atrioventricular bundle and proximal bundle branches by Tbx3 expression in human,
mouse, and chicken. Tbx3-deficient mice, which die between embryonic day 12.5 and
15.5, ectopically expressed genes for connexin (Cx)43, atrial natriuretic factor 
(Nppa), Tbx18, and Tbx20 in the atrioventricular bundle and proximal bundle
branches. Cx40 was precociously upregulated in the atrioventricular bundle of
Tbx3 mutants. Moreover, the atrioventricular bundle and branches failed to exit
the cell cycle in Tbx3 mutant embryos. Finally, Tbx3-deficient embryos developed 
outflow tract malformations and ventricular septal defects. These data reveal
that Tbx3 is required for the molecular specification of the atrioventricular
bundle and bundle branches and for the development of the ventricular septum and 
outflow tract. Our data suggest a mechanism in which Tbx3 represses
differentiation into ventricular working myocardium, thereby imposing the
conduction system phenotype on cells within its expression domain.

PMID: 18467625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Dev Biol. 2008 May 15;317(2):486-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.044. Epub 2008 
Mar 6.

Ndrg4 is required for normal myocyte proliferation during early cardiac
development in zebrafish.

Qu X(1), Jia H, Garrity DM, Tompkins K, Batts L, Appel B, Zhong TP, Baldwin HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

NDRG4 is a novel member of the NDRG family (N-myc downstream-regulated gene). The
roles of NDRG4 in development have not previously been evaluated. We show that,
during zebrafish embryonic development, ndrg4 is expressed exclusively in the
embryonic heart, the central nervous system (CNS) and the sensory system. Ndrg4
knockdown in zebrafish embryos causes a marked reduction in proliferative
myocytes and results in hypoplastic hearts. This growth defect is associated with
cardiac phenotypes in morphogenesis and function, including abnormal heart
looping, inefficient circulation and weak contractility. We reveal that ndrg4 is 
required for restricting the expression of versican and bmp4 to the developing
atrioventricular canal. This constellation of ndrg4 cardiac defects phenocopies
those seen in mutant hearts of heartstrings (hst), the tbx5 loss-of-function
mutants in zebrafish. We further show that ndrg4 expression is significantly
decreased in hearts with reduced tbx5 activities. Conversely, increased
expression of tbx5 that is due to tbx20 knockdown leads to an increase in ndrg4
expression. Together, our studies reveal an essential role of ndrg4 in regulating
proliferation and growth of cardiomyocytes, suggesting that ndrg4 may function
downstream of tbx5 during heart development and growth.

PMCID: PMC2800102
PMID: 18407257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Dev Biol. 2008 May 15;317(2):671-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.015. Epub 2008 
Feb 21.

Neuronal function of Tbx20 conserved from nematodes to vertebrates.

Pocock R(1), Mione M, Hussain S, Maxwell S, Pontecorvi M, Aslam S, Gerrelli D,
Sowden JC, Woollard A.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Biochemistry Department, University of Oxford, South Parks
Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, UK.

The Tbx20 orthologue, mab-9, is required for development of the Caenorhabditis
elegans hindgut, whereas several vertebrate Tbx20 genes promote heart
development. Here we show that Tbx20 orthologues also have a role in motor neuron
development that is conserved between invertebrates and vertebrates. mab-9
mutants exhibit guidance defects in dorsally projecting axons from motor neurons 
located in the ventral nerve cord. Danio rerio (Zebrafish) tbx20 morphants show
defects in the migration patterns of motor neuron soma of the facial and
trigeminal motor neuron groups. Human TBX20 is expressed in motor neurons in the 
developing hindbrain of human embryos and we show that human TBX20 can substitute
for zebrafish tbx20 in promoting cranial motor neuron migration. mab-9 is also
partially able to rescue the zebrafish migration defect, whereas other vertebrate
T-box genes cannot. Conversely we show that the human TBX20 T-box domain can
rescue motor neuron defects in C. elegans. These data suggest the functional
equivalence of Tbx20 orthologues in regulating the development of specific motor 
neuron groups. We also demonstrate the functional equivalence of human and C.
elegans Tbx20 T-box domains for regulating male tail development in the nematode 
even though these genes play highly diverged roles in organogenesis.

PMID: 18358469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Dev Biol. 2008 May 1;317(1):282-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.037. Epub 2008
Feb 29.

Twist1 function in endocardial cushion cell proliferation, migration, and
differentiation during heart valve development.

Shelton EL(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical
Center ML 7020, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Twist1 is a bHLH transcription factor that regulates cell proliferation,
migration, and differentiation in embryonic progenitor cell populations and
transformed tumor cells. While much is known about Twist1's function in a variety
of mesenchymal cell types, the role of Twist1 in endocardial cushion cells is
unknown. Twist1 gain and loss of function experiments were performed in primary
chicken endocardial cushion cells in order to elucidate its role in endocardial
cushion development. These studies indicate that Twist1 can induce endocardial
cushion cell proliferation as well as promote endocardial cushion cell migration.
Furthermore, Twist1 is subject to BMP regulation and can induce expression of
cell migration marker genes including Periostin, Cadherin 11, and Mmp2 while
repressing markers of valve cell differentiation including Aggrecan. Previously, 
Tbx20 has been implicated in endocardial cushion cell proliferation and
differentiation, and in the current study, Tbx20 also promotes cushion cell
migration. Twist1 can induce Tbx20 expression, while Tbx20 does not affect Twist1
expression. Taken together, these data indicate a role for Twist1 upstream of
Tbx20 in promoting cell proliferation and migration and repressing
differentiation in endocardial cushion cells during embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2413172
PMID: 18353304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 9;369(3):801-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.141. Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Common marmoset embryonic stem cell can differentiate into cardiomyocytes.

Chen H(1), Hattori F, Murata M, Li W, Yuasa S, Onizuka T, Shimoji K, Ohno Y,
Sasaki E, Kimura K, Hakuno D, Sano M, Makino S, Ogawa S, Fukuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine and Advanced Cardiac Therapeutics, Keio
University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582,
Japan.

Common marmoset monkeys have recently attracted much attention as a primate
research model, and are preferred to rhesus and cynomolgus monkeys due to their
small bodies, easy handling and efficient breeding. We recently reported the
establishment of common marmoset embryonic stem cell (CMESC) lines that could
differentiate into three germ layers. Here, we report that our CMESC can also
differentiate into cardiomyocytes and investigated their characteristics. After
induction, FOG-2 was expressed, followed by GATA4 and Tbx20, then Nkx2.5 and
Tbx5. Spontaneous beating could be detected at days 12-15. Immunofluorescent
staining and ultrastructural analyses revealed that they possessed
characteristics typical of functional cardiomyocytes. They showed sinus node-like
action potentials, and the beating rate was augmented by isoproterenol
stimulation. The BrdU incorporation assay revealed that CMESC-derived
cardiomyocytes retained a high proliferative potential for up to 24 weeks. We
believe that CMESC-derived cardiomyocytes will advance preclinical studies in
cardiovascular regenerative medicine.

PMID: 18331825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Jun 1;104(3):1022-33. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21686.

Characterization of TBX20 in human hearts and its regulation by TFAP2.

Hammer S(1), Toenjes M, Lange M, Fischer JJ, Dunkel I, Mebus S, Grimm CH, Hetzer 
R, Berger F, Sperling S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

The T-box family of transcription factors has been shown to have major impact on 
human development and disease. In animal studies Tbx20 is essential for the
development of the atrioventricular channel, the outflow tract and valves,
suggesting its potential causative role for the development of Tetralogy of
Fallot (TOF) in humans. In the presented study, we analyzed TBX20 in cardiac
biopsies derived from patients with TOF, ventricular septal defects (VSDs) and
normal hearts. Mutation analysis did not reveal any disease causing sequence
variation, however, TBX20 is significantly upregulated in tissue samples of
patients with TOF, but not VSD. In depth analysis of TBX20 transcripts lead to
the identification of two new exons 3' to the known TBX20 message resembling the 
mouse variant Tbx20a, as well as an extended 5'UTR. Functional analysis of the
human TBX20 promoter revealed a 100 bp region that contains strong activating
elements. Within this core promoter region we recognized functional binding sites
for TFAP2 transcription factors and identified TFAP2 as repressors of the TBX20
gene in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, decreased TFAP2C levels in cardiac biopsies 
of TOF patients underline the biological significance of the pathway described.
In summary, we provide first insights into the regulation of TBX20 and show its
potential for human congenital heart diseases.

PMID: 18275040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Jun 26;87(24):1709-12.

[Differentially expressed transcription factors in the cardiac outflow tract
tissue of connexin43 knockout mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Qi CH(1), Huang GY, Zhou GM.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Heart Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the changes in the expression of cardiac transcription 
factors in the cardiac outflow tract (OFT) tissues in the connexin43 knockout
homozygotes (Cx43 KO), connexin43 heterozygotes, and connexin43 wild-type mice
(Cx43 WT).
METHODS: The cDNA was retrotranscribed from the RNA extracted from the OFT
tissues of 6 Cx43 KO, 6 Cx43 WT, and 6 Cx43 heterozygotes genotyped by PCR method
on the embryonic day (ED) 13.5 and ED 14.5. The biotin-labeled cRNA derived from 
the transcription of cDNA was fragmented as probes. The probes were hybridized
with Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array. Gene Array Scanner was used to screen
the signals of hybridization and detect the expression of genes. The mRNA
expression levels of 3 cardiac transcription factors: Sox11, Foxp1, and Tbx20
were measured by real time quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The ratios of the expression of the 6 genes, all cardiac transcription
factors: Gata4, Mef2C, Sox4, Sox11, Foxp1, and Tbx20 between the Cx43 KO and Cx43
WT groups were 1:1.41, 1:2.30, 1:3.25, 1:0.71, 1:0.66, and 1:0.54. The expression
levels of Sox11 and Foxp1 on ED13.5 in the Cx43 K group were 4.76 +/- 0.19 and
5.08 +/- 0.28 respectively, both significantly lower than those of the Cx43 WT
group (5.34 +/- 0.25 and 5.64 +/- 0.15 respectively, both P < 0.01), and
expression level of Tbx20 on ED 13.5 in the Cx43 K group was 7.18 +/- 0.16, not
significantly different from that of the Cx43 WT group (7.47 +/- 0.27, P > 0.05).
The expression levels of the genes Sox11, Foxp1, Tbx20 on ED 14,5 were 4.71 +/-
0.27, 5.25 +/- 0.31, and 7.05 +/- 0.17 respectively, all significantly lower than
those of the Cx43 WT group (5.00 +/- 0.19, 5.77 +/- 0.16,) and 7.43 +/- 0.25, all
P < 0.05). The results of the expression of these genes by real time PCR analysis
showed an excellent concordance with those indicated by the microarray analysis.
CONCLUSION: The cardiac transcription factors such as Sox11, Foxp1, and Tbx20
that are differently expressed in the Cx43 KO OFT tissue may be involved in the
pathogenesis of the OFT defects.

PMID: 17825156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Aug;81(2):280-91. Epub 2007 Jun 15.

Mutations in cardiac T-box factor gene TBX20 are associated with diverse cardiac 
pathologies, including defects of septation and valvulogenesis and
cardiomyopathy.

Kirk EP(1), Sunde M, Costa MW, Rankin SA, Wolstein O, Castro ML, Butler TL, Hyun 
C, Guo G, Otway R, Mackay JP, Waddell LB, Cole AD, Hayward C, Keogh A, Macdonald 
P, Griffiths L, Fatkin D, Sholler GF, Zorn AM, Feneley MP, Winlaw DS, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, 2010, 
Australia.

The T-box family transcription factor gene TBX20 acts in a conserved regulatory
network, guiding heart formation and patterning in diverse species. Mouse Tbx20
is expressed in cardiac progenitor cells, differentiating cardiomyocytes, and
developing valvular tissue, and its deletion or RNA interference-mediated
knockdown is catastrophic for heart development. TBX20 interacts physically,
functionally, and genetically with other cardiac transcription factors, including
NKX2-5, GATA4, and TBX5, mutations of which cause congenital heart disease (CHD).
Here, we report nonsense (Q195X) and missense (I152M) germline mutations within
the T-box DNA-binding domain of human TBX20 that were associated with a family
history of CHD and a complex spectrum of developmental anomalies, including
defects in septation, chamber growth, and valvulogenesis. Biophysical
characterization of wild-type and mutant proteins indicated how the missense
mutation disrupts the structure and function of the TBX20 T-box. Dilated
cardiomyopathy was a feature of the TBX20 mutant phenotype in humans and mice,
suggesting that mutations in developmental transcription factors can provide a
sensitized template for adult-onset heart disease. Our findings are the first to 
link TBX20 mutations to human pathology. They provide insights into how mutation 
of different genes in an interactive regulatory circuit lead to diverse clinical 
phenotypes, with implications for diagnosis, genetic screening, and patient
follow-up.

PMCID: PMC1950799
PMID: 17668378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2007 Sep;18(10):1060-6. Epub 2007 Jul 30.

A novel early onset lethal form of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia maps to chromosome 7p14-p22.

Bhuiyan ZA(1), Hamdan MA, Shamsi ET, Postma AV, Mannens MM, Wilde AA, Al-Gazali
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Z.A.Bhuiyan@amc.uva.nl

INTRODUCTION: Previously, autosomal dominant catecholaminergic polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia (CPVT [1]) was mapped to chromosome 1q42-43 with
identification of pathogenic mutations in RYR2. Autosomal recessive CPVT (2) was 
mapped to chromosome 1p13-21, leading to the identification of mutations in
CASQ2. In this study, we aimed to elucidate clinical phenotypes of a new variant 
of CPVT (3) in an inbred Arab family and also delineate the chromosomal location 
of the gene causing CPVT (3).
METHODS AND RESULTS: In a highly inbred family, clinical symptoms of CPVT
appeared early in childhood (7-12 years) and in three of the four cases, the
first appearance of symptoms turned into a fatal outcome. Parents of the affected
children were first-degree cousins and without any symptoms. Segregation analysis
suggested an autosomal recessive inheritance. A genome-wide search using
polymorphic DNA markers mapped the disease locus to a 25-Mb interval on
chromosome 7p14-p22. A maximal multipoint LOD score of 3.17 was obtained at
marker D7S493. Sequencing of putative candidate genes, SP4, NPY, FKBP9, FKBP14,
PDE1C, and TBX20, in and around this locus, did not reveal any mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a novel highly malignant autosomal recessive form
of CPVT and mapped this disorder to a 25-Mb interval on chromosome 7p14-p22.

PMID: 17666061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Circ Res. 2007 May 11;100(9):1353-62. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Beta-catenin downregulation is required for adaptive cardiac remodeling.

Baurand A(1), Zelarayan L, Betney R, Gehrke C, Dunger S, Noack C, Busjahn A,
Huelsken J, Taketo MM, Birchmeier W, Dietz R, Bergmann MW.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

The armadillo-related protein beta-catenin has multiple functions in cardiac
tissue homeostasis: stabilization of beta-catenin has been implicated in adult
cardiac hypertrophy, and downregulation initiates heart formation in
embryogenesis. The protein is also part of the cadherin/catenin complex at the
cell membrane, where depletion might result in disturbed cell-cell interaction
similar to N-cadherin knockout models. Here, we analyzed the in vivo role of
beta-catenin in adult cardiac hypertrophy initiated by angiotensin II (Ang II).
The cardiac-specific mifepristone-inducible alphaMHC-CrePR1 transgene was used to
induce beta-catenin depletion (loxP-flanked exons 3 to 6, beta-cat(Deltaex3-6)
mice) or stabilization (loxP-flanked exon 3, beta-cat(Deltaex3) mice). Levels of 
beta-catenin were altered both in membrane and nuclear extracts. Analysis of the 
beta-catenin target genes Axin2 and Tcf-4 confirmed increased
beta-catenin-dependent transcription in beta-catenin stabilized mice. In both
models, transgenic mice were viable and healthy at age 6 months. beta-Catenin
appeared dispensable for cell membrane function. Ang II infusion induced cardiac 
hypertrophy both in wild-type mice and in mice with beta-catenin depletion. In
contrast, mice with stabilized beta-catenin had decreased cross-sectional area at
baseline and an abrogated hypertrophic response to Ang II infusion. Stabilizing
beta-catenin led to impaired fractional shortening compared with control
littermates after Ang II stimulation. This functional deterioration was
associated with altered expression of the T-box proteins Tbx5 and Tbx20 at
baseline and after Ang II stimulation. In addition, atrophy-related protein
IGFBP5 was upregulated in beta-catenin-stabilized mice. These data suggest that
beta-catenin downregulation is required for adaptive cardiac hypertrophy.

PMID: 17413044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Development. 2006 Dec;133(24):4945-55.

T-Box transcription factor Tbx20 regulates a genetic program for cranial motor
neuron cell body migration.

Song MR(1), Shirasaki R, Cai CL, Ruiz EC, Evans SM, Lee SK, Pfaff SL.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Members of the T-box transcription factor family (Tbx) are associated with
several human syndromes during embryogenesis. Nevertheless, their functions
within the developing CNS remain poorly characterized. Tbx20 is expressed by
migrating branchiomotor/visceromotor (BM/VM) neurons within the hindbrain during 
neuronal circuit formation. We examined Tbx20 function in BM/VM cells using
conditional Tbx20-null mutant mice to delete the gene in neurons. Hindbrain
rhombomere patterning and the initial generation of post-mitotic BM/VM neurons
were normal in Tbx20 mutants. However, Tbx20 was required for the tangential
(caudal) migration of facial neurons, the lateral migration of trigeminal cells
and the trans-median movement of vestibuloacoustic neurons. Facial cell soma
migration defects were associated with the coordinate downregulation of multiple 
components of the planar cell polarity pathway including Fzd7, Wnt11, Prickle1,
Vang1 and Vang2. Our study suggests that Tbx20 programs a variety of hindbrain
motor neurons for migration, independent of directionality, and in facial neurons
is a positive regulator of the non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway.

PMID: 17119020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 15;302(2):376-88. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

Tbx20 regulation of endocardial cushion cell proliferation and extracellular
matrix gene expression.

Shelton EL(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical
Center ML 7020, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

While recent work has implicated Tbx20 in myocardial maturation and
proliferation, the role of Tbx20 in heart valve development remains relatively
unknown. Tbx20 expression was manipulated in primary avian endocardial cells in
order to elucidate its function in developing endocardial cushions. Tbx20 gain of
function was achieved with a Tbx20-adenovirus, and endogenous Tbx20 expression
was inhibited with Tbx20-specific siRNA in cultured endocardial cushion cells.
With Tbx20 gain of function, the expression of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans 
(CSPG), including aggrecan and versican, was decreased, while the expression of
the matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) mmp9 and mmp13 was increased. Consistent
results were observed with Tbx20 loss of function, where the expression of CSPG
genes increased and MMP genes decreased. In addition, cushion mesenchyme
proliferation increased with infection of a Tbx20-adenovirus and decreased with
transfection of Tbx20-specfic siRNA. Furthermore, BMP2 treatment resulted in
increased Tbx20 expression in endocardial cushion cells, and loss of Tbx20 led to
increased Tbx2 and decreased N-myc gene expression. Taken together, these data
support a role for Tbx20 in repressing extracellular matrix remodeling and
promoting cell proliferation in mesenchymal valve precursor populations in
endocardial cushions during embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC1847324
PMID: 17064679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Dev Dyn. 2006 Jun;235(6):1623-30.

Developmental expression patterns of Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx5, and Tbx20 in Xenopus
tropicalis.

Showell C(1), Christine KS, Mandel EM, Conlon FL.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center and Department of Genetics, University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-3280, USA.

T-box genes have diverse functions during embryogenesis and are implicated in
several human congenital disorders. Here, we report the identification, sequence 
analysis, and developmental expression patterns of four members of the T-box gene
family in the diploid frog Xenopus tropicalis. These four genes-Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx5,
and Tbx20-have been shown to influence cardiac development in a variety of
organisms, in addition to their individual roles in regulating other aspects of
embryonic development. Our results highlight the high degree of evolutionary
conservation between orthologs of these genes in X. tropicalis and other
vertebrates, both at the molecular level and in their developmental expression
patterns, and also identify novel features of their expression. Thus, X.
tropicalis represents a potentially valuable vertebrate model in which to further
investigate the functions of these genes through genetic approaches.

Developmental Dynamics 235:1623-1630, 2006. (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC1635807
PMID: 16477648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2005 Dec;45(4):107-18.

Understanding heart development and congenital heart defects through
developmental biology: a segmental approach.

Sakabe M(1), Matsui H, Sakata H, Ando K, Yamagishi T, Nakajima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University,
Abenoku, Osaka, Japan.

ABSTRACT The heart is the first organ to form and function during development. In
the pregastrula chick embryo, cells contributing to the heart are found in the
postero-lateral epiblast. During the pregastrula stages, interaction between the 
posterior epiblast and hypoblast is required for the anterior lateral plate
mesoderm (ALM) to form, from which the heart will later develop. This tissue
interaction is replaced by an Activin-like signal in culture. During
gastrulation, the ALM is committed to the heart lineage by endoderm-secreted BMP 
and subsequently differentiates into cardiomyocyte. The right and left precardiac
mesoderms migrate toward the ventral midline to form the beating primitive heart 
tube. Then, the heart tube generates a right-side bend, and the d-loop and
presumptive heart segments begin to appear segmentally: outflow tract (OT), right
ventricle, left ventricle, atrioventricular (AV) canal, atrium and sinus venosus.
T-box transcription factors are involved in the formation of the heart segments: 
Tbx5 identifies the left ventricle and Tbx20 the right ventricle. After the
formation of the heart segments, endothelial cells in the OT and AV regions
transform into mesenchyme and generate valvuloseptal endocardial cushion tissue. 
This phenomenon is called endocardial EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transformation)
and is regulated mainly by BMP and TGFbeta. Finally, heart septa that have
developed in the OT, ventricle, AV canal and atrium come into alignment and fuse,
resulting in the completion of the four-chambered heart. Altered development seen
in the cardiogenetic process is involved in the pathogenesis of congenital heart 
defects. Therefore, understanding the molecular nature regulating the 'nodal
point' during heart development is important in order to understand the etiology 
of congenital heart defects, as well as normal heart development.

PMID: 16359490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mech Dev. 2005 Sep;122(9):1056-69.

Tbx20-related genes, mid and H15, are required for tinman expression, proper
patterning, and normal differentiation of cardioblasts in Drosophila.

Reim I(1), Mohler JP, Frasch M.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, Box 1020, One Gustave L. Levy Pl., New York, NY 10029, USA.

Tbx20-related T-box genes have been implicated in the regulation of heart
development in several vertebrate species. In the present report, we demonstrate 
that a pair of genes representing Drosophila orthologs of Tbx20, midline (mid)
and H15, have important functions during the development of the Drosophila
equivalent of the heart, i.e. the dorsal vessel. We show that mid is among the
earliest known genes that are specifically expressed in all cardioblasts during
early embryogenesis, and H15 expression is subsequently activated in the same
cells. Mutant embryos lacking the activity of mid, or both mid and H15, are able 
to form dorsal vessels with largely normal numbers of cardioblasts and
pericardial cells. Furthermore, the mutant cardioblasts express several general
cardioblast markers such as Mef2 and Toll at normal levels. However, the
expression of tinman (tin), which normally occurs in four out of six cardioblasts
in each hemisegment of the dorsal vessel, is almost abolished. Conversely, the
expression of the Dorsocross (Doc) T-box genes, which is normally restricted to
the two Tin-negative cardioblasts in each hemisegment, is strongly expanded into 
the majority of cardioblasts in mid mutant and mid+H15-deficient embryos.
Altogether, the data from the loss-of-function phenotypes demonstrate that mid,
and to a lesser degree H15, have important roles in establishing the metameric
patterning of cardioblast identities, but not in specifying cardioblasts as such.
Ectopic expression of mid causes ectopic tin expression and, less efficiently,
produces extra cardioblasts. We propose that one of the major functions of mid
and H15 during cardioblast development is the re-activation of tin expression at 
a stage when the induction of tin by Dpp in the dorsal mesoderm has ceased.
Through this activity, mid and H15 are required for the normal functional
diversification of cardioblasts and the expression of tin-dependent terminal
differentiation genes within the dorsal vessel.

PMID: 15922573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Development. 2005 Jun;132(12):2697-707. Epub 2005 May 18.

Tbx20 is essential for cardiac chamber differentiation and repression of Tbx2.

Singh MK(1), Christoffels VM, Dias JM, Trowe MO, Petry M, Schuster-Gossler K,
Bürger A, Ericson J, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30625
Hannover, Germany.

Tbx20, a member of the T-box family of transcriptional regulators, shows
evolutionary conserved expression in the developing heart. In the mouse, Tbx20 is
expressed in the cardiac crescent, then in the endocardium and myocardium of the 
linear and looped heart tube before it is restricted to the atrioventricular
canal and outflow tract in the multi-chambered heart. Here, we show that Tbx20 is
required for progression from the linear heart tube to a multi-chambered heart.
Mice carrying a targeted mutation of Tbx20 show early embryonic lethality due to 
hemodynamic failure. A linear heart tube with normal anteroposterior patterning
is established in the mutant. The tube does not elongate, indicating a defect in 
recruitment of mesenchyme from the secondary heart field, even though markers of 
the secondary heart field are not affected. Furthermore, dorsoventral patterning 
of the tube, formation of working myocardium, looping, and further
differentiation and morphogenesis fail. Instead, Tbx2, Bmp2 and vinexin alpha
(Sh3d4), genes normally restricted to regions of primary myocardium and lining
endocardium, are ectopically expressed in the linear heart tube of Tbx20 mutant
embryos. Because Tbx2 is both necessary and sufficient to repress chamber
differentiation (Christoffels et al., 2004a; Harrelson et al., 2004), Tbx20 may
ensure progression to a multi-chambered heart by repressing Tbx2 in the
myocardial precursor cells of the linear heart tube destined to form the
chambers.

PMID: 15901664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Development. 2005 May;132(10):2451-62. Epub 2005 Apr 20.

Murine T-box transcription factor Tbx20 acts as a repressor during heart
development, and is essential for adult heart integrity, function and adaptation.

Stennard FA(1), Costa MW, Lai D, Biben C, Furtado MB, Solloway MJ, McCulley DJ,
Leimena C, Preis JI, Dunwoodie SL, Elliott DE, Prall OW, Black BL, Fatkin D,
Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, St Vincent's Hospital, 384 Victoria
Street, Darlinghurst 2010, New South Wales, Australia.

The genetic hierarchies guiding lineage specification and morphogenesis of the
mammalian embryonic heart are poorly understood. We now show by gene targeting
that murine T-box transcription factor Tbx20 plays a central role in these
pathways, and has important activities in both cardiac development and adult
function. Loss of Tbx20 results in death of embryos at mid-gestation with grossly
abnormal heart morphogenesis. Underlying these disturbances was a severely
compromised cardiac transcriptional program, defects in the molecular
pre-pattern, reduced expansion of cardiac progenitors and a block to chamber
differentiation. Notably, Tbx20-null embryos showed ectopic activation of Tbx2
across the whole heart myogenic field. Tbx2 encodes a transcriptional repressor
normally expressed in non-chamber myocardium, and in the atrioventricular canal
it has been proposed to inhibit chamber-specific gene expression through
competition with positive factor Tbx5. Our data demonstrate a repressive activity
for Tbx20 and place it upstream of Tbx2 in the cardiac genetic program. Thus,
hierarchical, repressive interactions between Tbx20 and other T-box genes and
factors underlie the primary lineage split into chamber and non-chamber
myocardium in the forming heart, an early event upon which all subsequent
morphogenesis depends. Additional roles for Tbx20 in adult heart integrity and
contractile function were revealed by in-vivo cardiac functional analysis of
Tbx20 heterozygous mutant mice. These data suggest that mutations in human
cardiac transcription factor genes, possibly including TBX20, underlie both
congenital heart disease and adult cardiomyopathies.

PMID: 15843414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Development. 2005 May;132(10):2463-74. Epub 2005 Apr 20.

Tbx20 dose-dependently regulates transcription factor networks required for mouse
heart and motoneuron development.

Takeuchi JK(1), Mileikovskaia M, Koshiba-Takeuchi K, Heidt AB, Mori AD, Arruda
EP, Gertsenstein M, Georges R, Davidson L, Mo R, Hui CC, Henkelman RM, Nemer M,
Black BL, Nagy A, Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8,
Canada.

To elucidate the function of the T-box transcription factor Tbx20 in mammalian
development, we generated a graded loss-of-function series by transgenic RNA
interference in entirely embryonic stem cell-derived mouse embryos. Complete
Tbx20 knockdown resulted in defects in heart formation, including hypoplasia of
the outflow tract and right ventricle, which derive from the anterior heart field
(AHF), and decreased expression of Nkx2-5 and Mef2c, transcription factors
required for AHF formation. A mild knockdown led to persistent truncus arteriosus
(unseptated outflow tract) and hypoplastic right ventricle, entities similar to
human congenital heart defects, and demonstrated a critical requirement for Tbx20
in valve formation. Finally, an intermediate knockdown revealed a role for Tbx20 
in motoneuron development, specifically in the regulation of the transcription
factors Isl2 and Hb9, which are important for terminal differentiation of
motoneurons. Tbx20 could activate promoters/enhancers of several genes in
cultured cells, including the Mef2c AHF enhancer and the Nkx2-5 cardiac enhancer.
The Mef2c AHF enhancer relies on Isl1- and Gata-binding sites. We identified a
similar Isl1 binding site in the Nkx2-5 AHF enhancer, which in transgenic mouse
embryos was essential for activity in a large part of the heart, including the
outflow tract. Tbx20 synergized with Isl1 and Gata4 to activate both the Mef2c
and Nkx2-5 enhancers, thus providing a unifying mechanism for gene activation by 
Tbx20 in the AHF. We conclude that Tbx20 is positioned at a critical node in
transcription factor networks required for heart and motoneuron development where
it dose-dependently regulates gene expression.

PMID: 15843409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Development. 2005 May;132(10):2475-87. Epub 2005 Apr 20.

T-box genes coordinate regional rates of proliferation and regional specification
during cardiogenesis.

Cai CL(1), Zhou W, Yang L, Bu L, Qyang Y, Zhang X, Li X, Rosenfeld MG, Chen J,
Evans S.

Author information: 
(1)Skaggs School of Pharmacy, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Mutations in T-box genes are the cause of several congenital diseases and are
implicated in cancer. Tbx20-null mice exhibit severely hypoplastic hearts and
express Tbx2, which is normally restricted to outflow tract and atrioventricular 
canal, throughout the heart. Tbx20 mutant hearts closely resemble those seen in
mice overexpressing Tbx2 in myocardium, suggesting that upregulation of Tbx2 can 
largely account for the cardiac phenotype in Tbx20-null mice. We provide evidence
that Tbx2 is a direct target for repression by Tbx20 in developing heart. We have
also found that Tbx2 directly binds to the Nmyc1 promoter in developing heart,
and can repress expression of the Nmyc1 promoter in transient transfection
studies. Repression of Nmyc1 (N-myc) by aberrantly regulated Tbx2 can account in 
part for the observed cardiac hypoplasia in Tbx20 mutants. Nmyc1 is required for 
growth and development of multiple organs, including the heart, and
overexpression of Nmyc1 is associated with childhood tumors. Despite its clinical
relevance, the factors that regulate Nmyc1 expression during development are
unknown. Our data present a paradigm by which T-box proteins regulate regional
differences in Nmyc1 expression and proliferation to effect organ morphogenesis. 
We present a model whereby Tbx2 directly represses Nmyc1 in outflow tract and
atrioventricular canal of the developing heart, resulting in relatively low
proliferation. In chamber myocardium, Tbx20 represses Tbx2, preventing repression
of Nmyc1 and resulting in relatively high proliferation. In addition to its role 
in regulating regional proliferation, we have found that Tbx20 regulates
expression of a number of genes that specify regional identity within the heart, 
thereby coordinating these two important aspects of organ development.

PMID: 15843407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Dev Biol. 2005 Mar 15;279(2):509-24.

Neuromancer Tbx20-related genes (H15/midline) promote cell fate specification and
morphogenesis of the Drosophila heart.

Qian L(1), Liu J, Bodmer R.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, Center for Neuroscienes and Aging, 10901 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The Tbx family of transcription factors are prominently expressed in the early
cardiac primordium throughout the animal kingdom. Mutations in Tbx genes result
invariably in defective formation and function of the heart, including congenital
heart disease in humans. Similar to their vertebrate counterpart, the Drosophila 
Tbx20 gene pair, neuromancer1 (nmr1, FlyBase:H15) and neuromancer2 (nmr2,
Flybase:mid), exhibits a dynamic expression pattern, including in all contractile
myocardial cells. Deletion mutants of nmr1 combined with mesoderm-specific
knock-down of nmr2 exhibit phenotypes that suggest nmr is critical for correct
specification of the cardiac progenitor populations as well as for morphogenesis 
and assembly of the contractile heart tube. Loss-of-nmr-function causes a switch 
in cell fates in the cardiogenic region, in that the progenitors expressing the
homeobox gene even skipped (eve) are expanded accompanied by a corresponding
reduction of the progenitors expressing the homeobox gene ladybird (lbe). As a
result, the number of differentiating myocardial cells is severely reduced
whereas pericardial cell populations are expanded. Conversely, pan-mesodermal
expression of nmr represses eve, while causing an expansion of cardiac lbe
expression, as well as ectopic mesodermal expression of the homeobox gene tinman.
In addition, nmr mutants with less severe penetrance exhibit cell alignment
defects of the myocardium at the dorsal midline, suggesting nmr is also required 
for cell polarity acquisition of the heart tube. In exploring the regulation of
nmr, we find that the GATA factor Pannier is essential for cardiac expression,
and acts synergistically with Tinman in promoting nmr expression. Moreover,
reducing nmr function in the absence of pannier further aggravates the deficit in
cardiac mesoderm specification. Taken together, the data suggest that nmr acts
both in concert with and subsequent to pannier and tinman in cardiac
specification and differentiation. We propose that nmr is another determinant of 
cardiogenesis, along with tinman and pannier.

PMID: 15733676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dev Biol. 2005 Feb 15;278(2):459-72.

The Drosophila melanogaster T-box genes midline and H15 are conserved regulators 
of heart development.

Miskolczi-McCallum CM(1), Scavetta RJ, Svendsen PC, Soanes KH, Brook WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital
Drive NW, Calgary Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

The Drosophila melanogaster genes midline and H15 encode predicted T-box
transcription factors homologous to vertebrate Tbx20 genes. All identified
vertebrate Tbx20 genes are expressed in the embryonic heart and we find that both
midline and H15 are expressed in the cardioblasts of the dorsal vessel, the
insect organ equivalent to the vertebrate heart. The midline mRNA is first
detected in dorsal mesoderm at embryonic stage 12 in the two progenitors per
hemisegment that will divide to give rise to all six cardioblasts. Expression of 
H15 mRNA in the dorsal mesoderm is detected first in four to six cells per
hemisegment at stage 13. The expression of midline and H15 in the dorsal vessel
is dependent on Wingless signaling and the transcription factors tinman and
pannier. We find that the selection of two midline-expressing cells from a pool
of competent progenitors is dependent on Notch signaling. Embryos deleted for
both midline and H15 have defects in the alignment of the cardioblasts and
associated pericardial cells. Embryos null for midline have weaker and less
penetrant phenotypes while embryos deficient for H15 have morphologically normal 
hearts, suggesting that the two genes are partially redundant in heart
development. Despite the dorsal vessel defects, embryos mutant for both midline
and H15 have normal numbers of cardioblasts, suggesting that cardiac cell fate
specification is not disrupted. However, ectopic expression of midline in the
dorsal mesoderm can lead to dramatic increases in the expression of cardiac
markers, suggesting that midline and H15 participate in cardiac fate
specification and may normally act redundantly with other cardiogenic factors.
Conservation of Tbx20 expression and function in cardiac development lends
further support for a common ancestral origin of the insect dorsal vessel and the
vertebrate heart.

PMID: 15680363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Development. 2005 Feb;132(3):553-63. Epub 2005 Jan 5.

Tbx5 and Tbx20 act synergistically to control vertebrate heart morphogenesis.

Brown DD(1), Martz SN, Binder O, Goetz SC, Price BM, Smith JC, Conlon FL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Fordham Hall, UNC-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-3280, USA.

Members of the T-box family of proteins play a fundamental role in patterning the
developing vertebrate heart; however, the precise cellular requirements for any
one family member and the mechanism by which individual T-box genes function
remains largely unknown. In this study, we have investigated the cellular and
molecular relationship between two T-box genes, Tbx5 and Tbx20. We demonstrate
that blocking Tbx5 or Tbx20 produces phenotypes that display a high degree of
similarity, as judged by overall gross morphology, molecular marker analysis and 
cardiac physiology, implying that the two genes are required for and have
non-redundant functions in early heart development. In addition, we demonstrate
that although co-expressed, Tbx5 and Tbx20 are not dependent on the expression of
one another, but rather have a synergistic role during early heart development.
Consistent with this proposal, we show that TBX5 and TBX20 can physically
interact and map the interaction domains, and we show a cellular interaction for 
the two proteins in cardiac development, thus providing the first evidence for
direct interaction between members of the T-box gene family.

PMCID: PMC1635804
PMID: 15634698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jan;232(1):11-20.

T-box genes and heart development: putting the "T" in heart.

Plageman TF Jr(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, ML7020, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Members of the T-box gene family (Tbx) are essential for normal heart
development, and mutations in human TBX genes cause congenital cardiovascular
malformations. T-box genes have been implicated in early cardiac lineage
determination, chamber specification, valvuloseptal development, and
diversification of the specialized conduction system in vertebrate embryos. These
genes include Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx5, Tbx18, and Tbx20, all of which exhibit
complex temporal spatial regulation in developing cardiac structures. Less is
known about T-box genes in invertebrate heart development, but multiple T-box
genes are expressed in Drosophila cardiac lineages. The molecular hierarchies and
developmental processes controlled by T-box genes in the heart are the focus of
this review.

PMID: 15580613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Curr Biol. 2004 Oct 5;14(19):1694-702.

Drosophila T box proteins break the symmetry of hedgehog-dependent activation of 
wingless.

Buescher M(1), Svendsen PC, Tio M, Miskolczi-McCallum C, Tear G, Brook WJ, Chia
W.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College
London, 4th Floor New Hunts House, Guy's Hospital Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK.
marita.buescher@kcl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Segmentation of the Drosophila embryo is a classic paradigm for
pattern formation during development. The Wnt-1 homolog Wingless (Wg) is a key
player in the establishment of a segmentally reiterated pattern of cell type
specification. The intrasegmental polarity of this pattern depends on the precise
positioning of the Wg signaling source anterior to the Engrailed (En)/Hedgehog
(Hh) domain. Proper polarity of epidermal segments requires an asymmetric
response to the bidirectional Hh signal: wg is activated in cells anterior to the
Hh signaling source and is restricted from cells posterior to this signaling
source.
RESULTS: Here we report that Midline (Mid) and H15, two highly related T box
proteins representing the orthologs of zebrafish hrT and mouse Tbx20, are novel
negative regulators of wg transcription and act to break the symmetry of Hh
signaling. Loss of mid and H15 results in the symmetric outcome of Hh signaling: 
the establishment of wg domains anterior and posterior to the signaling source
predominantly, but not exclusively, in odd-numbered segments. Accordingly, loss
of mid and H15 produces defects that mimic a wg gain-of-function phenotype.
Misexpression of mid represses wg and produces a weak/moderate wg
loss-of-function phenocopy. Furthermore, we show that loss of mid and H15 results
in an anterior expansion of the expression of serrate (ser) in every segment,
representing a second instance of target gene repression downstream of Hh
signaling in the establishment of segment polarity.
CONCLUSIONS: The data we present here indicate that mid and H15 are important
components in pattern formation in the ventral epidermis. In odd-numbered
abdominal segments, Mid/H15 activity plays an important role in restricting the
expression of Wg to a single domain.

PMID: 15458640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Dev Dyn. 2004 Aug;230(4):743-53.

T-box genes in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis: characterization of cDNAs and
spatial expression.

Takatori N(1), Hotta K, Mochizuki Y, Satoh G, Mitani Y, Satoh N, Satou Y,
Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto, Japan.

Members of the T-box family of transcription factors share an evolutionarily
conserved DNA-binding domain and play significant roles in various processes of
embryonic development. Vertebrate T-box genes are categorized into the following 
five major subfamilies (eight groups), depending on sequence similarities:
Brachyury, Tbx1 (Tbx1/10, Tbx15/18/22, Tbx20), Tbx2/3/4/5 (Tbx2/3 and Tbx4/5),
Tbx6, and Tbr/Eomes/TBX21. Ascidians are primitive chordates, and their tadpole
larva are considered to represent the simplified and basic body plan of
vertebrates. In addition, it has been revealed that the ascidian genome contains 
the basic ancestral complement of genes involved in development. The present
characterization of cDNAs and survey of the Ciona intestinalis draft genome
demonstrated that the Ciona genome contains a single copy gene for each of the
Brachyury, Tbx1/10, Tbx15/18/22, Tbx20, Tbx2/3, and Tbr/Eomes/TBX21 groups, and
at least three copies of the Tbx6 subfamily. Each of the Ciona T-box genes shows 
a characteristic expression pattern, although that of Tbx20 was not determined in
the present study. These results provide basic information that will be useful
for future studies of the function of each gene, genetic cascades of different
T-box genes, and genome-wide surveys of evolutionary changes in the T-box gene
structure and organization in this primitive chordate.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15254908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Dev Dyn. 2004 Jul;230(3):576-80.

Expression of tbx20 RNA during chick heart development.

Yamagishi T(1), Nakajima Y, Nishimatsu S, Nohno T, Ando K, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Saitama Medical School, Moroyama-machi, Iruma-gun,
Saitama, Japan. toshiy@saitama-med.ac.jp

The T-box gene family encodes a set of transcription factors that are involved in
various developmental processes. We isolated tbx20 gene from chick embryos and
examined in detail its expression patterns during heart development. In situ
hybridization showed that tbx20 was expressed in the lateral plate mesoderm and
subsequently in the primitive heart tube. At stages of looped heart, tbx20 was
localized in the outflow tract (OT) and atrioventricular (AV) canal, in which
valvuloseptal endocardial cushion develops. At later stages, although tbx20 was
expressed predominantly in the nascent right ventricle, transcripts of tbx20 were
down-regulated in the left ventricle. These results suggest that tbx20 may play
important roles in a variety of developmental processes in cardiogenesis, such as
chamber-specification and septation.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15188442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Physiol Genomics. 2004 Jul 8;18(2):129-40.

A role for Tbx5 in proepicardial cell migration during cardiogenesis.

Hatcher CJ(1), Diman NY, Kim MS, Pennisi D, Song Y, Goldstein MM, Mikawa T,
Basson CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, Greenberg Cardiology Division, Department of 
Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10021, 
USA.

Transcriptional regulatory cascades during epicardial and coronary vascular
development from proepicardial progenitor cells remain to be defined. We have
used immunohistochemistry of human embryonic tissues to demonstrate that the TBX5
transcription factor is expressed not only in the myocardium, but also throughout
the embryonic epicardium and coronary vasculature. TBX5 is not expressed in other
human fetal vascular beds. Furthermore, immunohistochemical analyses of human
embryonic tissues reveals that unlike their epicardial counterparts, delaminating
epicardial-derived cells do not express TBX5 as they migrate through the
subepicardium before undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transformation required
for coronary vasculogenesis. In the chick, Tbx5 is expressed in the embryonic
proepicardial organ (PEO), which is composed of the epicardial and coronary
vascular progenitor cells. Retrovirus-mediated overexpression of human TBX5
inhibits cell incorporation of infected proepicardial cells into the nascent
chick epicardium and coronary vasculature. TBX5 overexpression as well as
antisense-mediated knockdown of chick Tbx5 produce a cell-autonomous defect in
the PEO that prevents proepicardial cell migration. Thus, both increasing and
decreasing Tbx5 dosage impairs development of the proepicardium. Culture of
explanted PEOs demonstrates that untreated chick proepicardial cells downregulate
Tbx5 expression during cell migration. Therefore, we propose that Tbx5
participates in regulation of proepicardial cell migration, a critical event in
the establishment of the epicardium and coronary vasculature.

PMID: 15138308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 30;279(18):19026-34. Epub 2004 Feb 20.

Differential expression and function of Tbx5 and Tbx20 in cardiac development.

Plageman TF Jr(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

The T-box transcription factors play critical roles in embryonic development
including cell type specification, tissue patterning, and morphogenesis. Several 
T-box genes are expressed in the heart and are regulators of cardiac development.
At the earliest stages of heart development, two of these genes, Tbx5 and Tbx20, 
are co-expressed in the heart-forming region but then become differentially
expressed as heart morphogenesis progresses. Although Tbx5 and Tbx20 belong to
the same gene family and share a highly conserved DNA-binding domain, their
transcriptional activities are distinct. The C-terminal region of the Tbx5
protein is a transcriptional activator, while the C terminus of Tbx20 can repress
transcription. Tbx5, but not Tbx20, activates a cardiac-specific promoter (atrial
natriuretic factor (ANF)) alone and synergistically with other transcription
factors. In contrast, Tbx20 represses ANF promoter activity and also inhibits the
activation mediated by Tbx5. Of the two T-box binding consensus sequences in the 
promoter of ANF, only T-box binding element 1 (TBE1) is required for the
synergistic activation of ANF by Tbx5 and GATA4, but TBE2 is required for
repression by Tbx20. To elucidate upstream signaling pathways that regulate Tbx5 
and Tbx20 expression, recombinant bone morphogenetic protein-2 was added to
cardiogenic explants from chick embryos. Using real time reverse
transcription-PCR, it was demonstrated that Tbx20, but not Tbx5, is induced by
bone morphogenetic protein-2. Collectively these data demonstrate clear
differences in both the expression and function of two related transcription
factors and suggest that the modulation of cardiac gene expression can occur as a
result of combinatorial regulatory interactions of T-box proteins.

PMID: 14978031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Development. 2003 Dec;130(24):5953-64. Epub 2003 Oct 22.

Tbx5 specifies the left/right ventricles and ventricular septum position during
cardiogenesis.

Takeuchi JK(1), Ohgi M, Koshiba-Takeuchi K, Shiratori H, Sakaki I, Ogura K,
Saijoh Y, Ogura T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5, Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0101, Japan.

Extensive misexpression studies were carried out to explore the roles played by
Tbx5, the expression of which is excluded from the right ventricle (RV) during
cardiogenesis. When Tbx5 was misexpressed ubiquitously, ventricular septum was
not formed, resulting in a single ventricle. In such heart, left ventricle
(LV)-specific ANF gene was induced. In search of the putative RV factor(s), we
have found that chick Tbx20 is expressed in the RV, showing a complementary
fashion to Tbx5. In the Tbx5-misexpressed heart, this gene was repressed. When
misexpression was spatially partial, leaving small Tbx5-negative area in the
right ventricle, ventricular septum was shifted rightwards, resulting in a small 
RV with an enlarged LV. Focal expression induced an ectopic boundary of
Tbx5-positive and -negative regions in the right ventricle, at which an
additional septum was formed. Similar results were obtained from the transient
transgenic mice. In such hearts, expression patterns of dHAND and eHAND were
changed with definitive cardiac abnormalities. Furthermore, we report that human 
ANF promoter is synergistically activated by Tbx5, Nkx2.5 and GATA4. This
activation was abrogated by Tbx20, implicating the pivotal roles of interactions 
among these heart-specific factors. Taken together, our data indicate that Tbx5
specifies the identity of LV through tight interactions among several
heart-specific factors, and highlight the essential roles of Tbx5 in cardiac
development.

PMID: 14573514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Dev Biol. 2003 Oct 15;262(2):206-24.

Cardiac T-box factor Tbx20 directly interacts with Nkx2-5, GATA4, and GATA5 in
regulation of gene expression in the developing heart.

Stennard FA(1), Costa MW, Elliott DA, Rankin S, Haast SJ, Lai D, McDonald LP,
Niederreither K, Dolle P, Bruneau BG, Zorn AM, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, 384 Victoria Street, Darlinghurst,
2010, Sydney, Australia.

Tbx20 is a member of the T-box transcription factor family expressed in the
forming hearts of vertebrate and invertebrate embryos. We report here analysis of
Tbx20 expression during murine cardiac development and assessment of DNA-binding 
and transcriptional properties of Tbx20 isoforms. Tbx20 was expressed in
myocardium and endocardium, including high levels in endocardial cushions. cDNAs 
generated by alternative splicing encode at least four Tbx20 isoforms, and Tbx20a
uniquely carried strong transactivation and transrepression domains in its C
terminus. Isoforms with an intact T-box bound specifically to DNA sites
resembling the consensus brachyury half site, although with less avidity compared
with the related factor, Tbx5. Tbx20 physically interacted with cardiac
transcription factors Nkx2-5, GATA4, and GATA5, collaborating to synergistically 
activate cardiac gene expression. Among cardiac GATA factors, there was
preferential synergy with GATA5, implicated in endocardial differentiation. In
Xenopus embryos, enforced expression of Tbx20a, but not Tbx20b, led to induction 
of mesodermal and endodermal lineage markers as well as cell migration,
indicating that the long Tbx20a isoform uniquely bears functional domains that
can alter gene expression and developmental behaviour in an in vivo context. We
propose that Tbx20 plays an integrated role in the ancient myogenic program of
the heart, and has been additionally coopted during evolution of vertebrates for 
endocardial cushion development.

PMID: 14550786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Dev Genes Evol. 2003 Jan;212(12):604-7. Epub 2002 Oct 31.

Developmental expression of the Xenopus laevis Tbx20 orthologue.

Brown DD(1), Binder O, Pagratis M, Parr BA, Conlon FL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, 220 Fordham Hall, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599-3280, USA.

We have isolated the Xenopus orthologue of the T-box gene, Tbx20, and
characterized its developmental expression profile. We show that Tbx20 is one of 
the earliest markers of heart tissue in Xenopus, and is expressed throughout all 
cardiac tissue during later stages of development. In addition, we also observe
expression in the cement gland, the jugular vein, the lung bud, the cloacal
aperture, rhombomeres 2, 4, 6 and 8, and in a subset of motor neurons.

PMCID: PMC1635808
PMID: 12536325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):5093-101.

HrT is required for cardiovascular development in zebrafish.

Szeto DP(1), Griffin KJ, Kimelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Box 357350, University of Washington, Seattle
98195-7530, USA.

The recently identified zebrafish T-box gene hrT is expressed in the developing
heart and in the endothelial cells forming the dorsal aorta. Orthologs of hrT are
expressed in cardiovascular cells from Drosophila to mouse, suggesting that the
function of hrT is evolutionarily conserved. The role of hrT in cardiovascular
development, however, has not thus far been determined in any animal model. Using
morpholino antisense oligonucleotides, we show that zebrafish embryos lacking hrT
function have dysmorphic hearts and an absence of blood circulation. Although the
early events in heart formation were normal in hrT morphant embryos, subsequently
the hearts failed to undergo looping, and late onset defects in chamber
morphology and gene expression were observed. In particular, we found that the
loss of hrT function led to a dramatic upregulation of tbx5, a gene required for 
normal heart morphogenesis. Conversely, we show that overexpression of hrT causes
a significant downregulation of tbx5, indicating that one key role of hrT is to
regulate the levels of tbx5. Secondly, we found that HrT is required to inhibit
the expression of the blood lineage markers gata1 and gata2 in the most posterior
lateral plate mesoderm. Finally, we show that HrT is required for vasculogenesis 
in the trunk, leading to similar vascular defects to those observed in midline
mutants such as floating head. hrT expression in the vascular progenitors depends
upon midline mesoderm, indicating that this expression is one important component
of the response to a midline-derived signal during vascular morphogenesis.

PMID: 12397116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Dev Genes Evol. 2001 Dec;211(11):559-62. Epub 2001 Oct 19.

Expression pattern of novel chick T-box gene, Tbx20.

Iio A(1), Koide M, Hidaka K, Morisaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute,
5-7-1 Fujishirodai, Suita, Osaka 565-8565, Japan.

Little is known about the molecular mechanisms involved with the initial
specifications of the cardiac mesoderm. In order to identify potential regulatory
factors that play important roles in early heart specification, we attempted to
isolate the chick H15-related T-box gene and analyze its expression pattern
during early development. The chick Tbx20 gene was found to be highly homologous 
to human, mouse, and zebrafish hrT/Tbx20. Its expression was initially detected
in the posterior lateral mesoderm, after which it expanded to the anterior and
was intensively co-expressed with a cardiogenic gene, Nkx2.5, in the anterior
lateral mesoderm.

PMID: 11862462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mech Dev. 2001 Jan;100(1):87-91.

Cloning and expression analysis of the mouse T-box gene tbx20.

Kraus F(1), Haenig B, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie, Abt. Molekulare Embryologie, Stübeweg
51, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.

T-box genes constitute a conserved multi-gene family with important roles in many
developmental processes. In this report, we describe the cloning and expression
analysis of a novel mouse T-box gene, Tbx20. Expression is prominent in the
extraembryonic mesoderm, in the developing heart, the eye anlage and motor
neurons of hindbrain and spinal cord.

PMID: 11118890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mech Dev. 2000 Aug;96(1):137-40.

Tbx12, a novel T-box gene, is expressed during early stages of heart and retinal 
development.

Carson CT(1), Kinzler ER, Parr BA.

Author information: 
(1)MCD Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0347, USA.

T-box genes encode transcription factors that regulate many developmental
processes. We have cloned a novel mouse T-box gene, Tbx12. Tbx12 is the
vertebrate homologue of the Drosophila H15 gene and the Caenorhabditis elegans
tbx-12 gene. Tbx12 is expressed in extraembryonic tissues such as the amnion and 
allantois. In the embryo, Tbx12 is strongly expressed in the neural retina and
the heart.

PMID: 10940636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Genomics. 2000 Aug 1;67(3):317-32.

Characterization of the human TBX20 gene, a new member of the T-Box gene family
closely related to the Drosophila H15 gene.

Meins M(1), Henderson DJ, Bhattacharya SS, Sowden JC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, Neural Development Unit, Institute of Child
Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

T-box transcription factors contain a novel type of DNA-binding domain, the T-box
domain, and are encoded by an ancient gene family. Four T-box genes, omb, Trg,
org-1, and H15, have been identified in Drosophila, whereas in mammals the T-box 
gene family has expanded, and 12 human T-box genes have been isolated. We have
identified a new human T-box gene, TBX20, and its mouse homologue Tbx20, which
are more closely related to the Drosophila H15 gene than to any known vertebrate 
gene. H15 expression in leg imaginal discs correlates with commitment to a
ventral fate, implicating this gene in early patterning events. We find that
TBX20 is expressed in the fetal heart, eye, and limb, and during embryogenesis in
the mouse, Tbx20 is expressed in the developing heart, eye, ventral neural tube, 
and limbs, indicating a possible role in regulating development of these tissues.
The TBX20 gene maps to chromosome 7p14-p15. An association between TBX20 and loci
for retinitis pigmentosa, RP9, and blepharophimosis syndrome, BPES, have been
excluded.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10936053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mech Dev. 2000 Jul;95(1-2):253-8.

tbx20, a new vertebrate T-box gene expressed in the cranial motor neurons and
developing cardiovascular structures in zebrafish.

Ahn DG(1), Ruvinsky I, Oates AC, Silver LM, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA. dgahn@molbio.princeton.edu

The T-box genes constitute a family of transcriptional regulator genes that have 
been implicated in a variety of developmental processes ranging from the
formation of germ layers to the regionalization of the central nervous system. In
this report we describe the cloning and expression pattern of a new T-box gene
from zebrafish, which we named tbx20. tbx20 is an ortholog of two other T-box
genes isolated from animals of different phyla - H15 of Drosophila melanogaster
and tbx-12 of Caenorhabditis elegans, suggesting that the evolutionary origin of 
this gene predates the divergence between the protostomes and deuterostomes.
During development, tbx20 is expressed in embryonic structures of both mesodermal
and ectodermal origins, including the heart, cranial motor neurons, and the roof 
of the dorsal aorta.

PMID: 10906473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


