
1. Stem Cells Int. 2016;2016:8648356. doi: 10.1155/2016/8648356. Epub 2016 Feb 1.

Highly Synchronized Expression of Lineage-Specific Genes during In Vitro Hepatic 
Differentiation of Human Pluripotent Stem Cell Lines.

Ghosheh N(1), Olsson B(2), Edsbagge J(3), Küppers-Munther B(3), Van Giezen M(3), 
Asplund A(2), Andersson TB(4), Björquist P(5), Carén H(6), Simonsson S(7),
Sartipy P(8), Synnergren J(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioscience, Systems Biology Research Center, University of Skövde,
541 28 Skövde, Sweden; Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Clinical Chemistry
and Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 413 45
Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)School of Bioscience, Systems Biology Research Center,
University of Skövde, 541 28 Skövde, Sweden. (3)Takara Bio Europe AB, Arvid
Wallgrens Backe 20, 413 46 Gothenburg, Sweden. (4)AstraZeneca R&D, CVMD DMPK, 431
83 Mölndal, Sweden; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Section of
Pharmacogenetics, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. (5)NovaHep AB,
Arvid Wallgrens Backe 20, 413 46 Gothenburg, Sweden. (6)Sahlgrenska Cancer
Center, Department of Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden. (7)Institute of Biomedicine,
Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden. (8)School of Bioscience,
Systems Biology Research Center, University of Skövde, 541 28 Skövde, Sweden;
AstraZeneca R&D, GMD CVMD GMed, 431 83 Mölndal, Sweden.

Human pluripotent stem cells- (hPSCs-) derived hepatocytes have the potential to 
replace many hepatic models in drug discovery and provide a cell source for
regenerative medicine applications. However, the generation of fully functional
hPSC-derived hepatocytes is still a challenge. Towards gaining better
understanding of the differentiation and maturation process, we employed a
standardized protocol to differentiate six hPSC lines into hepatocytes and
investigated the synchronicity of the hPSC lines by applying RT-qPCR to assess
the expression of lineage-specific genes (OCT4, NANOG, T, SOX17, CXCR4, CER1,
HHEX, TBX3, PROX1, HNF6, AFP, HNF4a, KRT18, ALB, AAT, and CYP3A4) which serve as 
markers for different stages during liver development. The data was evaluated
using correlation and clustering analysis, demonstrating that the expression of
these markers is highly synchronized and correlated well across all cell lines.
The analysis also revealed a distribution of the markers in groups reflecting the
developmental stages of hepatocytes. Functional analysis of the differentiated
cells further confirmed their hepatic phenotype. Taken together, these results
demonstrate, on the molecular level, the highly synchronized differentiation
pattern across multiple hPSC lines. Moreover, this study provides additional
understanding for future efforts to improve the functionality of hPSC-derived
hepatocytes and thereby increase the value of related models.

PMCID: PMC4753346
PMID: 26949401  [PubMed]


2. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2016 Feb;36(2):210-4.

[Inhibitory effect of Biejiajian pills on HepG2 cell xenograft growth and
expression of ß-catenin and Tbx3 in nude mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Wen B(1), Sun HT, He SQ, LA L, An HY, Pang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 458 Hospital of PLA, Guangzhou
510602, China. E-mail: hjzwb@aliyun.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the molecular mechanism by which Biejiajian pills inhibit
hepatocellular carcinoma in a nude mouse model bearing HepG2 cell xenograft.
METHODS: The inhibitory effect of Biejiajian pills on the growth of HepG2 cell
xenograft in nude mice was observed. Immunohistochemical method was used to
examine proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) expression in HepG2 cell
xenograft, and TUNEL method was employed to detect the cell apoptosis; the
expression levels of ß-catenin and Tbx3 were measured by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Biejiajian pills significantly suppressed the growth of HepG2 cell
xenograft in nude mice. The tumor-bearing mice treated with a high and a moderate
dose of Biejiajian pills showed significantly increased apoptosis rate of the
tumor cells [(22.9±1.220)% and (14.7±0.50)%, respectively] compared with the
control group [(5.5±0.90)%, P<0.05]. Treatment with Biejiajian pills
significantly decreased the expressions of PNCA, ß-catenin, and Tbx3 in the cell 
xenograft (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Biejiajian pills can inhibit the growth of HepG2 cell xenograft in
nude mice and promote tumor cell apoptosis possibly by inhibiting PNCA expression
and the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

PMID: 26922018  [PubMed - in process]


3. BMC Cancer. 2016 Feb 26;16(1):165. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2210-8.

Analysis of functional germline variants in APOBEC3 and driver genes on breast
cancer risk in Moroccan study population.

Marouf C(1,)(2,)(3), Göhler S(4), Filho MI(5), Hajji O(6), Hemminki K(7,)(8),
Nadifi S(9,)(10), Försti A(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. maroufchaymaa@gmail.com. (2)Laboratory of Genetics
and Molecular Pathology-Medical School of Casablanca, Casablanca, Morocco.
maroufchaymaa@gmail.com. (3)University Hassan II Ain Chock, Center Of Doctoral
Sciences "In Health Sciences", Casablanca, Morocco. maroufchaymaa@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. s.goehler@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (5)Department of
Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany. m.inacio@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (6)Department of Oncology, Littoral Clinic,
Casablanca, Morocco. o.hajji@cliniquelelittoral.ma. (7)Department of Molecular
Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. 
k.hemminki@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (8)Center for Primary Health Care Research,
Clinical Research Center, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
k.hemminki@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (9)Laboratory of Genetics and Molecular
Pathology-Medical School of Casablanca, Casablanca, Morocco. nadifisel@yahoo.com.
(10)University Hassan II Ain Chock, Center Of Doctoral Sciences "In Health
Sciences", Casablanca, Morocco. nadifisel@yahoo.com. (11)Department of Molecular 
Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. 
a.foersti@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (12)Center for Primary Health Care Research,
Clinical Research Center, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
a.foersti@dkfz-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) is the most prevalent cancer in women and a major 
public health problem in Morocco. Several Moroccan studies have focused on
studying this disease, but more are needed, especially at the genetic and
molecular levels. Therefore, we investigated the potential association of several
functional germline variants in the genes commonly mutated in sporadic breast
cancer.
METHODS: In this case-control study, we examined 36 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 13 genes (APOBEC3A, APOBEC3B, ARID1B, ATR, MAP3K1, MLL2, 
MLL3, NCOR1, RUNX1, SF3B1, SMAD4, TBX3, TTN), which were located in the core
promoter, 5'-and 3'UTR or which were nonsynonymous SNPs to assess their potential
association with inherited predisposition to breast cancer development.
Additionally, we identified a ~29.5-kb deletion polymorphism between APOBEC3A and
APOBEC3B and explored possible associations with BC. A total of 226 Moroccan
breast cancer cases and 200 matched healthy controls were included in this study.
RESULTS: The analysis showed that12 SNPs in 8 driver genes, 4 SNPs in APOBEC3B
gene and 1 SNP in APOBEC3A gene were associated with BC risk and/or clinical
outcome at P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.05 level. RUNX1_rs8130963 (odds ratio (OR)<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.25; 95 % CI
1.42-3.56; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0005; dominant model), TBX3_rs8853 (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.04; 95 % CI
1.38-3.01; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0003; dominant model), TBX3_rs1061651 (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.14; 95 %
CI1.43-3.18; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0002; dominant model), TTN_rs12465459 (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.02; 95 %
confidence interval 1.33-3.07; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0009; dominant model), were the most
significantly associated SNPs with BC risk. A strong association with clinical
outcome were detected for the genes SMAD4 _rs3819122 with tumor size (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.45; 
95 % CI 0.25-0.82; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009) and TTN_rs2244492 with estrogen receptor
(OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.45; 95 % CI 0.25-0.82; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that genetic variations in driver and APOBEC3
genes were associated with the risk of BC and may have impact on clinical
outcome. However, the reported association between the deletion polymorphism and 
BC risk was not confirmed in the Moroccan population. These preliminary findings 
require replication in larger studies.

PMCID: PMC4768349
PMID: 26920143  [PubMed - in process]


4. Oncogenesis. 2016 Feb 22;5:e199. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2016.11.

The T-box transcription factor 3 is a promising biomarker and a key regulator of 
the oncogenic phenotype of a diverse range of sarcoma subtypes.

Willmer T(1), Cooper A(1), Sims D(1), Govender D(2), Prince S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. (2)Division of
Anatomical Pathology, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.

Sarcomas represent a complex group of malignant neoplasms of mesenchymal origin
and their heterogeneity poses a serious diagnostic and therapeutic challenge.
There is therefore a need to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underpinning the 
pathogenesis of the more than 70 distinguishable sarcoma subtypes. The
transcription factor TBX3, a critical developmental regulator, is overexpressed
in several cancers of epithelial origin where it contributes to tumorigenesis by 
different molecular mechanisms. However, the status and role of TBX3 in sarcomas 
have not been reported. Here we show that a diverse subset of soft tissue and
bone sarcoma cell lines and patient-derived sarcoma tissues express high levels
of TBX3. We further explore the significance of this overexpression using a small
interferring RNA approach and demonstrate that TBX3 promotes the migratory
ability of chondrosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma and liposarcoma cells but inhibits
fibrosarcoma cell migration. This suggested that TBX3 may play a key role in the 
development of different sarcoma subtypes by functioning as either an oncoprotein
or as a brake to prevent tumour progression. To further explore this, TBX3
knockdown and overexpression cell culture models were established using
chondrosarcoma and fibrosarcoma cells as representatives of each scenario, and
the resulting cells were characterized with regard to key features of
tumorigenesis. Results from in vitro and in vivo assays reveal that, while TBX3
promotes substrate-dependent and -independent cell proliferation, migration and
tumour formation in chondrosarcoma cells, it discourages fibrosarcoma formation. 
Our findings provide novel evidence linking TBX3 to cancers of mesenchymal
origin. Furthermore, we show that TBX3 may be a biomarker for the diagnosis of
histologically dynamic sarcoma subtypes and that it impacts directly on their
oncogenic phenotype. Indeed, we reveal that TBX3 may exhibit oncogene or tumour
suppressor activity in sarcomas, which suggests that its role in cancer
progression may rely on cellular context.

PMID: 26900951  [PubMed]


5. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Jan 8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37550. [Epub ahead of print]

Novel copy number variants and major limb reduction malformation: Report of three
cases.

Shamseldin HE(1), Anazi S(1), Wakil SM(1), Faqeih E(2), El Khashab HY(3,)(4),
Salih MA(3), Al-Qattan MM(5), Hashem M(1), Alsedairy H(1), Alkuraya FS(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (2)Department of Pediatric Specialties, Children's
Hospital, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital, Ain Shams University, Cairo,
Egypt. (5)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, King Saud University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (6)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of
Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Limb reduction malformations are highly heterogeneous in their clinical
presentation and so, predicting the underlying mutation on a clinical basis can
be challenging. Molecular karyotyping is a powerful genomic tool that has quickly
become the mainstay for the study of children with malformation syndromes. We
describe three patients with major limb reduction anomalies in whom pathogenic
copy number variants were identified on molecular karyotyping. These include a
patient with hypoplastic phalanges and absent hallux bilaterally with de novo
deletion of 11.9<U+2009>Mb on 7p21.1-22.1 spanning 63 genes including RAC1, another
patient with severe Holt-Oram syndrome and a large de novo deletion 2.2<U+2009>Mb on
12q24.13-24.21 spanning 20 genes including TBX3 and TBX5, and a third patient
with acheiropodia who had a nullizygous deletion of 102<U+2009>kb on 7q36.3 spanning
LMBR1. We discuss the potential of these novel genomic rearrangements to improve 
our understanding of limb development in humans. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26749485  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Stem Cells Int. 2016;2016:6759343. doi: 10.1155/2016/6759343. Epub 2015 Nov 30.

TBX3 Knockdown Decreases Reprogramming Efficiency of Human Cells.

Klingenstein M(1), Raab S(1), Achberger K(1), Kleger A(2), Liebau S(1), Linta
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroanatomy, Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, 72074 Tübingen,
Germany. (2)Department of Internal Medicine I, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm,
Germany.

TBX3 is a member of the T-box transcription factor family and is involved in the 
core pluripotency network. Despite this role in the pluripotency network, its
contribution to the reprogramming process during the generation of human induced 
pluripotent stem cells remains elusive. In this respect, we performed
reprogramming experiments applying TBX3 knockdown in human fibroblasts and
keratinocytes. Knockdown of TBX3 in both somatic cell types decreased the
reprogramming efficiencies in comparison to control cells but with unchanged
reprogramming kinetics. The resulting iPSCs were indistinguishable from control
cells and displayed a normal in vitro differentiation capacity by generating
cells of all three germ layers comparable to the controls.

PMCID: PMC4677243
PMID: 26697078  [PubMed]


7. Nat Genet. 2016 Feb;48(2):152-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.3475. Epub 2015 Dec 21.

Regulatory mutations in TBX3 disrupt asymmetric hair pigmentation that underlies 
Dun camouflage color in horses.

Imsland F(1), McGowan K(2,)(3), Rubin CJ(1), Henegar C(3), Sundström E(1),
Berglund J(1), Schwochow D(4,)(5), Gustafson U(4), Imsland P(6), Lindblad-Toh
K(1,)(7), Lindgren G(4), Mikko S(4), Millon L(8), Wade C(7), Schubert M(9),
Orlando L(9), Penedo MC(8), Barsh GS(2,)(3), Andersson L(1,)(4,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Science for Life Laboratory Uppsala, Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. (2)HudsonAlpha Institute for
Biotechnology, Huntsville, Alabama, USA. (3)Department of Genetics, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. (4)Department of Animal
Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala,
Sweden. (5)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), AgroParisTech,
Génetique Animale et Biologie Intégrative, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(6)Menntaskólinn við Hamrahlíð, Reykjavík, Iceland. (7)Broad Institute of Harvard
and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (8)Veterinary Genetics Laboratory, School
of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA. 
(9)Centre for GeoGenetics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (10)Department of Veterinary Integrative
Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas, USA.

Dun is a wild-type coat color in horses characterized by pigment dilution with a 
striking pattern of dark areas termed primitive markings. Here we show that
pigment dilution in Dun horses is due to radially asymmetric deposition of
pigment in the growing hair caused by localized expression of the T-box 3 (TBX3) 
transcription factor in hair follicles, which in turn determines the distribution
of hair follicle melanocytes. Most domestic horses are non-dun, a more intensely 
pigmented phenotype caused by regulatory mutations impairing TBX3 expression in
the hair follicle, resulting in a more circumferential distribution of
melanocytes and pigment granules in individual hairs. We identified two different
alleles (non-dun1 and non-dun2) causing non-dun color. non-dun2 is a recently
derived allele, whereas the Dun and non-dun1 alleles are found in ancient horse
DNA, demonstrating that this polymorphism predates horse domestication. These
findings uncover a new developmental role for T-box genes and new aspects of hair
follicle biology and pigmentation.

PMCID: PMC4731265
PMID: 26691985  [PubMed - in process]


8. Oncogene. 2015 Dec 21. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.486. [Epub ahead of print]

TBX2 represses PTEN in rhabdomyosarcoma and skeletal muscle.

Zhu B(1), Zhang M(1), Williams EM(2), Keller C(3), Mansoor A(2), Davie JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Simmons Cancer Institute,
Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Carbondale, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Oregon Health and Sciences University, Portland, OR, 
USA. (3)Children's Cancer Therapy Development Institute, Fort Collins, CO, USA.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most frequent soft tissue sarcoma in children that 
shares many features of developing skeletal muscle. TBX2, a T-box family member, 
is highly upregulated in tumor cells of both major RMS subtypes where it
functions as an oncogene. TBX2 is a repressor that is often overexpressed in
cancer cells and functions in bypassing cell growth control, including the
repression of the cell cycle regulators p14 and p21. We have found that TBX2
directly represses the tumor-suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) in 
both RMS and normal muscle. Exogenous expression of TBX2 in normal muscle cells
downregulates PTEN, and depletion or interference with TBX2 in RMS cells
upregulates PTEN. Human RMS tumors show high levels of TBX2 and correspondingly
low levels of PTEN. The expression of PTEN in clinical RMS samples is relatively 
uncharacterized, and we establish that suppression of PTEN is a frequent event in
both subtypes of RMS. TBX2 represses PTEN by directly binding to the promoter and
recruiting the histone deacetylase, HDAC1. RMS cells have high levels of
activated AKT owing to the deregulation of phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)
signaling, and depletion or interference with TBX2, which upregulates PTEN,
results in a reduction of phospho-AKT. We have also found that the highly related
T-box family member TBX3 does not repress PTEN in the muscle lineage. This work
suggests that TBX2 is a central component of the PTEN/PI3K/AKT signaling pathway 
deregulation in RMS cells and that targeting TBX2 in RMS tumors may offer a novel
therapeutic approach for RMS.Oncogene advance online publication, 21 December
2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.486.

PMID: 26686089  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Dec 8. pii: S0167-4889(15)00424-3. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.12.004. [Epub ahead of print]

Generation of cardiac pacemaker cells by programming and differentiation.

Husse B(1), Franz WM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical University Innsbruck, Department of Internal Medicine III, Cardiology 
and Angiology, Anichstr. 35, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria. Electronic address:
britta.husse@i-med.ac.at. (2)Medical University Innsbruck, Department of Internal
Medicine III, Cardiology and Angiology, Anichstr. 35, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria. 
Electronic address: wolfgang-michael.franz@i-med.ac.at.

A number of diseases are caused by faulty function of the cardiac pacemaker and
described as "sick sinus syndrome". The medical treatment of sick sinus syndrome 
with electrical pacemaker implants in the diseased heart includes risks. These
problems may be overcome via "biological pacemaker" derived from different adult 
cardiac cells or pluripotent stem cells. The generation of cardiac pacemaker
cells requires the understanding of the pacing automaticity. Two characteristic
phenomena the "membrane-clock" and the "Ca(2+)-clock" are responsible for the
modulation of the pacemaker activity. Processes in the "membrane-clock"
generating the spontaneous pacemaker firing are based on the voltage-sensitive
membrane ion channel activity starting with slow diastolic depolarization and
discharging in the action potential. The influence of the intracellular Ca(2+)
modulating the pacemaker activity is characterized by the "Ca(2+)-clock". The
generation of pacemaker cells started with the reprogramming of adult cardiac
cells by targeted induction of one pacemaker function like HCN1-4 overexpression 
and enclosed in an activation of single pacemaker specific transcription factors.
Reprogramming of adult cardiac cells with the transcription factor Tbx18 created 
cardiac cells with characteristic features of cardiac pacemaker cells. Another
key transcription factor is Tbx3 specifically expressed in the cardiac conduction
system including the sinoatrial node and sufficient for the induction of the
cardiac pacemaker gene program. For a successful cell therapeutic practice, the
generated cells should have all regulating mechanisms of cardiac pacemaker cells.
Otherwise, the generated pacemaker cells serve only as investigating model for
the fundamental research or as drug testing model for new antiarrhythmics. This
article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Cardiomyocyte Biology: Integration
of Developmental and Environmental Cues in the Heart edited by Marcus Schaub and 
Hughes Abriel.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26681531  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Dec 8;5(6):1155-70. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.11.003.

A Dynamic Role of TBX3 in the Pluripotency Circuitry.

Russell R(1), Ilg M(1), Lin Q(2), Wu G(3), Lechel A(1), Bergmann W(1), Eiseler
T(1), Linta L(4), Kumar P P(5), Klingenstein M(4), Adachi K(3), Hohwieler M(1),
Sakk O(6), Raab S(4), Moon A(5), Zenke M(2), Seufferlein T(1), Schöler HR(3),
Illing A(1), Liebau S(4), Kleger A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm, Germany.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Biomedical Engineering, Medical
Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany. (3)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, 48149
Münster, Germany. (4)Institute of Neuroanatomy, Eberhard Karls University
Tübingen, 72074 Tübingen, Germany. (5)Weis Center for Research, Geisinger Clinic,
Danville, PA 17822, USA. (6)Core Facility Transgenic Mice, Ulm University,
89081 Ulm, Germany. (7)Department of Internal Medicine I, Ulm University,
89081 Ulm, Germany. Electronic address: alexander.kleger@uni-ulm.de.

Pluripotency represents a cell state comprising a fine-tuned pattern of
transcription factor activity required for embryonic stem cell (ESC)
self-renewal. TBX3 is the earliest expressed member of the T-box transcription
factor family and is involved in maintenance and induction of pluripotency.
Hence, TBX3 is believed to be a key member of the pluripotency circuitry, with
loss of TBX3 coinciding with loss of pluripotency. We report a dynamic expression
of TBX3 in vitro and in vivo using genetic reporter tools tracking TBX3
expression in mouse ESCs (mESCs). Low TBX3 levels are associated with reduced
pluripotency, resembling the more mature epiblast. Notably, TBX3-low cells
maintain the intrinsic capability to switch to a TBX3-high state and vice versa. 
Additionally, we show TBX3 to be dispensable for induction and maintenance of
naive pluripotency as well as for germ cell development. These data highlight
novel facets of TBX3 action in mESCs.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4682344
PMID: 26651606  [PubMed - in process]


11. Genome Biol Evol. 2015 Dec 3;8(1):42-50. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evv245.

Population Variation Reveals Independent Selection toward Small Body Size in
Chinese Debao Pony.

Kader A(1), Li Y(2), Dong K(1), Irwin DM(3), Zhao Q(1), He X(1), Liu J(4), Pu
Y(1), Gorkhali NA(1), Liu X(1), Jiang L(1), Li X(1), Guan W(1), Zhang Y(2), Wu
DD(5), Ma Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution,
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)College of Animal Science and Technology, China
Agricultural University, Beijing, China. (5)State Key Laboratory of Genetic
Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Kunming, China wudongdong@mail.kiz.ac.cn mayuehui@caas.cn. (6)Institute
of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China
wudongdong@mail.kiz.ac.cn mayuehui@caas.cn.

Body size, one of the most important quantitative traits under evolutionary
scrutiny, varies considerably among species and among populations within species.
Revealing the genetic basis underlying this variation is very important,
particularly in humans where there is a close relationship with diseases and in
domestic animals as the selective patterns are associated with improvements in
production traits. The Debao pony is a horse breed with small body size that is
unique to China; however, it is unknown whether the size-related candidate genes 
identified in Western breeds also account for the small body size of the Debao
pony. Here, we compared individual horses from the Debao population with other
two Chinese horse populations using single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
identified with the Equine SNP 65 Bead Chip. The previously reported size-related
candidate gene HMGA2 showed a significant signature for selection, consistent
with its role observed in human populations. More interestingly, we found a
candidate gene TBX3, which had not been observed in previous studies on horse
body size that displayed the highest differentiation and most significant
association, and thus likely is the dominating factor for the small stature of
the Debao pony. Further comparison between the Debao pony and other breeds of
horses from around the world demonstrated that TBX3 was selected independently in
the Debao pony, suggesting that there were multiple origins of small stature in
the horse.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

PMCID: PMC4758242
PMID: 26637467  [PubMed - in process]


12. Nat Commun. 2015 Dec 4;6:8658. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9658.

Sixteen new lung function signals identified through 1000 Genomes Project
reference panel imputation.

Soler Artigas M(1), Wain LV(1), Miller S(2), Kheirallah AK(2), Huffman JE(3),
Ntalla I(1), Shrine N(1), Obeidat M(4), Trochet H(3,)(5), McArdle WL(6), Alves
AC(7), Hui J(8,)(9,)(10,)(11), Zhao JH(12), Joshi PK(13), Teumer A(14,)(15),
Albrecht E(16), Imboden M(17,)(18), Rawal R(16,)(19,)(20), Lopez LM(21,)(22),
Marten J(3), Enroth S(23), Surakka I(24,)(25), Polasek O(13,)(26), Lyytikäinen
LP(27,)(28), Granell R(6), Hysi PG(29), Flexeder C(30), Mahajan A(31), Beilby
J(8,)(9,)(11), Bossé Y(32), Brandsma CA(33), Campbell H(13), Gieger
C(16,)(19,)(20), Gläser S(34), González JR(35,)(36,)(37), Grallert H(19), Hammond
CJ(29), Harris SE(21,)(38), Hartikainen AL(39), Heliövaara M(25), Henderson J(6),
Hocking L(5,)(40), Horikoshi M(31,)(41), Hutri-Kähönen N(42,)(43), Ingelsson
E(31,)(44,)(45), Johansson Å(23,)(46), Kemp JP(6,)(47,)(48), Kolcic I(26), Kumar 
A(17,)(18,)(31,)(49), Lind L(50), Melén E(51), Musk AW(8,)(52,)(53), Navarro
P(3), Nickle DC(54), Padmanabhan S(5,)(55), Raitakari OT(56,)(57), Ried JS(16),
Ripatti S(24,)(58,)(59), Schulz H(30,)(60), Scott RA(12), Sin DD(4,)(61), Starr
JM(21,)(62); UK BiLEVE, Viñuela A(29), Völzke H(14), Wild SH(13), Wright AF(3),
Zemunik T(63), Jarvis DL(64,)(65), Spector TD(29), Evans DM(6,)(47,)(48),
Lehtimäki T(27,)(28), Vitart V(3), Kähönen M(66), Gyllensten U(23), Rudan
I(13,)(67), Deary IJ(21,)(22), Karrasch S(30,)(68,)(69), Probst-Hensch
NM(17,)(18), Heinrich J(30,)(60,)(70), Stubbe B(34), Wilson JF(3,)(13), Wareham
NJ(12), James AL(8,)(71,)(53), Morris AP(31,)(72,)(73), Jarvelin
MR(7,)(74,)(75,)(76), Hayward C(5), Sayers I(2), Strachan DP(77), Hall IP(2),
Tobin MD(1,)(78).

Collaborators: Deloukas P, Hansell AL, Hubbard R, Jackson VE, Marchini J, Pavord 
I, Thomson NC, Zeggini E.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Epidemiology Group, Department of Health Sciences, University of
Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK. (2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Queen's
Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK. (3)MRC Human
Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland EH8 9AD, UK. (4)University of British Columbia
Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, St Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada V6Z 1Y6. (5)Generation Scotland, A Collaboration between the
University Medical Schools and NHS, Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh, Glasgow EH4 2XU,
UK. (6)School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol
BS8 1TH, UK. (7)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, MRC -PHE Centre for
Environment &Health, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London SW7
2AZ, UK. (8)Busselton Population Medical Research Institute, Busselton, Western
Australia 6280, Australia. (9)PathWest Laboratory Medicine WA, Sir Charles
Gairdner Hospital, Western Australia 6009, Australia. (10)School of Population
Health, The University of Western Australia, Western Australia 6009, Australia.
(11)School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Western
Australia, Western Australia 6009, Australia. (12)MRC Epidemiology Unit,
University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Institute of Metabolic
Science, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge CB2 0SL, UK. (13)Usher Institute 
of Population Health Sciences and Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Teviot
Place, Edinburgh EH8 9AD, Scotland, UK. (14)University Medicine Greifswald,
Community Medicine, SHIP-Clinical Epidemiological Research, Greifswald 17489,
Germany. (15)Department for Genetics and Functional Genomics, Interfaculty
Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald,
Greifswald 17489, Germany. (16)Institute of Genetic Epidemiology, Helmholtz
Zentrum München German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg
D-85764, Germany. (17)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel 4051,
Switzerland. (18)University of Basel, Basel 4001, Switzerland. (19)Research Unit 
of Molecular Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for 
Environmental Health, Neuherberg D-85764, Germany. (20)Institute of Epidemiology 
II, Helmholtz Zentrum München German Research Center for Environmental Health,
Neuherberg D-85764, Germany. (21)Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive
Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9AD, UK. (22)Department of
Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9AD, UK. (23)Department of
Immunology, Genetics, and Pathology, Biomedical Center, SciLifeLab Uppsala,
Uppsala University, Uppsala 751 23, Sweden. (24)Institute for Molecular Medicine 
Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki FI-00014, Finland. (25)The
National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Helsinki FI-00271, Finland.
(26)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Split, Split 
21000, Croatia. (27)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Fimlab Laboratories,
Tampere FI-33101, Finland. (28)Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of
Tampere School of Medicine, Tampere FI-33520, Finland. (29)KCL Department of
Twins Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King's College London, London WC2R 2LS, 
UK. (30)Institute of Epidemiology I, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research
Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg D-85764, Germany. (31)Wellcome Trust 
Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
(32)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de
Pneumologie de Québec, Laval University, Québec, Canada G1V 0A6. (33)Department
of Pathology and Medical Biology, University of Groningen, University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen 9700, The Netherlands. (34)Department of Internal
Medicine B, Pneumology, Cardiology, Intensive Care, Weaning, Field of Research:
Pneumological Epidemiology, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald 17489,
Germany. (35)Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology (CREAL), Barcelona
E-08003, Spain. (36)CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid 28029,
Spain. (37)Pompeu Fabra University (UPF), Barcelona 08002, Catalonia, Spain.
(38)Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH8 9AD, UK. (39)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of Oulu
University Hospital ,MRC of Oulu University, Oulu 90220, Finland. (40)Division of
Applied Health Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland AB24 3FX, UK.
(41)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX1 2JD, UK. (42)Department of Pediatrics, Tampere University
Hospital, Tampere 33521, Finland. (43)Department of Pediatrics, University of
Tampere School of Medicine, Tampere FI-33520, Finland. (44)Department of Medical 
Sciences, Molecular Epidemiology and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala
University, Uppsala 751 23, Sweden. (45)Department of Medicine, Division of
Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305, USA. (46)Uppsala Clinical Research Centre, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala 751 23, Sweden. (47)Diamantina Institute, Translational Research
Institute, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland QLD 4072, Australia.
(48)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, Bristol BS8 1TH, UK. (49)Institute of
Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm SE-171 7, Sweden.
(50)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala 751 23, Sweden.
(51)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet and Sachs'
Children's Hospital, Stockholm SE-171 7, Sweden. (52)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Western Australia 6009, Australia.
(53)School of Medicine and Pharmacology, The University of Western Australia,
Western Australia 6009, Australia. (54)Genetics and Pharmacogenomics, Merck
Research Labs, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (55)Division of Cardiovascular
and Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8TA, Scotland, UK.
(56)Department of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine, Turku University
Hospital, Turku 20520, Finland. (57)Research Centre of Applied and Preventive
Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Turku, Turku 20014, Finland.
(58)Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki FI-00014,
Finland. (59)Department of Human Genomics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. (60)Comprehensive Pneumology Center Munich
(CPC-M), Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Munich 85764, Germany.
(61)Respiratory Division, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada V6T 1Z4. (62)Alzheimer Scotland Research Centre, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9AD, UK. (63)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Split, Split 21000, Croatia. (64)Respiratory Epidemiology
and Public Health, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. (65)MRC Health
Protection Agency (HPA) Centre for Environment and Health, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. (66)Department of Clinical Physiology, University of 
Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere 33521, Finland. (67)Centre for
Population Health Sciences, Medical School, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh
EH8 9AD, Scotland, UK. (68)Institute of General Practice, University Hospital
Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich D - 81675,
Germany. (69)Institute and Outpatient Clinic for Occupational, Social and
Environmental Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich 80539, Germany.
(70)University Hospital Munich, Institute and Outpatient Clinic for Occupational,
Social and Environmental Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilian University Munich, Munich
80539, Germany. (71)Department of Pulmonary Physiology and Sleep Medicine, Sir
Charles Gairdner Hospital, Western Australia 6009, Australia. (72)Department of
Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZX, UK. (73)Estonian
Genome Centre, University of Tartu, Tartu 50090, Estonia. (74)Center for Life
Course Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, P.O.Box 5000, FI-90014 University of
Oulu, Oulu FI-01051, Finland. (75)Biocenter Oulu, P.O.Box 5000, Aapistie 5A,
FI-90014 University of Oulu, Oulu FI-01051, Finland. (76)Unit of Primary Care,
Oulu University Hospital, Kajaanintie 50, P.O.Box 20, FI-90220 Oulu, 90029 OYS,
Finland. (77)Population Health Research Institute, St George's, University of
London, Cranmer Terrace, London WC1B 5DN, UK. (78)National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR) Leicester Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, Glenfield
Hospital, Leicester LE3 9QP, UK.

Lung function measures are used in the diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. In 38,199 European ancestry individuals, we studied genome-wide
association of forced expiratory volume in 1<U+2009>s (FEV1), forced vital capacity
(FVC) and FEV1/FVC with 1000 Genomes Project (phase 1)-imputed genotypes and
followed up top associations in 54,550 Europeans. We identify 14 novel loci (P<5 
× 10(-8)) in or near ENSA, RNU5F-1, KCNS3, AK097794, ASTN2, LHX3, CCDC91, TBX3,
TRIP11, RIN3, TEKT5, LTBP4, MN1 and AP1S2, and two novel signals at known loci
NPNT and GPR126, providing a basis for new understanding of the genetic
determinants of these traits and pulmonary diseases in which they are altered.

PMCID: PMC4686825
PMID: 26635082  [PubMed - in process]


13. Front Oncol. 2015 Oct 29;5:244. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00244. eCollection 2015.

Putative Breast Cancer Driver Mutations in TBX3 Cause Impaired Transcriptional
Repression.

Fischer K(1), Pflugfelder GO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, Mainz University , Mainz , Germany.

The closely related T-box transcription factors TBX2 and TBX3 are frequently
overexpressed in melanoma and various types of human cancers, in particular,
breast cancer. The overexpression of TBX2 and TBX3 can have several cellular
effects, among them suppression of senescence, promotion of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and invasive cell motility. In contrast, loss 
of function of TBX3 and most other human T-box genes causes developmental
haploinsufficiency syndromes. Stephens and colleagues (1), by exome sequencing of
breast tumor samples, identified five different mutations in TBX3, all affecting 
the DNA-binding T-domain. One in-frame deletion of a single amino acid,
p.N212delN, was observed twice. Due to the clustering of these mutations to the
T-domain and for statistical reasons, TBX3 was inferred to be a driver gene in
breast cancer. Since mutations in the T-domain generally cause loss of function
and because the tumorigenic action of TBX3 has generally been attributed to
overexpression, we determined whether the putative driver mutations had loss- or 
gain-of-function properties. We tested two in-frame deletions, one missense, and 
one frameshift mutant protein for DNA-binding in vitro, and for target gene
repression in cell culture. In addition, we performed an in silico analysis of
somatic TBX mutations in breast cancer, collected in The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA). Both the experimental and the in silico analysis indicate that the
observed mutations predominantly cause loss of TBX3 function.

PMCID: PMC4625211
PMID: 26579496  [PubMed]


14. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 12;5:16539. doi: 10.1038/srep16539.

Improvement in Mouse iPSC Induction by Rab32 Reveals the Importance of Lipid
Metabolism during Reprogramming.

Pei Y(1), Yue L(1), Zhang W(1), Wang Y(1), Wen B(1), Zhong L(1), Xiang J(1), Li
J(1), Zhang S(1), Wang H(1), Mu H(1), Wei Q(1), Han J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratories for Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, China.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) have variable expression levels of a
series of genes that affect their pluripotent potential, but the regulatory
mechanisms controlling reprogramming remain unclear. By testing the efficiency of
iPSC generation using Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 (termed OSK) plus one additional gene, we 
found that Rab32 improved reprogramming efficiency. We established a system for
detecting the number and the size of lipid droplets and autophagosomes per cell
for tracking their morphological changes during reprogramming. Our results showed
that Rab32 increased lipid storage during the early and middle stages, and also
increased autophagy during the middle stage of reprogramming. These findings were
further confirmed by the up-regulation of lipid biosynthesis and autophagosome
formation related genes, of which their expression could improve iPSC induction. 
The inhibition of lipid biosynthesis and autophagosome formation significantly
reduced reprogramming efficiency, and the inhibition of lipid synthesis phenotype
could be rescued by the overexpression of Rab32. In addition, the expression of
pluripotency genes such as Klf2, Nr5a2 and Tbx3, was up-regulated by Rab32. These
results demonstrated that Rab32 could improve the induction of iPSCs through the 
enhancement of lipid biosynthesis, highlighting the importance of lipid
metabolism during reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC4642270
PMID: 26559473  [PubMed - in process]


15. Development. 2015 Dec 1;142(23):4056-67. doi: 10.1242/dev.128298. Epub 2015 Oct
12.

Hoxc8 initiates an ectopic mammary program by regulating Fgf10 and Tbx3
expression and Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Carroll LS(1), Capecchi MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Moran Eye Center, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA
lsc3@utah.edu. (2)Department of Human Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

The role of Hox genes in the formation of cutaneous accessory organs such as hair
follicles and mammary glands has proved elusive, a likely consequence of
overlapping function and expression among various homeobox factors. Lineage and
immunohistochemical analysis of Hoxc8 in mice revealed that this midthoracic Hox 
gene has transient but strong regional expression in ventrolateral surface
ectoderm at E10.5, much earlier than previously reported. Targeted mice were
generated to conditionally misexpress Hoxc8 from the Rosa locus using select Cre 
drivers, which significantly expanded the domain of thoracic identity in mutant
embryos. Accompanying this expansion was the induction of paired zones of ectopic
mammary development in the cervical region, which generated between three and
five pairs of mammary placodes anterior to the first wild-type mammary rudiment. 
These rudiments expressed the mammary placode markers Wnt10b and Tbx3 and were
labeled by antibodies to the mammary mesenchyme markers ERa and androgen
receptor. Somitic Fgf10 expression, which is required for normal mammary line
formation, was upregulated in mutant cervical somites, and conditional ablation
of ectodermal Tbx3 expression eliminated all normally positioned and ectopic
mammary placodes. We present evidence that Hoxc8 participates in regulating the
initiation stages of mammary placode morphogenesis, and suggest that this and
other Hox genes are likely to have important roles during regional specification 
and initiation of these and other cutaneous accessory organs.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4712843 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26459221  [PubMed - in process]


16. Cell. 2015 Oct 8;163(2):506-19. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.09.033.

Comprehensive Molecular Portraits of Invasive Lobular Breast Cancer.

Ciriello G(1), Gatza ML(2), Beck AH(3), Wilkerson MD(4), Rhie SK(5), Pastore
A(6), Zhang H(7), McLellan M(8), Yau C(9), Kandoth C(10), Bowlby R(11), Shen
H(12), Hayat S(6), Fieldhouse R(6), Lester SC(3), Tse GM(13), Factor RE(14),
Collins LC(3), Allison KH(15), Chen YY(16), Jensen K(17), Johnson NB(3),
Oesterreich S(18), Mills GB(19), Cherniack AD(7), Robertson G(11), Benz C(9),
Sander C(6), Laird PW(12), Hoadley KA(20), King TA(21); TCGA Research Network,
Perou CM(22).

Collaborators: Akbani R, Auman JT, Balasundaram M, Balu S, Barr T, Beck A, Benz
C, Benz S, Berrios M, Beroukhim R, Bodenheimer T, Boice L, Bootwalla MS, Bowen J,
Bowlby R, Brooks D, Cherniack AD, Chin L, Cho J, Chudamani S, Ciriello G,
Davidsen T, Demchok JA, Dennison JB, Ding L, Felau I, Ferguson ML, Frazer S,
Gabriel SB, Gao J, Gastier-Foster JM, Gatza ML, Gehlenborg N, Gerken M, Getz G,
Gibson WJ, Hayes DN, Heiman DI, Hoadley KA, Holbrook A, Holt RA, Hoyle AP, Hu H, 
Huang M, Hutter CM, Hwang ES, Jefferys SR, Jones SJ, Ju Z, Kim J, Lai PH, Laird
PW, Lawrence MS, Leraas KM, Lichtenberg TM, Lin P, Ling S, Liu J, Liu W, Lolla L,
Lu Y, Ma Y, Maglinte DT, Mardis E, Marks J, Marra MA, McAllister C, McLellan M,
Meng S, Meyerson M, Mills GB, Moore RA, Mose LE, Mungall AJ, Murray BA, Naresh R,
Noble MS, Oesterreich S, Olopade O, Parker JS, Perou CM, Pihl T, Saksena G,
Schumacher SE, Shaw KR, Ramirez NC, Rathmell WK, Rhie SK, Roach J, Robertson AG, 
Saksena G, Sander C, Schein JE, Schultz N, Shen H, Sheth M, Shi Y, Shih J,
Shelley CS, Shriver C, Simons JV, Sofia HJ, Soloway MG, Sougnez C, Sun C,
Tarnuzzer R, Tiezzi DG, Van Den Berg DJ, Voet D, Wan Y, Wang Z, Weinstein JN,
Weisenberger DJ, Wilkerson MD, Wilson R, Wise L, Wiznerowicz M, Wu J, Wu Y, Yang 
L, Yau C, Zack TI, Zenklusen JC, Zhang H, Zhang J, Zmuda E.

Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is the second most prevalent histologic subtype 
of invasive breast cancer. Here, we comprehensively profiled 817 breast tumors,
including 127 ILC, 490 ductal (IDC), and 88 mixed IDC/ILC. Besides E-cadherin
loss, the best known ILC genetic hallmark, we identified mutations targeting
PTEN, TBX3, and FOXA1 as ILC enriched features. PTEN loss associated with
increased AKT phosphorylation, which was highest in ILC among all breast cancer
subtypes. Spatially clustered FOXA1 mutations correlated with increased FOXA1
expression and activity. Conversely, GATA3 mutations and high expression
characterized luminal A IDC, suggesting differential modulation of ER activity in
ILC and IDC. Proliferation and immune-related signatures determined three ILC
transcriptional subtypes associated with survival differences. Mixed IDC/ILC
cases were molecularly classified as ILC-like and IDC-like revealing no true
hybrid features. This multidimensional molecular atlas sheds new light on the
genetic bases of ILC and provides potential clinical options.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4603750 [Available on 2016-10-08]
PMID: 26451490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 2;10(10):e0136735. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136735.
eCollection 2015.

Incorporating Known Genetic Variants Does Not Improve the Accuracy of PSA Testing
to Identify High Risk Prostate Cancer on Biopsy.

Gilbert R(1), Martin RM(2), Evans DM(3), Tilling K(1), Davey Smith G(2), Kemp
JP(3), Lane JA(1), Hamdy FC(4), Neal DE(5), Donovan JL(1), Metcalfe C(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol,
United Kingdom. (2)School of Social and Community Medicine, University of
Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom; MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University
of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom. (3)School of Social and Community Medicine, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom; MRC Integrative Epidemiology
Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom; University of Queensland
Diamantina Institute, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia. (4)Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom. (5)Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing is a widely accepted
screening method for prostate cancer, but with low specificity at thresholds
giving good sensitivity. Previous research identified four single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) principally associated with circulating PSA levels rather
than with prostate cancer risk (TERT rs2736098, FGFR2 rs10788160, TBX3
rs11067228, KLK3 rs17632542). Removing the genetic contribution to PSA levels may
improve the ability of the remaining biologically-determined variation in PSA to 
discriminate between high and low risk of progression within men with identified 
prostate cancer. We investigate whether incorporating information on the PSA-SNPs
improves the discrimination achieved by a single PSA threshold in men with raised
PSA levels.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Men with PSA between 3-10 ng/mL and
histologically-confirmed prostate cancer were categorised as high or low risk of 
progression (Low risk: Gleason score=6 and stage T1-T2a; High risk: Gleason score
7-10 or stage T2C). We used the combined genetic effect of the four PSA-SNPs to
calculate a genetically corrected PSA risk score. We calculated the Area under
the Curve (AUC) to determine how well genetically corrected PSA risk scores
distinguished men at high risk of progression from low risk men.
RESULTS: The analysis includes 868 men with prostate cancer (Low risk: 684
(78.8%); High risk: 184 (21.2%)). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves 
indicate that including the 4 PSA-SNPs does not improve the performance of
measured PSA as a screening tool for high/low risk prostate cancer (measured PSA 
level AUC = 59.5% (95% CI: 54.7,64.2) vs additionally including information from 
the 4 PSA-SNPs AUC = 59.8% (95% CI: 55.2,64.5) (p-value = 0.40)).
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that genetically correcting PSA for the combined
genetic effect of four PSA-SNPs, did not improve discrimination between high and 
low risk prostate cancer in men with raised PSA levels (3-10 ng/mL). Replication 
and gaining more accurate estimates of the effects of the 4 PSA-SNPs and
additional variants associated with PSA levels and not prostate cancer could be
obtained from subsequent GWAS from larger prospective studies.

PMCID: PMC4592274
PMID: 26431041  [PubMed - in process]


18. Development. 2015 Nov 1;142(21):3704-12. doi: 10.1242/dev.128736. Epub 2015 Sep
28.

Facial whisker pattern is not sufficient to instruct a whisker-related
topographic map in the mouse somatosensory brainstem.

Laumonnerie C(1), Bechara A(1), Vilain N(1), Kurihara Y(2), Kurihara H(2), Rijli 
FM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66,
Basel 4058, Switzerland. (2)Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8654, Japan Core Research for Evolutional
Science and Technology (CREST), Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST),
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 102-0075, Japan. (3)Friedrich Miescher Institute for
Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, Basel 4058, Switzerland University of
Basel, Basel 4056, Switzerland filippo.rijli@fmi.ch.

Facial somatosensory input is relayed by trigeminal ganglion (TG) neurons and
serially wired to brainstem, thalamus and cortex. Spatially ordered sets of
target neurons generate central topographic maps reproducing the spatial
arrangement of peripheral facial receptors. Facial pattern provides a necessary
template for map formation, but may be insufficient to impose a brain somatotopic
pattern. In mice, lower jaw sensory information is relayed by the trigeminal
nerve mandibular branch, whose axons target the brainstem dorsal principal
sensory trigeminal nucleus (dPrV). Input from mystacial whiskers is relayed by
the maxillary branch and forms a topographic representation of rows and whiskers 
in the ventral PrV (vPrV). To investigate peripheral organisation in imposing a
brain topographic pattern, we analysed Edn1(-/-) mice, which present ectopic
whisker rows on the lower jaw. We found that these whiskers were innervated by
mandibular TG neurons which initially targeted dPrV. Unlike maxillary TG neurons,
the ectopic whisker-innervating mandibular neuron cell bodies and pre-target
central axons did not segregate into a row-specific pattern nor target the dPrV
with a topographic pattern. Following periphery-driven molecular repatterning to 
a maxillary-like identity, mandibular neurons partially redirected their central 
projections from dPrV to vPrV. Thus, while able to induce maxillary-like
molecular features resulting in vPrV final targeting, a spatially ordered lower
jaw ectopic whisker pattern is insufficient to impose row-specific pre-target
organisation of the central mandibular tract or a whisker-related matching
pattern of afferents in dPrV. These results provide novel insights into
periphery-dependent versus periphery-independent mechanisms of trigeminal
ganglion and brainstem patterning in matching whisker topography.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26417040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Aug 14;9:113. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00113. eCollection
2015.

Lhx5 controls mamillary differentiation in the developing hypothalamus of the
mouse.

Heide M(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhou X(1), Zhao T(2), Miquelajáuregui A(3),
Varela-Echavarría A(3), Alvarez-Bolado G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Heidelberg Heidelberg,
Germany. (2)Key Laboratory of Oral Disease and Biomedical Sciences,
Stomatological Hospital, Chongqing Medical University Chongqing, China.
(3)Departamento de Neurobiología del Desarrollo y Neurofisiología, Instituto de
Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México Querétaro, Mexico.

Acquisition of specific neuronal identity by individual brain nuclei is a key
step in brain development. However, how the mechanisms that confer neuronal
identity are integrated with upstream regional specification networks is still
mysterious. Expression of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), is required for hypothalamic
specification and is later downregulated by Tbx3 to allow for the differentiation
of the tubero-mamillary region. In this region, the mamillary body (MBO), is a
large neuronal aggregate essential for memory formation. To clarify how MBO
identity is acquired after regional specification, we investigated Lhx5, a
transcription factor with restricted MBO expression. We first generated a
hypomorph allele of Lhx5-in homozygotes, the MBO disappears after initial
specification. Intriguingly, in these mutants, Tbx3 was downregulated and the Shh
expression domain abnormally extended. Microarray analysis and chromatin
immunoprecipitation indicated that Lhx5 appears to be involved in Shh
downregulation through Tbx3 and activates several MBO-specific regulator and
effector genes. Finally, by tracing the caudal hypothalamic cell lineage we show 
that, in the Lhx5 mutant, at least some MBO cells are present but lack
characteristic marker expression. Our work shows how the Lhx5 locus contributes
to integrate regional specification pathways with downstream acquisition of
neuronal identity in the MBO.

PMCID: PMC4536661
PMID: 26321924  [PubMed]


20. Cell Rep. 2015 Sep 8;12(10):1594-605. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.08.006. Epub
2015 Aug 28.

MiR-93 Controls Adiposity via Inhibition of Sirt7 and Tbx3.

Cioffi M(1), Vallespinos-Serrano M(1), Trabulo SM(2), Fernandez-Marcos PJ(3),
Firment AN(4), Vazquez BN(5), Vieira CR(1), Mulero F(6), Camara JA(6), Cronin
UP(7), Perez M(8), Soriano J(8), G Galvez B(9), Castells-Garcia A(1), Haage V(1),
Raj D(10), Megias D(8), Hahn S(11), Serrano L(5), Moon A(4), Aicher A(12),
Heeschen C(13).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cells & Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO),
Madrid 28028, Spain. (2)Stem Cells & Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid 28028, Spain; Stem Cells in Cancer & Ageing, Barts
Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London EC1M 6BQ, UK. (3)Tumor 
Suppression Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid 28028, 
Spain. (4)Weis Center for Research, Danville, PA 17822, USA. (5)Department of
Genetics, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. (6)Bioimaging, Spanish
National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid 28028, Spain. (7)Flow Cytometry
Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid 28028, Spain.
(8)Confocal Microscopy Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO),
Madrid 28028, Spain. (9)Spanish National Cardiovascular Research Center (CNIC),
Madrid 28028, Spain. (10)Stem Cells in Cancer & Ageing, Barts Cancer Institute,
Queen Mary University of London, London EC1M 6BQ, UK. (11)Department of Molecular
Gastrointestinal Oncology, Ruhr-University, Bochum 44801, Germany. (12)Stem Cells
& Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid 28028,
Spain; Stem Cells in Cancer & Ageing, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary
University of London, London EC1M 6BQ, UK. Electronic address:
aicher_a@yahoo.com. (13)Stem Cells & Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid 28028, Spain; Stem Cells in Cancer & Ageing, Barts
Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.
Electronic address: c.heeschen@qmul.ac.uk.

Conquering obesity has become a major socioeconomic challenge. Here, we show that
reduced expression of the miR-25-93-106b cluster, or miR-93 alone, increases fat 
mass and, subsequently, insulin resistance. Mechanistically, we discovered an
intricate interplay between enhanced adipocyte precursor turnover and increased
adipogenesis. First, miR-93 controls Tbx3, thereby limiting self-renewal in early
adipocyte precursors. Second, miR-93 inhibits the metabolic target Sirt7, which
we identified as a major driver of in vivo adipogenesis via induction of
differentiation and maturation of early adipocyte precursors. Using mouse
parabiosis, obesity in mir-25-93-106b(-/-) mice could be rescued by restoring
levels of circulating miRNA and subsequent inhibition of Tbx3 and Sirt7.
Downregulation of miR-93 also occurred in obese ob/ob mice, and this phenocopy of
mir-25-93-106b(-/-) was partially reversible with injection of miR-93 mimics. Our
data establish miR-93 as a negative regulator of adipogenesis and a potential
therapeutic option for obesity and the metabolic syndrome.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26321631  [PubMed - in process]


21. Hypertension. 2015 Oct;66(4):793-9. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.05645. Epub 
2015 Aug 17.

Endogenous microRNAs in human microvascular endothelial cells regulate mRNAs
encoded by hypertension-related genes.

Kriegel AJ(1), Baker MA(2), Liu Y(2), Liu P(2), Cowley AW Jr(2), Liang M(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Physiology, Center of Systems Molecular Medicine,
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee. mliang@mcw.edu akriegel@mcw.edu. (2)From
the Department of Physiology, Center of Systems Molecular Medicine, Medical
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee.

The goal of this study was to systematically identify endogenous microRNAs
(miRNAs) in endothelial cells that regulate mRNAs encoded by genes relevant to
hypertension. Small RNA deep sequencing was performed in cultured human
microvascular endothelial cells. Of the 50 most abundant miRNAs identified, 30
had predicted target mRNAs encoded by genes with known involvement in
hypertension or blood pressure regulation. The cells were transfected with
anti-miR oligonucleotides to inhibit each of the 30 miRNAs and the mRNA abundance
of predicted targets was examined. Of 95 miRNA-target pairs examined, the target 
mRNAs were significantly upregulated in 35 pairs and paradoxically downregulated 
in 8 pairs. The result indicated significant suppression of the abundance of mRNA
encoded by ADM by endogenous miR-181a-5p, ATP2B1 by the miR-27 family, FURIN by
miR-125a-5p, FGF5 by the let-7 family, GOSR2 by miR-27a-3p, JAG1 by miR-21-5p,
SH2B3 by miR-30a-5p, miR-98, miR-181a-5p, and the miR-125 family, TBX3 by the
miR-92 family, ADRA1B by miR-22-3p, ADRA2A by miR-30a-5p and miR-30e-5p, ADRA2B
by miR-30e-5p, ADRB1 by the let-7 family and miR-98, EDNRB by the miR-92 family, 
and NOX4 by the miR-92 family, miR-100-5p, and miR-99b-5p (n=3-9; P<0.05 versus
scrambled anti-miR). Treatment with anti-miR-21 decreased blood pressure in mice 
fed a 4% NaCl diet. Inhibition of the miRNAs targeting NOX4 mRNA increased H2O2
release from endothelial cells. The findings indicate widespread, tonic control
of mRNAs encoded by genes relevant to blood pressure regulation by endothelial
miRNAs and provide a novel and uniquely informative basis for studying the role
of miRNAs in hypertension.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4567475 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26283043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Nat Commun. 2015 Aug 18;6:8082. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9082.

Association analysis identifies new risk loci for congenital heart disease in
Chinese populations.

Lin Y(1), Guo X(2), Zhao B(3), Liu J(2), Da M(4), Wen Y(1), Hu Y(4), Ni B(1),
Zhang K(1), Yang S(5), Xu J(6), Dai J(7), Wang X(6), Xia Y(8), Ma H(7), Jin G(7),
Yu S(3), Liu J(9), Keavney BD(10), Goodship JA(11), Cordell HJ(11), Wang X(8),
Shen H(1), Sha J(2), Zhou Z(2), Chen Y(6), Mo X(4), Luo L(12), Hu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing 210029, China [2] Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of
Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. (2)1] State Key
Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, 
China [2] Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing 210029, China. (3)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Xijing hospital, 
The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China. (4)Department of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Nanjing Children's Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing 210008, China. (5)Department of Cardiology, Nanjing Children's Hospital, 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210008, China. (6)Department of Thoracic and 
Cardiovascular Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China. (7)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
211166, China. (8)1] State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China [2] Department of Toxicology and Key
Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of Public
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. (9)1] State Key
Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, 
China [2] Center of Clinical Reproductive Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital
of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China. (10)1] Institute of Genetic
Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK [2] Institute of 
Cardiovascular Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9NT, UK.
(11)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 
3BZ, UK. (12)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development,
Ministry of Education, Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, School of
Life Sciences, Southwest University, Beibei, Chongqing 400715, China.

Our previous genome-wide association study (GWAS) identified two susceptibility
loci for congenital heart disease (CHD) in Han Chinese. Here we identify
additional loci by testing promising associations in an extended 3-stage
validation consisting of 6,053 CHD cases and 7,410 controls. We find GW
significant (P<5.0 × 10(-8)) evidence of 4 additional CHD susceptibility loci at 
4q31.22 (rs1400558, upstream of EDNRA, Pall=1.63 × 10(-9)), 9p24.2 (rs7863990,
close to SMARCA2, Pall=3.71 × 10(-14)), 12q24.13 (rs2433752, upstream of TBX3 and
TBX5, Pall=1.04 × 10(-10)) and 20q12 (rs490514, in PTPRT, Pall=1.20 × 10(-13)).
Moreover, the data from previous European GWAS supports that rs490514 is
associated with the risk of CHD (P=3.40 × 10(-3)). These results enhance our
understanding of CHD susceptibility.

PMID: 26283027  [PubMed - in process]


23. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(19):3173-83. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1080398.

The T-Box factor TBX3 is important in S-phase and is regulated by c-Myc and
cyclin A-CDK2.

Willmer T(1), Peres J(1), Mowla S(1), Abrahams A(1), Prince S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Human Biology ; Faculty of Health Sciences; University of Cape
Town ; Cape Town , South Africa.

The transcription factor, TBX3, is critical for the formation of, among other
structures, the heart, limbs and mammary glands and haploinsufficiency of the
human TBX3 gene result in ulnar-mammary syndrome which is characterized by
hypoplasia of these structures. On the other hand, the overexpression of TBX3 is 
a feature of a wide range of cancers and it has been implicated in several
aspects of the oncogenic process. This includes its ability to function as an
immortalizing gene and to promote proliferation through actively repressing
negative cell cycle regulators. Together this suggests that TBX3 levels may need 
to be tightly regulated during the cell cycle. Here we demonstrate that this is
indeed the case and that TBX3 mRNA and protein levels peak at S-phase and that
the TBX3 protein is predominantly localized to the nucleus of S-phase cells. The 
increased levels of TBX3 in S-phase are shown to occur transcriptionally through 
activation by c-Myc at E-box motifs located at -1210 and -701 bps and
post-translationally by cyclin A-CDK2 phosphorylation. Importantly, when TBX3 is 
depleted by shRNA the cells accumulate in S-phase. These results suggest that
TBX3 is required for cells to transit through S-phase and that this function may 
be linked to its role as a pro-proliferative factor.

PMID: 26266831  [PubMed - in process]


24. Ukr Biochem J. 2015 Mar-Apr;87(2):76-87.

INHIBITION OF ERN1 SIGNALING ENZYME AFFECTS HYPOXIC REGULATION OF THE EXPRESSION 
OF E2F8, EPAS1, HOXC6, ATF3, TBX3 AND FOXF1 GENES IN U87 GLIOMA CELLS.

Minchenko OH, Tsymbal DO, Minchenko DO, Kovalevska OV, Karbovskyi LL, Bikfalvi A.

Hypoxia as well as the endoplasmic reticulum stress are important factors of
malignant tumor growth and control of the expression of genes, which regulate
numerous metabolic processes and cell proliferation. Furthermore, blockade of
ERN1 (endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus 1) suppresses cell proliferation and tumor
growth. We studied the effect of hypoxia on the expression of genes encoding the 
transcription factors such as E2F8 (E2F transcription factor 8), EPAS1
(endothelial PAS domain protein 1), TBX3 (T-box 3), ATF3 (activating
transcription factor 3), FOXF1 (forkhead box F), and HOXC6 (homeobox C6) in U87
glioma cells with and without ERN1 signaling enzyme function. We have established
that hypoxia enhances the expression of HOXC6, E2F8, ATF3, and EPAS1 genes but
does not change TBX3 and FOXF1 gene expression in glioma cells with ERNI
function. At the same time, the expression level of all studied genes is strongly
decreased, except for TBX3 gene, in glioma cells without ERN1 function. Moreover,
the inhibition of ERN1 signaling enzyme function significantly modifies the
effect of hypoxia on the expression of these transcription factor genes. removes 
or introduces this regulation as well as changes a direction or magnitude of
hypoxic regulation. Present study demonstrates that fine-tuning of the expression
of proliferation related genes depends upon hypoxia and ERN1-mediated endoplasmic
reticulum stress signaling and correlates with slower proliferation rate of
glioma cells without ERN1 function.

PMID: 26255341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 15;75(18):3980-90. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0506. Epub 
2015 Aug 6.

A Molecular Portrait of High-Grade Ductal Carcinoma In Situ.

Abba MC(1), Gong T(2), Lu Y(2), Lee J(2), Zhong Y(2), Lacunza E(1), Butti M(1),
Takata Y(2), Gaddis S(2), Shen J(2), Estecio MR(3), Sahin AA(4), Aldaz CM(5).

Author information: 
(1)CINIBA, School of Medical Sciences, National University of La Plata, La Plata,
Argentina. (2)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville,
Texas. (3)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas.
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (4)The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (5)The University 
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas. maaldaz@mdanderson.org.

Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a noninvasive precursor lesion to invasive
breast carcinoma. We still have no understanding on why only some DCIS lesions
evolve to invasive cancer whereas others appear not to do so during the life span
of the patient. Here, we performed full exome (tumor vs. matching normal),
transcriptome, and methylome analysis of 30 pure high-grade DCIS (HG-DCIS) and 10
normal breast epithelial samples. Sixty-two percent of HG-DCIS cases displayed
mutations affecting cancer driver genes or potential drivers. Mutations were
observed affecting PIK3CA (21% of cases), TP53 (17%), GATA3 (7%), MLL3 (7%) and
single cases of mutations affecting CDH1, MAP2K4, TBX3, NF1, ATM, and ARID1A.
Significantly, 83% of lesions displayed numerous large chromosomal copy number
alterations, suggesting they might precede selection of cancer driver mutations. 
Integrated pathway-based modeling analysis of RNA-seq data allowed us to identify
two DCIS subgroups (DCIS-C1 and DCIS-C2) based on their tumor-intrinsic subtypes,
proliferative, immune scores, and in the activity of specific signaling pathways.
The more aggressive DCIS-C1 (highly proliferative, basal-like, or ERBB2(+))
displayed signatures characteristic of activated Treg cells
(CD4(+)/CD25(+)/FOXP3(+)) and CTLA4(+)/CD86(+) complexes indicative of a
tumor-associated immunosuppressive phenotype. Strikingly, all lesions showed
evidence of TP53 pathway inactivation. Similarly, ncRNA and methylation profiles 
reproduce changes observed postinvasion. Among the most significant findings, we 
observed upregulation of lncRNA HOTAIR in DCIS-C1 lesions and hypermethylation of
HOXA5 and SOX genes. We conclude that most HG-DCIS lesions, in spite of
representing a preinvasive stage of tumor progression, displayed molecular
profiles indistinguishable from invasive breast cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4768486 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26249178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Nature. 2015 Aug 13;524(7564):180-5. doi: 10.1038/nature14863. Epub 2015 Aug 5.

Self-renewing diploid Axin2(+) cells fuel homeostatic renewal of the liver.

Wang B(1), Zhao L(2), Fish M(2), Logan CY(2), Nusse R(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Developmental Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Stanford Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA [2] Department of 
Medicine and Liver Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California 94143, USA. (2)Department of Developmental Biology, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Stanford Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305,
USA.

Comment in
    Cell Res. 2015 Nov;25(11):1181-2.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Oct 1;17(4):377-8.
    Nature. 2015 Aug 13;524(7564):165-6.

The source of new hepatocytes in the uninjured liver has remained an open
question. By lineage tracing using the Wnt-responsive gene Axin2 in mice, we
identify a population of proliferating and self-renewing cells adjacent to the
central vein in the liver lobule. These pericentral cells express the early liver
progenitor marker Tbx3, are diploid, and thereby differ from mature hepatocytes, 
which are mostly polyploid. The descendants of pericentral cells differentiate
into Tbx3-negative, polyploid hepatocytes, and can replace all hepatocytes along 
the liver lobule during homeostatic renewal. Adjacent central vein endothelial
cells provide Wnt signals that maintain the pericentral cells, thereby
constituting the niche. Thus, we identify a cell population in the liver that
subserves homeostatic hepatocyte renewal, characterize its anatomical niche, and 
identify molecular signals that regulate its activity.

PMCID: PMC4589224
PMID: 26245375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 8;6(26):22048-59.

A contrasting function for miR-137 in embryonic mammogenesis and adult breast
carcinogenesis.

Lee JM(1), Cho KW(2), Kim EJ(1), Tang Q(1), Kim KS(3), Tickle C(4), Jung
HS(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division in Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Department of Oral Biology,
Oral Science Research Center, BK21 PLUS Project, Yonsei University College of
Dentistry, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Radiology, Seoul National University
Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (3)Graduate School of Biomedical Science and Engineering,
College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Biology
and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, UK. (5)Oral Biosciences, Faculty of
Dentistry, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR.

MicroRNAs are differentially expressed in breast cancer cells and have been
implicated in cancer formation, tumour invasion and metastasis. We investigated
the miRNA expression profiles in the developing mammary gland. MiR-137 was
expressed prominently in the developing mammary gland. When the miR-137 was
over-expressed in the embryo, the mammary epithelium became thickened. Moreover, 
genes associated with mammary gland formation such as Tbx3 and Lef1 were not
expressed. This suggests that miR-137 induces gland formation and invasion. When 
miR-137 was over-expressed in MDA-MB-231 cells, their ability to form tumours in 
adult mice was significantly reduced. These data support miR-137 decides
epithelial cell behavior in the human breast cancer. It also suggests that
miR-137 is a potential therapeutic target for amelioration of breast cancer
progression.

PMCID: PMC4673145
PMID: 26215676  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):3256-68. doi: 10.1172/JCI68257. Epub 2015 Jul
20.

Transcription factor ISL1 is essential for pacemaker development and function.

Liang X, Zhang Q, Cattaneo P, Zhuang S, Gong X, Spann NJ, Jiang C, Cao X, Zhao X,
Zhang X, Bu L, Wang G, Chen HS, Zhuang T, Yan J, Geng P, Luo L, Banerjee I, Chen 
Y, Glass CK, Zambon AC, Chen J, Sun Y, Evans SM.

The sinoatrial node (SAN) maintains a rhythmic heartbeat; therefore, a better
understanding of factors that drive SAN development and function is crucial to
generation of potential therapies, such as biological pacemakers, for sinus
arrhythmias. Here, we determined that the LIM homeodomain transcription factor
ISL1 plays a key role in survival, proliferation, and function of pacemaker cells
throughout development. Analysis of several Isl1 mutant mouse lines, including
animals harboring an SAN-specific Isl1 deletion, revealed that ISL1 within SAN is
a requirement for early embryonic viability. RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) analyses of
FACS-purified cells from ISL1-deficient SANs revealed that a number of genes
critical for SAN function, including those encoding transcription factors and ion
channels, were downstream of ISL1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays performed
with anti-ISL1 antibodies and chromatin extracts from FACS-purified SAN cells
demonstrated that ISL1 directly binds genomic regions within several genes
required for normal pacemaker function, including subunits of the L-type calcium 
channel, Ank2, and Tbx3. Other genes implicated in abnormal heart rhythm in
humans were also direct ISL1 targets. Together, our results demonstrate that ISL1
regulates approximately one-third of SAN-specific genes, indicate that a
combination of ISL1 and other SAN transcription factors could be utilized to
generate pacemaker cells, and suggest ISL1 mutations may underlie sick sinus
syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4563735
PMID: 26193633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Jul 14;5(1):97-110. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.05.009.
Epub 2015 Jun 18.

Tbx3 Controls Dppa3 Levels and Exit from Pluripotency toward Mesoderm.

Waghray A(1), Saiz N(2), Jayaprakash AD(3), Freire AG(4), Papatsenko D(5),
Pereira CF(5), Lee DF(5), Brosh R(5), Chang B(1), Darr H(5), Gingold J(5), Kelley
K(5), Schaniel C(6), Hadjantonakis AK(2), Lemischka IR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Regenerative Biology, The Black Family Stem Cell Institute, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Graduate
School, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(2)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10029, USA. (3)Graduate School, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Genetics and Genomic 
Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(4)Developmental and Regenerative Biology, The Black Family Stem Cell Institute, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; I3S - Instituto
de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde & INEB - Instituto de Engenharia Biomédica,
Universidade do Porto, 4150-180 Porto, Portugal; Faculdade de Engenharia da
Universidade do Porto, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal. (5)Developmental and
Regenerative Biology, The Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. (6)Developmental and
Regenerative Biology, The Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Graduate School, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Pharmacology and System
Therapeutics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(7)Developmental and Regenerative Biology, The Black Family Stem Cell Institute, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Graduate
School, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA;
Pharmacology and System Therapeutics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address: ihor.lemischka@mssm.edu.

Tbx3, a member of the T-box family, plays important roles in development, stem
cells, nuclear reprogramming, and cancer. Loss of Tbx3 induces differentiation in
mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs). However, we show that mESCs exist in an
alternate stable pluripotent state in the absence of Tbx3. In-depth transcriptome
analysis of this mESC state reveals Dppa3 as a direct downstream target of Tbx3. 
Also, Tbx3 facilitates the cell fate transition from pluripotent cells to
mesoderm progenitors by directly repressing Wnt pathway members required for
differentiation. Wnt signaling regulates differentiation of mESCs into mesoderm
progenitors and helps to maintain a naive pluripotent state. We show that Tbx3, a
downstream target of Wnt signaling, fine tunes these divergent roles of Wnt
signaling in mESCs. In conclusion, we identify a signaling-TF axis that controls 
the exit of mESCs from a self-renewing pluripotent state toward mesoderm
differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4618439
PMID: 26095607  [PubMed - in process]


30. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 8;10(6):e0124841. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124841.
eCollection 2015.

Mercapturic Acids Derived from the Toxicants Acrolein and Crotonaldehyde in the
Urine of Cigarette Smokers from Five Ethnic Groups with Differing Risks for Lung 
Cancer.

Park SL(1), Carmella SG(2), Chen M(2), Patel Y(1), Stram DO(1), Haiman CA(1), Le 
Marchand L(3), Hecht SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California,
United States of America. (2)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America. (3)University of Hawaii Cancer 
Center, Honolulu, Hawaii, United States of America.

The Multiethnic Cohort epidemiology study has clearly demonstrated that, compared
to Whites and for the same number of cigarettes smoked, African Americans and
Native Hawaiians have a higher risk for lung cancer whereas Latinos and Japanese 
Americans have a lower risk. Acrolein and crotonaldehyde are two important
constituents of cigarette smoke which have well documented toxic effects and
could play a role in lung cancer etiology. Their urinary metabolites
3-hydroxypropylmercapturic acid (3-HPMA) and 3-hydroxy-1-methylpropylmercapturic 
acid (HMPMA), respectively, are validated biomarkers of acrolein and
crotonaldehyde exposure. We quantified levels of 3-HPMA and HMPMA in the urine of
more than 2200 smokers from these five ethnic groups, and also carried out a
genome wide association study using blood samples from these subjects. After
adjusting for age, sex, creatinine, and total nicotine equivalents, geometric
mean levels of 3-HPMA and HMPMA were significantly different in the five groups
(P < 0.0001). Native Hawaiians had the highest and Latinos the lowest geometric
mean levels of both 3-HPMA and HMPMA. Levels of 3-HPMA and HMPMA were 3787 and
2759 pmol/ml urine, respectively, in Native Hawaiians and 1720 and 2210 pmol/ml
urine in Latinos. These results suggest that acrolein and crotonaldehyde may be
involved in lung cancer etiology, and that their divergent levels may partially
explain the differing risks of Native Hawaiian and Latino smokers. No strong
signals were associated with 3-HPMA in the genome wide association study,
suggesting that formation of the glutathione conjugate of acrolein is mainly
non-enzymatic, while the top significant association with HMPMA was located on
chromosome 12 near the TBX3 gene, but its relationship to HMPMA excretion is not 
clear.

PMCID: PMC4460074
PMID: 26053186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cardiology. 2015;132(1):49-57. doi: 10.1159/000398784. Epub 2015 Jun 4.

Electric-Pulse Current Stimulation Increases If Current in mShox2 Genetically
Modified Canine Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

Feng Y(1), Luo S, Tong S, Zhong L, Zhang C, Yang P, Song Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate the role of mShox2 in generating If pacemaker 
current in vitro by means of electric-pulse current stimulation (EPCS) of canine 
mesenchymal stem cells (cMSCs).
METHODS: mShox2 genetically modified cMSCs were prepared with pLentis-mShox2 red 
fluorescent protein. After EPCS induction, we examined the kinetic
characteristics of generated inward current by means of a patch clamp. We then
evaluated the expression of pacemaker-related genes, such as Nkx2.5, Tbx3, HCN4, 
Cx43 and Cx45, by means of qRT-PCR and Western blotting. The morphological
changes and the cardiomyogenic differentiation marker cTnT were investigated at
the same time.
RESULTS: The time- and voltage-dependent inward current recorded after mShox2
infection was confirmed to be If current. After EPCS induction, the detection
rate of this If current was increased. The current amplitude and density were
increased, and the channel activation curve shifted to the right. The pacemaker
markers Tbx3, HCN4 and Cx45 were significantly upregulated, but the working
myocardium markers Nkx2.5 and Cx43 were downregulated after mShox2 infection, and
were more remarkable after EPCS induction. The cells became larger and assumed
spindle and spider-like morphologies. cTnT was also detected in the experimental 
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that EPCS promotes the differentiation of mShox2
genetically modified cMSCs into pacemaker-like cells, which generates more If
current.

PMID: 26045052  [PubMed - in process]


32. Gut. 2015 Dec;64(12):1936-48. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-308470. Epub 2015 Apr 17.

The miR-17-92 cluster counteracts quiescence and chemoresistance in a distinct
subpopulation of pancreatic cancer stem cells.

Cioffi M(1), Trabulo SM(1), Sanchez-Ripoll Y(1), Miranda-Lorenzo I(1), Lonardo
E(1), Dorado J(1), Reis Vieira C(2), Ramirez JC(3), Hidalgo M(4), Aicher A(1),
Hahn S(5), Sainz B Jr(1), Heeschen C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cells & Cancer Group, CNIO, Madrid, Spain. (2)Stem Cells & Cancer Group, 
CNIO, Madrid, Spain Viral Vector Unit, Spanish National Cardiovascular Research
Centre (CNIC), Madrid, Spain. (3)Viral Vector Unit, Spanish National
Cardiovascular Research Centre (CNIC), Madrid, Spain. (4)Gastrointestinal Cancer 
Clinical Research Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid,
Spain. (5)Department of Molecular Gastrointestinal Oncology, Ruhr-University
Bochum, D-44801 Bochum, Germany. (6)Stem Cells & Cancer Group, CNIO, Madrid,
Spain Barts Cancer Institute, Centre for Stem Cells in Cancer & Ageing, Queen
Mary University of London, London, UK.

Comment in
    Gut. 2015 Dec;64(12):1842-3.

OBJECTIVE: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) represent the root of many solid cancers
including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, are highly chemoresistant and
represent the cellular source for disease relapse. However the mechanisms
involved in these processes still need to be fully elucidated. Understanding the 
mechanisms implicated in chemoresistance and metastasis of pancreatic cancer is
critical to improving patient outcomes.
DESIGN: Micro-RNA (miRNA) expression analyses were performed to identify
functionally defining epigenetic signatures in pancreatic CSC-enriched
sphere-derived cells and gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic CSCs.
RESULTS: We found the miR-17-92 cluster to be downregulated in chemoresistant
CSCs versus non-CSCs and demonstrate its crucial relevance for CSC biology. In
particular, overexpression of miR-17-92 reduced CSC self-renewal capacity, in
vivo tumourigenicity and chemoresistance by targeting multiple
NODAL/ACTIVIN/TGF-ß1 signalling cascade members as well as directly inhibiting
the downstream targets p21, p57 and TBX3. Overexpression of miR-17-92 translated 
into increased CSC proliferation and their eventual exhaustion via downregulation
of p21 and p57. Finally, the translational impact of our findings could be
confirmed in preclinical models for pancreatic cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings therefore identify the miR-17-92 cluster as a
functionally determining family of miRNAs in CSCs, and highlight the putative
potential of developing modulators of this cluster to overcome drug resistance in
pancreatic CSCs.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMCID: PMC4680182
PMID: 25887381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Neural Dev. 2015 Mar 20;10:7. doi: 10.1186/s13064-015-0035-9.

Dorsoventral patterning of the Xenopus eye involves differential temporal changes
in the response of optic stalk and retinal progenitors to Hh signalling.

Wang X(1), Lupo G(2,)(3), He R(4), Barsacchi G(5), Harris WA(6), Liu Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Science, Institute of
Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 15 Datun Road, Chaoyang District,
Beijing, 100101, China. 13522764597@163.com. (2)Department of Physiology,
Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge,
CB2 3DY, UK. giuseppe.lupo@uniroma1.it. (3)Department of Chemistry, Sapienza
University of Rome, Piazzale A. Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy.
giuseppe.lupo@uniroma1.it. (4)The State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive
Science, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 15 Datun Road,
Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100101, China. herq@ibp.ac.cn. (5)Dipartimento di
Biologia, Unità di Biologia Cellulare e dello Sviluppo, Università di Pisa, SS 12
Abetone e Brennero 4, 56127, Pisa, Italy. gbarsacchi41@gmail.com. (6)Department
of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing
Street, Cambridge, CB2 3DY, UK. wah20@cam.ac.uk. (7)The State Key Laboratory of
Brain and Cognitive Science, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 15 Datun Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100101, China.
liuy@moon.ibp.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (Hh) signals are instrumental to the dorsoventral patterning
of the vertebrate eye, promoting optic stalk and ventral retinal fates and
repressing dorsal retinal identity. There has been limited analysis, however, of 
the critical window during which Hh molecules control eye polarity and of the
temporal changes in the responsiveness of eye cells to these signals.
RESULTS: In this study, we used pharmacological and molecular tools to perform
stage-specific manipulations of Hh signalling in the developing Xenopus eye. In
gain-of-function experiments, most of the eye was sensitive to ventralization
when the Hh pathway was activated starting from gastrula/neurula stages. During
optic vesicle stages, the dorsal eye became resistant to Hh-dependent
ventralization, but this pathway could partially upregulate optic stalk markers
within the retina. In loss-of-function assays, inhibition of Hh signalling
starting from neurula stages caused expansion of the dorsal retina at the expense
of the ventral retina and the optic stalk, while the effects of Hh inhibition
during optic vesicle stages were limited to the reduction of optic stalk size.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest the existence of two competence windows during
which the Hh pathway differentially controls patterning of the eye region. In the
first window, between the neural plate and the optic vesicle stages, Hh
signalling exerts a global influence on eye dorsoventral polarity, contributing
to the specification of optic stalk, ventral retina and dorsal retinal domains.
In the second window, between optic vesicle and optic cup stages, this pathway
plays a more limited role in the maintenance of the optic stalk domain. We
speculate that this temporal regulation is important to coordinate dorsoventral
patterning with morphogenesis and differentiation processes during eye
development.

PMCID: PMC4373414
PMID: 25886149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Neurosci. 2015 Apr 8;35(14):5549-56. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3614-14.2015.

Fertility-regulating Kiss1 neurons arise from hypothalamic POMC-expressing
progenitors.

Sanz E(1), Quintana A(2), Deem JD(3), Steiner RA(4), Palmiter RD(5), McKnight
GS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Center for Integrative Brain Research and Center
for Developmental Therapeutics, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle,
Washington 98101. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Center for Integrative Brain Research and Center for Developmental Therapeutics, 
Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Washington 98101. (3)Department
of Pharmacology. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, and Department of
Physiology and Biophysics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195,
and. (5)Department of Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, mcknight@u.washington.edu.

Hypothalamic neuronal populations are central regulators of energy homeostasis
and reproductive function. However, the ontogeny of these critical hypothalamic
neuronal populations is largely unknown. We developed a novel approach to examine
the developmental pathways that link specific subtypes of neurons by combining
embryonic and adult ribosome-tagging strategies in mice. This new method shows
that Pomc-expressing precursors not only differentiate into discrete neuronal
populations that mediate energy balance (POMC and AgRP neurons), but also into
neurons critical for puberty onset and the regulation of reproductive function
(Kiss1 neurons). These results demonstrate a developmental link between
nutrient-sensing and reproductive neuropeptide synthesizing neuronal populations 
and suggest a potential pathway that could link maternal nutrition to
reproductive development in the offspring.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/355549-08$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4388920
PMID: 25855171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biosci Bioeng. 2015 Nov;120(5):562-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2015.03.001. Epub
2015 Mar 26.

Partial inhibition of differentiation associated with elevated protein levels of 
pluripotency factors in mouse embryonic stem cells expressing exogenous EGAM1N
homeoprotein.

Sato S(1), Nakazawa M(1), Kihara Y(1), Kubo Y(1), Sato Y(1), Kikuchi T(1), Nonaka
A(1), Sasaki A(2), Iwashita J(1), Murata J(1), Hosaka M(1), Kobayashi M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioresource Sciences, Akita Prefectural University, 241-438
Kaidohbatanishi, Shimoshinjohnakano, Akita 010-0195, Japan. (2)Graduate School of
Bioresource Sciences, Akita Prefectural University, 241-438 Kaidohbatanishi,
Shimoshinjohnakano, Akita 010-0195, Japan; Akita Research Institute of Food and
Brewing, 4-26 Sanuki, Araya-machi, Akita 010-1623, Japan. (3)Graduate School of
Bioresource Sciences, Akita Prefectural University, 241-438 Kaidohbatanishi,
Shimoshinjohnakano, Akita 010-0195, Japan. Electronic address:
makoba@akita-pu.ac.jp.

We previously reported that transcripts encoding the homeoprotein EGAM1N are
expressed in preimplantation mouse embryos and embryonic stem (ES) cells, and the
exogenous expression of EGAM1N inhibits the differentiation of ES cells. In order
to clarify the relationship between the inhibition of differentiation and EGAM1N,
we generated mouse MG1.19 ES cells stably expressing EGAM1N. Control
transfectants with an empty vector formed relatively flattened cell colonies
similar to those observed in parental MG1.19 cells. In contrast, Egam1n
transfectants formed tightly aggregated cell colonies with increased localization
of CDH1 at cell-to-cell interfaces. The protein levels of pluripotency factors,
including TBX3 and SOX2, were also increased. The expression of Tbx3 transcripts 
was induced, although the level of Sox2 transcripts was almost unchanged. The
expression of EGAM1N resulted in no obvious changes in the expression of genes
encoding receptors, protein kinases, transcription factors, and their encoded
proteins involved in the LIF-STAT3 signaling pathway. Alkaline phosphatase
activity, a marker for the undifferentiated state, in Egam1n transfectants was
exhibited in a clonal proliferation assay. When differentiation of Egam1n
transfectants was induced, progression was prevented with increases in transcript
levels of Pou5f1, Sox2, Nanog, Klf4, Tbx3, and their encoded proteins. However,
Egam1n transfectants formed relatively flattened-cell layers as observed in the
control, indicating that the expression of EGAM1N could not maintain
LIF-independent self-renewal of ES cells. Overall, we suggest that expression of 
EGAM1N could inhibit differentiation, at least in part, by elevating the protein 
levels of pluripotency factors in MG1.19 ES cells.

Copyright © 2015 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25817697  [PubMed - in process]


36. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(4):1397-401.

Overexpression of Tbx3 predicts poor prognosis of patients with resectable
pancreatic carcinoma.

Wang HC(1), Meng QC, Shan ZZ, Yuan Z, Huang XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Yi-shan Road, Shanghai, China E-mail : 15216633283@163.com.

BACKGROUND: To determine the expressions of Tbx3, a member of subgroup belonging 
to T-box family, and its prognostic value in pancreatic carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We determined the expression levels of Tbx3 on both mRNA
and protein levels in 30 pairs of fresh tumor tissues and paratumor tissues by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and Western blotting, 
respectively. In addition, protein level of Tbx3 were identified using
immunochemistry in 80 pairs of paraffin-embedded specimen. The correlations
between Tbx3 expression and various clinicopathological parameters as well as
overall survival were evaluated.
RESULTS: Tbx3 mRNA and protein levels in tumor tissues were significantly higher 
than in the paratumor tissues by qRT-PCR (0.05 ±0.007 vs. 0.087±0.001, p<0.001)
and western blotting (1.134±0.043 vs. 0.287±0.017, p<0.001). The statistical
analysis based on immunohistochemical evaluation suggested that Tbx3 aberrant
expression was significantly associated with several conventional
clinicopathological variables, such as gender, age, tumor position, preoperative 
CA19-9 level, pathological T staging and N staging. Univariate and multivariate
analyses revealed that Tbx3 expression was an independent prognostic factor for
overall survival (<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that overexpression of Tbx3 is associated with
poor prognosis of pancreatic cancer patients. However, additional clinical trials
are needed to accurately validate this observation.

PMID: 25743805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Vis Exp. 2015 Feb 17;(96):e52465. doi: 10.3791/52465.

Generation of murine cardiac pacemaker cell aggregates based on
ES-cell-programming in combination with Myh6-promoter-selection.

Rimmbach C(1), Jung JJ(1), David R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Reference and Translation Center for Cardiac Stem Cell Therapy, University of 
Rostock. (2)Reference and Translation Center for Cardiac Stem Cell Therapy,
University of Rostock; davidrob@med.uni-rostock.de.

Treatment of the "sick sinus syndrome" is based on artificial pacemakers. These
bear hazards such as battery failure and infections. Moreover, they lack hormone 
responsiveness and the overall procedure is cost-intensive. "Biological
pacemakers" generated from PSCs may become an alternative, yet the typical
content of pacemaker cells in Embryoid Bodies (EBs) is extremely low. The
described protocol combines "forward programming" of murine PSCs via the sinus
node inducer TBX3 with Myh6-promoter based antibiotic selection. This yields
cardiomyocyte aggregates consistent of >80% physiologically functional pacemaker 
cells. These "induced-sinoatrial-bodies" ("iSABs") are spontaneously contracting 
at yet unreached frequencies (400-500 bpm) corresponding to nodal cells isolated 
from mouse hearts and are able to pace murine myocardium ex vivo. Using the
described protocol highly pure sinus nodal single cells can be generated which
e.g. can be used for in vitro drug testing. Furthermore, the iSABs generated
according to this protocol may become a crucial step towards heart tissue
engineering.

PMID: 25742394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cardiovasc Res. 2015 Jun 1;106(3):520-9. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvv042. Epub 2015 Feb
17.

Role of common and rare variants in SCN10A: results from the Brugada syndrome QRS
locus gene discovery collaborative study.

Behr ER(1), Savio-Galimberti E(2), Barc J(3), Holst AG(4), Petropoulou E(5),
Prins BP(5), Jabbari J(6), Torchio M(7), Berthet M(8), Mizusawa Y(3), Yang T(2), 
Nannenberg EA(9), Dagradi F(7), Weeke P(2), Bastiaenan R(5), Ackerman MJ(10),
Haunso S(11), Leenhardt A(12), Kääb S(13), Probst V(14), Redon R(14), Sharma
S(5), Wilde A(15), Tfelt-Hansen J(11), Schwartz P(7), Roden DM(2), Bezzina CR(3),
Olesen M(16), Darbar D(2), Guicheney P(8), Crotti L(17); UK10K Consortium,
Jamshidi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Research Centre, ICCS, St George's University of London, London
SW17 0RE, UK yjamshid@sgul.ac.uk ebehr@sgul.ac.uk. (2)Divisions of Cardiovascular
Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, Netherlands. (4)Laboratory for Molecular Cardiology, The Heart Centre,
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark Danish National
Research Foundation Centre for Cardiac Arrhythmia, Copenhagen, Denmark Novo
Nordisk A/S, Denmark. (5)Human Genetics Research Centre, ICCS, St George's
University of London, London SW17 0RE, UK. (6)Laboratory for Molecular
Cardiology, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark Danish National Research Foundation Centre for Cardiac
Arrhythmia, Copenhagen, Denmark LEO Pharma A/S, Denmark. (7)IRCCS Istituto
Auxologico Italiano, Center for Cardiac Arrhythmias of Genetic Origin, Milan,
Italy. (8)Inserm, UMR S1166, Faculté de Médecine Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris,
France Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR S1166, Paris, France
Institute of Cardiometabolism & Nutrition, ICAN, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital,
Paris, France. (9)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam. (10)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Internal
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA Division of Pediatric Cardiology,
Department of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
(11)Laboratory for Molecular Cardiology, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark Danish National Research Foundation
Centre for Cardiac Arrhythmia, Copenhagen, Denmark Department of Medicine and
Surgery, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (12)AP-HP, Hôpital
Bichat, Service de Cardiologie et Centre de Référence des Maladies Cardiaques
Héréditaires, Paris, France. (13)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum
München, Neuherberg, Germany. (14)Inserm, UMR 1087, l'institut du Thorax, Nantes,
France CHU Nantes, l'institut du Thorax, Service de Cardiologie, Nantes, France. 
(15)Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands Princess Al-Jawhara Al-Brahim Centre of Excellence in
Research of Hereditary Disorders, Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. (16)Laboratory
for Molecular Cardiology, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark Danish National Research Foundation Centre for
Cardiac Arrhythmia, Copenhagen, Denmark. (17)IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, 
Center for Cardiac Arrhythmias of Genetic Origin, Milan, Italy Inserm, UMR 1087, 
l'institut du Thorax, Nantes, France Department of Molecular Medicine, University
of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2015 Jun 1;106(3):351-2.

AIMS: Brugada syndrome (BrS) remains genetically heterogeneous and is associated 
with slowed cardiac conduction. We aimed to identify genetic variation in BrS
cases at loci associated with QRS duration.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A multi-centre study sequenced seven candidate genes
(SCN10A, HAND1, PLN, CASQ2, TKT, TBX3, and TBX5) in 156 Caucasian SCN5A
mutation-negative BrS patients (80% male; mean age 48) with symptoms (64%) and/or
a family history of sudden death (47%) or BrS (18%). Forty-nine variants were
identified: 18 were rare (MAF <1%) and non-synonymous; and 11/18 (61.1%), mostly 
in SCN10A, were predicted as pathogenic using multiple bioinformatics tools.
Allele frequencies were compared with the Exome Sequencing and UK10K Projects.
SKAT methods tested rare variation in SCN10A finding no statistically significant
difference between cases and controls. Co-segregation analysis was possible for
four of seven probands carrying a novel pathogenic variant. Only one pedigree
(I671V/G1299A in SCN10A) showed co-segregation. The SCN10A SNP V1073 was,
however, associated strongly with BrS [66.9 vs. 40.1% (UK10K) OR (95% CI) = 3.02 
(2.35-3.87), P = 8.07 × 10-19]. Voltage-clamp experiments for NaV1.8 were
performed for SCN10A common variants V1073, A1073, and rare variants of interest:
A200V and I671V. V1073, A200V and I671V, demonstrated significant reductions in
peak INa compared with ancestral allele A1073 (rs6795970).
CONCLUSION: Rare variants in the screened QRS-associated genes (including SCN10A)
are not responsible for a significant proportion of SCN5A mutation negative BrS. 
The common SNP SCN10A V1073 was strongly associated with BrS and demonstrated
loss of NaV1.8 function, as did rare variants in isolated patients.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4447806 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25691538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Mar 15;183:117-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.01.049. Epub
2015 Jan 27.

Signaling molecules, transcription growth factors and other regulators revealed
from in-vivo and in-vitro models for the regulation of cardiac development.

Meganathan K(1), Sotiriadou I(1), Natarajan K(1), Hescheler J(1), Sachinidis
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology and
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Germany.
(2)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology and
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Germany.
Electronic address: A.Sachinidis@uni-koeln.de.

Several in-vivo heart developmental models have been applied to decipher the
cardiac developmental patterning encompassing early, dorsal, cardiac and visceral
mesoderm as well as various transcription factors such as Gata, Hand, Tin, Dpp,
Pnr. The expression of cardiac specific transcription factors, such as Gata4,
Tbx5, Tbx20, Tbx2, Tbx3, Mef2c, Hey1 and Hand1 are of fundamental significance
for the in-vivo cardiac development. Not only the transcription factors, but also
the signaling molecules involved in cardiac development were conserved among
various species. Enrichment of the bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) in the
anterior lateral plate mesoderm is essential for the initiation of myocardial
differentiation and the cardiac developmental process. Moreover, the expression
of a number of cardiac transcription factors and structural genes initiate
cardiac differentiation in the medial mesoderm. Other signaling molecules such as
TGF-beta, IGF-1/2 and the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) play a significant role 
in cardiac repair/regeneration, ventricular heart development and specification
of early cardiac mesoderm, respectively. The role of the Wnt signaling in cardiac
development is still controversial discussed, as in-vitro results differ
dramatically in relation to the animal models. Embryonic stem cells (ESC) were
utilized as an important in-vitro model for the elucidation of the cardiac
developmental processes since they can be easily manipulated by numerous
signaling molecules, growth factors, small molecules and genetic manipulation.
Finally, in the present review the dynamic role of the long noncoding RNA and
miRNAs in the regulation of cardiac development are summarized and discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25662074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Am J Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;5(1):344-53. eCollection 2015.

Overexpression of Tbx3 is correlated with Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
phenotype and predicts poor prognosis of colorectal cancer.

Shan ZZ(1), Yan XB(1), Yan LL(1), Tian Y(1), Meng QC(1), Qiu WW(1), Zhang Z(1),
Jin ZM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Sixth People's Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Shanghai 200233, P. R. China.

AIMS: To investigate the clinical significance of Tbx3 in colorectal cancer (CRC)
and the possible association between Tbx3 expression and Epithelial- Transition
Mesenchymal (EMT) phenotype.
METHODS: Quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) and western blotting were employed to evaluate the expression of Tbx3
in 30 fresh CRC and matched normal tissues. Using immunochemistry, protein level 
of Tbx3 and EMT markers (E-cadherin and N-cadherin) were identified in 150 pairs 
of paraffin-embedded specimen.
RESULTS: The results of qRT-PCR and western blotting showed that Tbx3 expression 
was higher in CRC tissues than in corresponding normal tissues. The statistical
analysis based on immunohistochemical evaluation suggested that Tbx3 aberrant
expression was significantly associated with tumor size (P=0.049),
differentiation (P=0.032), invasion (P=0.019), lymph node metastasis (P=0.049)
and TNM stage (P=0.018). Patients who displayed high expression of Tbx3 may
achieve a poorer overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS), compared 
to those with low expression of Tbx3. This tendency was also observed in patients
with intermediate levels of disease (II and III stage). The multivariate analysis
indicated Tbx3 expression could independently predict the outcome of CRC
patients. Interestingly, correlation analysis suggested Tbx3 expression was
negatively correlated with E-cadherin expression, but positively correlated with 
N-cadherin expression.
CONCLUSION: Tbx3 may promote CRC progression by involving EMT program and has the
potential to be an effective prognostic predictor for CRC patients.

PMCID: PMC4300685
PMID: 25628943  [PubMed]


41. Dev Dyn. 2015 Apr;244(4):619-27. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24248. Epub 2015 Jan 24.

Sox2 is the faithful marker for pluripotency in pig: evidence from embryonic
studies.

Liu S(1), Bou G, Sun R, Guo S, Xue B, Wei R, Cooney AJ, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of life science, Northeast Agricultural University of China, Harbin,
China.

BACKGROUND: Mammalian first lineage segregation generates trophectoderm (TE) and 
pluripotent inner cell mass (ICM), which provides an ideal model for studying the
mechanisms of maintenance and loss of pluripotency. In mouse, the transcription
factor OCT4 restricts to ICM and plays a key role in TE/ICM specification and
pluripotent regulatory networks. However, in pig, OCT4 does not restrict to ICM
cells, suggesting a different molecular basis in TE/ICM specification and
pluripotent regulatory networks.
RESULTS: To explore molecular basis of porcine TE/ICM specification and
pluripotent regulatory networks, we examined expression pattern of pluripotency
factors, including SOX2, REX1, SALL4, ESG1, NANOG, TBX3, LIN28, KLF2, and KLF5,
in porcine blastocysts. We found that SOX2 is a faithful pluripotent marker that 
anchored to the pluripotent cells including embryonic part cells, ICM cells and
newly EPI cells along with developmental progress, whereas OCT4 expressed in
almost all the cells at the same time. Consistently, analysis of spatiotemporal
distribution of SOX2 and the TE marker CDX2 revealed an exclusive expression
pattern in D6 blastocysts, whereas no correlation was observed between OCT4 and
CDX2 at the same stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide a molecular basis in porcine embryonic
patterning and a clue for further studying porcine pluripotent regulatory
networks.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25619399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Apr;8(2):284-93. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.113.000587. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

GATA-Binding Factor 6 Contributes to Atrioventricular Node Development and
Function.

Liu F(1), Lu MM(1), Patel NN(1), Schillinger KJ(1), Wang T(1), Patel VV(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Penn Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia (F.L., M.M.L., N.N.P., K.J.S., T.W.); and Department of Physiology, 
Section of Clinical Cardiac Electrophysiology & Cardiovascular Research Center,
Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA (V.V.P.). (2)From the Penn
Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (F.L., M.M.L.,
N.N.P., K.J.S., T.W.); and Department of Physiology, Section of Clinical Cardiac 
Electrophysiology & Cardiovascular Research Center, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA (V.V.P.). vickas.patel@temple.edu.

Comment in
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Apr;8(2):247-9.

BACKGROUND: Several transcription factors regulate cardiac conduction system
(CCS) development and function but the role of each in specifying distinct CCS
components remains unclear. GATA-binding factor 6 (GATA6) is a zinc-finger
transcription factor that is critical for patterning the cardiovascular system.
However, the role of GATA6 in the embryonic heart and CCS has never been shown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We report that Gata6 is expressed abundantly in the proximal
CCS during midgestation in mice. Myocardial-specific deletion of the carboxyl
zinc-finger of Gata6 induces loss of hyperpolarizing cyclic nucleotide-gated
channel, subtype 4 staining in the compact atrioventricular node with some
retention of hyperpolarizing cyclic nucleotide-gated channel, subtype 4 staining 
in the atrioventricular bundle, but has no significant effect on the
connexin-40-positive bundle branches. Furthermore, myocardial-specific deletion
of the carboxyl zinc-finger of Gata6 alters atrioventricular conduction in
postnatal life as assessed by surface and invasive electrophysiological
evaluation, as well as decreasing the number of ventricular myocytes and inducing
compensatory myocyte hypertrophy. Myocardial-specific deletion of the carboxyl
zinc-finger of Gata6 is also associated with downregulation of the
transcriptional repressor ID2 and the cardiac sodium-calcium exchanger NCX1 in
the proximal CCS, where GATA6 transactivates both of these factors. Finally,
carboxyl zinc-finger deletion of Gata6 reduces cell-cycle exit of TBX3+ myocytes 
in the developing atrioventricular bundle during the period of atrioventricular
node specification, which results in fewer TBX3+ cells in the proximal CCS of
mature mutant mice.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA6 contributes to the development and postnatal function of the
murine atrioventricular node by promoting cell-cycle exit of specified
cardiomyocytes toward a conduction system lineage.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4406809
PMID: 25613430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Circ Res. 2015 Jan 30;116(3):398-406. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.304731. Epub
2014 Nov 6.

Canonical wnt signaling regulates atrioventricular junction programming and
electrophysiological properties.

Gillers BS(1), Chiplunkar A(1), Aly H(1), Valenta T(1), Basler K(1), Christoffels
VM(1), Efimov IR(1), Boukens BJ(1), Rentschler S(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, Cardiovascular Division (B.S.G., A.C., H.A., 
S.R.), and Department of Developmental Biology (B.S.G., A.C., H.A., S.R.),
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO; Institute of Molecular
Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland (T.V., K.B.); Department
of Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology, Heart Failure Research Center, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (V.M.C.); and
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO
(I.R.E., B.J.B., S.R.). (2)From the Department of Medicine, Cardiovascular
Division (B.S.G., A.C., H.A., S.R.), and Department of Developmental Biology
(B.S.G., A.C., H.A., S.R.), Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO; Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland (T.V., K.B.); Department of Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology,
Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands (V.M.C.); and Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Washington University, St. Louis, MO (I.R.E., B.J.B., S.R.).
Stacey.rentschler@wustl.edu.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2015 Jan 30;116(3):386-8.

RATIONALE: Proper patterning of the atrioventricular canal (AVC) is essential for
delay of electrical impulses between atria and ventricles, and defects in AVC
maturation can result in congenital heart disease.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of canonical Wnt signaling in the myocardium
during AVC development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We used a novel allele of ß-catenin that preserves
ß-catenin's cell adhesive functions but disrupts canonical Wnt signaling,
allowing us to probe the effects of Wnt loss of function independently. We show
that the loss of canonical Wnt signaling in the myocardium results in tricuspid
atresia with hypoplastic right ventricle associated with the loss of AVC
myocardium. In contrast, ectopic activation of Wnt signaling was sufficient to
induce formation of ectopic AV junction-like tissue as assessed by morphology,
gene expression, and electrophysiological criteria. Aberrant AVC development can 
lead to ventricular pre-excitation, a characteristic feature of
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. We demonstrate that postnatal activation of Notch
signaling downregulates canonical Wnt targets within the AV junction.
Stabilization of ß-catenin protein levels can rescue Notch-mediated ventricular
pre-excitation and dysregulated ion channel gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that myocardial canonical Wnt signaling is an
important regulator of AVC maturation and electric programming upstream of Tbx3. 
Our data further suggest that ventricular pre-excitation may require both
morphological patterning defects, as well as myocardial lineage reprogramming, to
allow robust conduction across accessory pathway tissue.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4312529
PMID: 25599332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 30;6(3):1821-33.

The T-box transcription factor, TBX3, is a key substrate of AKT3 in
melanomagenesis.

Peres J(1), Mowla S(1), Prince S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa.

The AKT3 signalling pathway plays a critical role in melanoma formation and
invasion and components of this signalling cascade are therefore attractive
targets for the treatment of malignant melanoma. Recent evidence show that the
embryonically important TBX3 transcription factor is upregulated in a subset of
melanomas and plays a key role in promoting melanoma formation and invasion, in
part by repressing the cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin. We have identified TBX3
as a key substrate of AKT3 in melanomagenesis. Briefly, using site-directed
mutagenesis and in vitro kinase assays, we have identified the AKT3 target site
at serine residue 720 in the TBX3 protein and show that this site is
phosphorylated in vivo. Importantly, we show by western blotting,
immunofluorescence, reporter, migration and invasion assays that the
phosphorylation at S720 promotes TBX3 protein stability, nuclear localization,
transcriptional repression of E-cadherin, and its role in cell migration and
invasion. Our results identify a novel signalling and transcriptional network
linking AKT3, TBX3 and E-cadherin during melanoma migration and invasion and
reveals TBX3 as a potential target for anti-metastatic therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4359334
PMID: 25595898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Med Rep. 2015 May;11(5):3249-58. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3149. Epub 2015 Jan 7.

Angiotensin II promotes differentiation of mouse c-kit-positive cardiac stem
cells into pacemaker-like cells.

Xue C(1), Zhang J(1), Lv Z(1), Liu H(1), Huang C(2), Yang J(2), Wang T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical
College, Nanchong, Sichuan 637000, P.R. China. (2)Department of Cardiology,
Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Cardiovascular Research Institute, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, Hubei 430060, P.R. China.

Cardiac stem cells (CSCs) can differentiate into cardiac muscle-like cells;
however, it remains unknown whether CSCs may possess the ability to differentiate
into pacemaker cells. The aim of the present study was to determine whether
angiotensin II (Ang II) could promote the specialization of CSCs into
pacemaker-like cells. Mouse CSCs were treated with Ang II from day 3-5, after
cell sorting. The differentiation potential of the cells was then analyzed by
morphological analysis, flow cytometry, reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction, immunohistochemistry and patch clamp analysis. Treatment with Ang II
resulted in an increased number of cardiac muscle-like cells (32.7 ± 4.8% vs.
21.5 ± 4.8%; P<0.05), and inhibition of smooth muscle-like cells (6.2 ± 7.3% vs. 
20.5 ± 5.1%; P<0.05). Following treatment with Ang II, increased levels of the
cardiac progenitor-specific markers GATA4 and Nkx2.5 were observed in the cells. 
Furthermore, the transcript levels of pacemaker function-related genes, including
hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN)2, HCN4, T-box (Tbx)2
and Tbx3, were significantly upregulated. Immunofluorescence analysis confirmed
the increased number of pacemaker-like cells. The pacemaker current (If) was
recorded in the cells derived from CSCs, treated with Ang II. In conclusion,
treatment of CSCs with Ang II during the differentiation process modified
cardiac-specific gene expression and resulted in the enhanced formation of
pacemaker-like cells.

PMCID: PMC4368082
PMID: 25572000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mamm Genome. 2015 Feb;26(1-2):57-79. doi: 10.1007/s00335-014-9551-x. Epub 2015
Jan 1.

In-silico QTL mapping of postpubertal mammary ductal development in the mouse
uncovers potential human breast cancer risk loci.

Hadsell DL(1), Hadsell LA, Olea W, Rijnkels M, Creighton CJ, Smyth I, Short KM,
Cox LL, Cox TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, USDA/ARS Children's Nutrition Research Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, 1100 Bates St. Suite 10072, Mail Stop: BCM-320,
Houston, TX, 77030-2600, USA, dhadsell@bcm.edu.

Genetic background plays a dominant role in mammary gland development and breast 
cancer (BrCa). Despite this, the role of genetics is only partially understood.
This study used strain-dependent variation in an inbred mouse mapping panel, to
identify quantitative trait loci (QTL) underlying structural variation in mammary
ductal development, and determined if these QTL correlated with genomic intervals
conferring BrCa susceptibility in humans. For about half of the traits,
developmental variation among the complete set of strains in this study was
greater (P < 0.05) than that of previously studied strains, or strains in current
common use for mammary gland biology. Correlations were also detected with
previously reported variation in mammary tumor latency and metastasis. In-silico 
genome-wide association identified 20 mammary development QTL (Mdq). Of these,
five were syntenic with previously reported human BrCa loci. The most significant
(P = 1 × 10(-11)) association of the study was on MMU6 and contained the genes
Plxna4, Plxna4os1, and Chchd3. On MMU5, a QTL was detected (P = 8 × 10(-7)) that 
was syntenic to a human BrCa locus on h12q24.5 containing the genes Tbx3 and
Tbx5. Intersection of linked SNP (r(2) > 0.8) with genomic and epigenomic
features, and intersection of candidate genes with gene expression and survival
data from human BrCa highlighted several for further study. These results support
the conclusion that mammary tumorigenesis and normal ductal development are
influenced by common genetic factors and that further studies of genetically
diverse mice can improve our understanding of BrCa in humans.

PMCID: PMC4548818
PMID: 25552398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jan 16;456(3):743-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.12.041. Epub 2014 Dec 13.

Tbx3 and Nr5a2 improve the viability of porcine induced pluripotent stem cells
after dissociation into single cells by inhibiting RHO-ROCK-MLC signaling.

Wang J(1), Wei R(2), Bou G(3), Liu Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Northeast Agricultural University of China, Harbin
150030, China; Institute of Life Sciences, Chong Qing Medical University, Chong
Qing 400016, China. Electronic address: wjy2003123@163.com. (2)College of Life
Science, Northeast Agricultural University of China, Harbin 150030, China.
Electronic address: weirenyue@gmail.com. (3)College of Life Science, Northeast
Agricultural University of China, Harbin 150030, China. Electronic address:
Gerel.chimeg@yahoo.com. (4)College of Life Science, Northeast Agricultural
University of China, Harbin 150030, China. Electronic address: liu086@yahoo.com.

Porcine induced pluripotent stem cells (piPSCs) had been reported during the past
5years, but there were few reports on how the cell signaling works in piPSCs. In 
order to clarify the signaling work that dominated the characteristic difference 
of two types of piPSCs which were derived from Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc (termed
4F piPSCs) and Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, c-Myc, Tbx3 and Nr5a2 (termed 6F piPSCs)
respectively, we performed this study. 4F piPSCs and 6F piPSCs were cultured in
medium with or without the ROCK inhibitor Y27632 after dissociating into single
cells, the efficiency of a single cell colony and the number of AP positive
colonies were assessed. The total RhoA and GTP-bind RhoA were detected in 4F
piPSCs and 6F piPSCs before and after digestion into single cells. To explore the
relationship between RHO-ROCK-MLC signaling pathway and the two factors Tbx3 and 
Nr5a2, the 4F piPSCs were infected with lenti-virus Tbx3 and Nr5a2 (termed
4F+TND). Results showed that the viability of cells could be enhanced by Y27632
and the RHO-ROCK-MLC signaling pathway was activated after dissociation into
single cells in 4F piPSCs but not in 6F piPSCs. And, the 4F+TND piPSCs could be
passaged and keep in high viability after dissociation into single cells, though 
the morphology of colonies did not change. These results indicated that the Tbx3 
and Nr5a2 can improve the viability of piPSCs after dissociation into single
cells by inhibiting the RHO-ROCK-MLC signaling pathway. And this provides useful 
information for establishing porcine pluripotent cells in future study.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25514039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;31(4):923-6.

[Research progress of Tbx3 in cardiac biological pacemaker].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y, Li B.

The early cardiac biological pacemaker studies were mostly around HCN channel,
and how to build a biological pacemaker through the enhanced If current. In
recent years, however, people found that the genes of Tbx3 could play an
important role in the development of cardiac conduction system, especially in
processes of the maturity of the sinoatrial node and maintenance of its function.
And the Tbx3 can further optimize the biological pacemaker. Therefore, it could
be a new therapeutic focus in biological pacemaker and treatment of cardiac
conduction system disease. This paper summarizes some of the latest research
progress of the Tbx3 in biological pacemaker in recent years. We hope that this
review could provide theoretical basis for the clinical applications of Tbx3.

PMID: 25508445  [PubMed - in process]


49. FEBS J. 2015 Feb;282(4):685-99. doi: 10.1111/febs.13173. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

Vitamin C induces a pluripotent state in mouse embryonic stem cells by modulating
microRNA expression.

Gao Y(1), Han Z, Li Q, Wu Y, Shi X, Ai Z, Du J, Li W, Guo Z, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi,
China; Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Yangling,
Shaanxi, China; College of Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling,
Shaanxi, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a group of noncoding RNAs, function as post-transcriptional
gene regulators and control the establishment, self-renewal and differentiation
of stem cells. Vitamin C has been recognized as a reprogramming enhancer because 
of its ability to induce a blastocyst-like state in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). 
However, knowledge on the regulation of miRNAs by vitamin C in ESCs is limited.
In this study, we found that vitamin C induced miRNA expression, particularly of 
ESC-specific miRNAs. Moreover, vitamin C maintained the miRNA expression of the
Dlk1-Dio3 imprinting region. The miRNAs in this region contain identical seed
sequences, which target a class of genes, including Kdm6b, Klf13, and Sox6, and
are mainly related to cell differentiation and development. These genes were
significantly downregulated by vitamin C. Notably, miR-143 promoted self-renewal 
of mouse ESCs and suppressed expression of the de novo methyltransferase gene
Dnmt3a. Knockdown of miR-143 by use of its inhibitor counteracted the vitamin
C-induced reduction in Dnmt3a expression, showing that vitamin C repressed Dnmt3a
expression via miR-143. Vitamin C also promoted DNA demethylation, including of
pluripotency gene promoters (Tbx3, Tcl1, and Esrrb) and ESC-specific miRNA
promoters (miR-290-295 and miR-17-92 clusters), and DNA hydroxymethylation,
including of the intergenic differentially methylated region of the Dlk1-Dio3
region. These results strongly suggested that vitamin C promoted widespread DNA
demethylation in gene promoters by modulating epigenetic modifiers, including
Dnmt3a, which activated pluripotency genes and ESC-specific miRNAs. Then,
differentiation and development genes were repressed by ESC-enriched miRNAs,
which maintained the stem cell state.

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 25491368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 23;290(4):2007-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.619007. Epub 2014 
Dec 8.

The short stature homeobox 2 (Shox2)-bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) pathway
regulates dorsal mesenchymal protrusion development and its temporary function as
a pacemaker during cardiogenesis.

Sun C(1), Yu D(1), Ye W(1), Liu C(1), Gu S(1), Sinsheimer NR(1), Song Z(1), Li
X(1), Chen C(1), Song Y(1), Wang S(1), Schrader L(1), Chen Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New
Orleans, Louisiana 70118. (2)From the Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70118 ychen@tulane.edu.

Comment in
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 20;290(12):8013-4.
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 20;290(12):8015.

The atrioventricular (AV) junction plays a critical role in chamber septation and
transmission of cardiac conduction pulses. It consists of structures that develop
from embryonic dorsal mesenchymal protrusion (DMP) and the embryonic AV canal.
Despite extensive studies on AV junction development, the genetic regulation of
DMP development remains poorly understood. In this study we present evidence that
Shox2 is expressed in the developing DMP. Intriguingly, this Shox2-expressing
domain possesses a pacemaker-specific genetic profile including Hcn4 and Tbx3.
This genetic profile leads to nodal-like electrophysiological properties, which
is gradually silenced as the AV node becomes matured. Phenotypic analyses of
Shox2(-/-) mice revealed a hypoplastic and defectively differentiated DMP, likely
attributed to increased apoptosis, accompanied by dramatically reduced expression
of Bmp4 and Hcn4, ectopic activation of Cx40, and an aberrant pattern of action
potentials. Interestingly, conditional deletion of Bmp4 or inhibition of BMP
signaling by overexpression of Noggin using a Shox2-Cre allele led to a similar
DMP hypoplasia and down-regulation of Hcn4, whereas activation of a transgenic
Bmp4 allele in Shox2(-/-) background attenuated DMP defects. Moreover, the lack
of Hcn4 expression in the DMP of mice carrying Smad4 conditional deletion and
direct binding of pSmad1/5/8 to the Hcn4 regulatory region further confirm the
Shox2-BMP genetic cascade in the regulation of DMP development. Our results
reveal that Shox2 regulates DMP fate and development by controlling BMP signaling
through the Smad-dependent pathway to drive tissue growth and to induce Hcn4
expression and suggest a temporal pacemaking function for the DMP during early
cardiogenesis.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4303656
PMID: 25488669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;31(4):923-6.

[Research progress of Tbx3 in cardiac biological pacemaker].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y, Li B.

The early cardiac biological pacemaker studies were mostly around HCN channel,
and how to build a biological pacemaker through the enhanced If current. In
recent years, however, people found that the genes of Tbx3 could play an
important role in the development of cardiac conduction system, especially in
processes of the maturity of the sinoatrial node and maintenance of its function.
And the Tbx3 can further optimize the biological pacemaker. Therefore, it could
be a new therapeutic focus in biological pacemaker and treatment of cardiac
conduction system disease. This paper summarizes some of the latest research
progress of the Tbx3 in biological pacemaker in recent years. We hope that this
review could provide theoretical basis for the clinical applications of Tbx3.

PMID: 25464814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Gene. 2015 Jan 1;554(1):101-4. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.10.031. Epub 2014 Oct 22.

Genetic and functional analysis of the TBX3 gene promoter in indirect inguinal
hernia.

Zhao Z(1), Tian W(2), Wang L(1), Wang H(3), Qin X(3), Xing Q(4), Pang S(3), Yan
B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Interventional Radiology, Jining Medical University Affiliated
Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong 272029, China. (2)Clinical 
Laboratory, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University,
Jinan, Shandong 250000, China. (3)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac
Disease Diagnosis and Treatment, Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital,
Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong 272029, China. (4)Division of
Pediatric Surgery, Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical 
University, Jining, Shandong 272029, China. (5)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory
of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment, Jining Medical University Affiliated 
Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong 272029, China; Shandong
Provincial Sino-US Cooperation Research Center for Translational Medicine, Jining
Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining,
Shandong 272029, China.

Inguinal hernia is a common developmental disease in children and most cases are 
indirect inguinal hernia (IIH). Genetic factors have been suggested to play
important roles in IIH. Although IIH has been observed in several human
syndromes, genetic causes and molecular mechanisms for IIH remain unknown. TBX3
is a member of the T-box family of transcription factors that are essential to
the embryonic development. Human studies and animal experiments have demonstrated
that TBX3 is required for the development of the heart, limbs, mammary glands and
other tissues and organs. TBX3 gene expression has been detected in human
fibroblast and tissues of abdominal wall. We speculated that TBX3 may be involved
in the IIH formation. Since TBX3 activity is highly dosage-sensitive, a TBX3 gene
promoter was genetically and functionally analyzed in IIH patients and
ethnic-matched controls in this study. One heterozygous deletion variant
(g.4820_4821del) was identified in one IIH patient, but in none of controls. The 
variant significantly decreased TBX3 gene promoter activities, likely by creating
a binding site for sex-determining region Y (SRY), mobility group transcription
factor. One heterozygous insertion variant (g.3913_3914ins) was only found in one
control, which did not affect TBX3 gene promoter activities. Taken together, TBX3
gene variants may contribute to IIH as a rare risk factor by reducing TBX3
levels.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25455105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Cell. 2014 Nov 10;31(3):345-57. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.09.018. Epub 2014 
Nov 10.

HAND2 targets define a network of transcriptional regulators that
compartmentalize the early limb bud mesenchyme.

Osterwalder M(1), Speziale D(1), Shoukry M(2), Mohan R(3), Ivanek R(1), Kohler
M(4), Beisel C(4), Wen X(5), Scales SJ(5), Christoffels VM(3), Visel A(6),
Lopez-Rios J(7), Zeller R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, 4058
Basel, Switzerland. (2)Genomics Division, MS 84-171, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (3)Department of Anatomy, Embryology, and
Physiology, Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, 1100 DD Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (4)Department for Biosystems
Science and Engineering, Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, 4058 Basel,
Switzerland. (5)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way,
South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (6)Genomics Division, MS 84-171, Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; U.S. Department of Energy 
Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA 94598, USA; School of Natural Sciences, 
University of California, Merced, Merced, CA 95343, USA. (7)Developmental
Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, 4058 Basel,
Switzerland. Electronic address: javier.lopez-rios@unibas.ch. (8)Developmental
Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, 4058 Basel,
Switzerland. Electronic address: rolf.zeller@unibas.ch.

The genetic networks that govern vertebrate development are well studied, but how
the interactions of trans-acting factors with cis-regulatory modules (CRMs) are
integrated into spatiotemporal regulation of gene expression is not clear. The
transcriptional regulator HAND2 is required during limb, heart, and branchial
arch development. Here, we identify the genomic regions enriched in HAND2
chromatin complexes from mouse embryos and limb buds. Then we analyze the HAND2
target CRMs in the genomic landscapes encoding transcriptional regulators
required in early limb buds. HAND2 controls the expression of genes functioning
in the proximal limb bud and orchestrates the establishment of anterior and
posterior polarity of the nascent limb bud mesenchyme by impacting Gli3 and Tbx3 
expression. TBX3 is required downstream of HAND2 to refine the posterior Gli3
expression boundary. Our analysis uncovers the transcriptional circuits that
function in establishing distinct mesenchymal compartments downstream of HAND2
and upstream of SHH signaling.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4357275
PMID: 25453830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mod Pathol. 2015 Apr;28(4):515-22. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2014.145. Epub 2014 Nov
14.

Stratification based on methylation of TBX2 and TBX3 into three molecular grades 
predicts progression in patients with pTa-bladder cancer.

Beukers W(1), Kandimalla R(1), Masius RG(1), Vermeij M(1), Kranse R(2), van
Leenders GJ(1), Zwarthoff EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Dutch
Cancer Registry, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The potential risk of recurrence and progression in patients with
non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer necessitates followup by cystoscopy. The risk 
of progression to muscle-invasive bladder cancer is estimated based on the
European Organisation of Research and Treatment of Cancer score, a combination of
several clinicopathological variables. However, pathological assessment is not
objective and reproducibility is insufficient. The use of molecular markers could
contribute to the estimation of tumor aggressiveness. We recently demonstrated
that methylation of GATA2, TBX2, TBX3, and ZIC4 genes could predict progression
in Ta tumors. In this study, we aimed to validate the markers in a large patient 
set using DNA from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue. PALGA: the Dutch 
Pathology Registry was used for patient selection. We included 192 patients with 
pTaG1/2 bladder cancer of whom 77 experienced progression. Methylation analysis
was performed and log-rank analysis was used to calculate the predictive value of
each methylation marker for developing progression over time. This analysis
showed better progression-free survival in patients with low methylation rates
compared with the patients with high methylation rates for all markers (P<0.001) 
during a followup of ten-years. The combined predictive effect of the methylation
markers was analyzed with the Cox-regression method. In this analysis, TBX2,
TBX3, and ZIC4 were independent predictors of progression. On the basis of
methylation status of TBX2 and TBX3, patients were divided into three new
molecular grade groups. Survival analysis showed that only 8% of patients in the 
low molecular grade group progressed within 5 years. This was 29 and 63% for the 
intermediate- and high-molecular grade groups. In conclusion, this new
molecular-grade based on the combination of TBX2 and TBX3 methylation is an
excellent marker for predicting progression to muscle-invasive bladder cancer in 
patients with primary pTaG1/2 bladder cancer.

PMID: 25394776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Stem Cells. 2015 Mar;33(3):699-712. doi: 10.1002/stem.1889.

Acute loss of Cited2 impairs Nanog expression and decreases self-renewal of mouse
embryonic stem cells.

Kranc KR(1), Oliveira DV, Armesilla-Diaz A, Pacheco-Leyva I, Catarina Matias A,
Luisa Escapa A, Subramani C, Wheadon H, Trindade M, Nichols J, Kaji K, Enver T,
Bragança J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom.

Identifying novel players of the pluripotency gene regulatory network centered on
Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog as well as delineating the interactions within the complex 
network is key to understanding self-renewal and early cell fate commitment of
embryonic stem cells (ESC). While overexpression of the transcriptional regulator
Cited2 sustains ESC pluripotency, its role in ESC functions remains unclear.
Here, we show that Cited2 is important for proliferation, survival, and
self-renewal of mouse ESC. We position Cited2 within the pluripotency gene
regulatory network by defining Nanog, Tbx3, and Klf4 as its direct targets. We
also demonstrate that the defects caused by Cited2 depletion are, at least in
part, rescued by Nanog constitutive expression. Finally, we demonstrate that
Cited2 is required for and enhances reprogramming of mouse embryonic fibroblasts 
to induced pluripotent stem cells.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4583779
PMID: 25377420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 19;289(51):35633-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.596411. Epub
2014 Nov 4.

The anti-proliferative function of the TGF-ß1 signaling pathway involves the
repression of the oncogenic TBX2 by its homologue TBX3.

Li J(1), Ballim D(1), Rodriguez M(2), Cui R(3), Goding CR(2), Teng H(1), Prince
S(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University
of Cape Town, Observatory, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa. (2)Ludwig Institute for
Cancer Research, Oxford University, Headington, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom,
and. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118. (4)From the
Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town,
Observatory, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa, sharon.prince@uct.ac.za.

A growing body of work has shown that the highly homologous T-box transcription
factors TBX2 and TBX3 play critical but distinct roles in embryonic development
and cancer progression. For example, TBX2 and TBX3 are up-regulated in several
cancers and recent evidence suggests that whereas TBX2 functions as a
pro-proliferative factor, TBX3 inhibits cell proliferation but promotes cancer
cell migration and invasion. While the molecular mechanisms regulating these
functions of TBX2 and TBX3 are poorly understood we recently reported that the
TGF-ß1 signaling pathway up-regulates TBX3 expression to mediate, in part, its
well described anti-proliferative and pro-migratory roles. The TBX3 targets
responsible for these functions were however not identified. Here we reveal for
the first time that the TGF-ß1 signaling pathway represses TBX2 transcriptionally
and we provide a detailed mechanism to show that this is mediated by TBX3.
Furthermore, we implicate the down-regulation of TBX2 in the anti-proliferative
function of the TGF-ß1-TBX3 axis. These findings have important implications for 
our understanding of the regulation of TBX2 and TBX3 and shed light on the
mechanisms involved in the anti-proliferative and pro-migratory roles of TGF-ß1.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4271245
PMID: 25371204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc. 2015 Nov;90(4):1163-78. doi: 10.1111/brv.12150. Epub
2014 Oct 31.

How the pterosaur got its wings.

Tokita M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 16
Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, U.S.A.

Throughout the evolutionary history of life, only three vertebrate lineages took 
to the air by acquiring a body plan suitable for powered flight: birds, bats, and
pterosaurs. Because pterosaurs were the earliest vertebrate lineage capable of
powered flight and included the largest volant animal in the history of the
earth, understanding how they evolved their flight apparatus, the wing, is an
important issue in evolutionary biology. Herein, I speculate on the potential
basis of pterosaur wing evolution using recent advances in the developmental
biology of flying and non-flying vertebrates. The most significant morphological 
features of pterosaur wings are: (i) a disproportionately elongated fourth
finger, and (ii) a wing membrane called the brachiopatagium, which stretches from
the posterior surface of the arm and elongated fourth finger to the anterior
surface of the leg. At limb-forming stages of pterosaur embryos, the zone of
polarizing activity (ZPA) cells, from which the fourth finger eventually
differentiates, could up-regulate, restrict, and prolong expression of 5'-located
Homeobox D (Hoxd) genes (e.g. Hoxd11, Hoxd12, and Hoxd13) around the ZPA through 
pterosaur-specific exploitation of sonic hedgehog (SHH) signalling. 5'Hoxd genes 
could then influence downstream bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signalling to
facilitate chondrocyte proliferation in long bones. Potential expression of Fgf10
and Tbx3 in the primordium of the brachiopatagium formed posterior to the
forelimb bud might also facilitate elongation of the phalanges of the fourth
finger. To establish the flight-adapted musculoskeletal morphology shared by all 
volant vertebrates, pterosaurs probably underwent regulatory changes in the
expression of genes controlling forelimb and pectoral girdle musculoskeletal
development (e.g. Tbx5), as well as certain changes in the mode of cell-cell
interactions between muscular and connective tissues in the early phase of their 
evolution. Developmental data now accumulating for extant vertebrate taxa could
be helpful in understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms of body-plan
evolution in extinct vertebrates as well as extant vertebrates with unique
morphology whose embryonic materials are hard to obtain.

© 2014 The Author. Biological Reviews © 2014 Cambridge Philosophical Society.

PMID: 25361444  [PubMed - in process]


58. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 28;9(10):e111442. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111442.
eCollection 2014.

Human breast progenitor cell numbers are regulated by WNT and TBX3.

Arendt LM(1), St Laurent J(1), Wronski A(1), Caballero S(1), Lyle SR(2), Naber
SP(3), Kuperwasser C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental, Molecular, and Chemical Biology Department, Sackler School of
Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Molecular Oncology Research Institute,
Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America. (3)Department of Pathology,
Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Although human breast development is mediated by hormonal and
non-hormonal means, the mechanisms that regulate breast progenitor cell activity 
remain to be clarified. This limited understanding of breast progenitor cells has
been due in part to the lack of appropriate model systems to detect and
characterize their properties.
METHODS: To examine the effects of WNT signaling and TBX3 expression on
progenitor activity in the breast, primary human mammary epithelial cells (MEC)
were isolated from reduction mammoplasty tissues and transduced with lentivirus
to overexpress WNT1 or TBX3 or reduce expression of their cognate receptors using
shRNA. Changes in progenitor activity were quantified using characterized assays.
We identified WNT family members expressed by cell populations within the
epithelium and assessed alterations in expression of WNT family ligands by MECs
in response to TBX3 overexpression and treatment with estrogen and progesterone.
RESULTS: Growth of MECs on collagen gels resulted in the formation of distinct
luminal acinar and basal ductal colonies. Overexpression of TBX3 in MECs resulted
in increased ductal colonies, while shTBX3 expression diminished both colony
types. Increased WNT1 expression led to enhanced acinar colony formation, shLRP6 
decreased both types of colonies. Estrogen stimulated the formation of acinar
colonies in control MEC, but not shLRP6 MEC. Formation of ductal colonies was
enhanced in response to progesterone. However, while shLRP6 decreased MEC
responsiveness to progesterone, shTBX3 expression did not alter this response.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified two phenotypically distinguishable lineage-committed
progenitor cells that contribute to different structural elements and are
regulated via hormonal and non-hormonal mechanisms. WNT signaling regulates both 
types of progenitor activity. Progesterone favors the expansion of ductal
progenitor cells, while estrogen stimulates the expansion of acinar progenitor
cells. Paracrine WNT signaling is stimulated by estrogen and progesterone, while 
autocrine WNT signaling is induced by the embryonic T-box transcription factor
TBX3.

PMCID: PMC4211891
PMID: 25350852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Oncotarget. 2014 Dec 15;5(23):11998-2015.

The orthologous Tbx transcription factors Omb and TBX2 induce epithelial cell
migration and extrusion in vivo without involvement of matrix metalloproteinases.

Shen J(1), Lu J(1), Sui L(1), Wang D(1), Yin M(2), Hoffmann I(3), Legler A(3),
Pflugfelder GO(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Carbon Fiber and Functional Polymers, Beijing Laboratory of 
Biomedical Materials, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China. 
(3)Institute of Genetics, Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany.

The transcription factors TBX2 and TBX3 are overexpressed in various human
cancers. Here, we investigated the effect of overexpressing the orthologous Tbx
genes Drosophila optomotor-blind (omb) and human TBX2 in the epithelium of the
Drosophila wing imaginal disc and observed two types of cell motility. Omb/TBX2
overexpressing cells could move within the plane of the epithelium. Invasive
cells migrated long-distance as single cells retaining or regaining normal cell
shape and apico-basal polarity in spite of attenuated apical DE-cadherin
concentration. Inappropriate levels of DE-cadherin were sufficient to drive cell 
migration in the wing disc epithelium. Omb/TBX2 overexpression and reduced
DE-cadherin-dependent adhesion caused the formation of actin-rich lateral cell
protrusions. Omb/TBX2 overexpressing cells could also delaminate basally,
penetrating the basal lamina, however, without degradation of extracellular
matrix. Expression of Timp, an inhibitor of matrix metalloproteases, blocked
neither intraepithelial motility nor basal extrusion. Our results reveal an
MMP-independent mechanism of cell invasion and suggest a conserved role of
Tbx2-related proteins in cell invasion and metastasis-related processes.

PMCID: PMC4322970
PMID: 25344916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 24;9(10):e110191. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110191.
eCollection 2014.

Transcriptional repressor Tbx3 is required for the hormone-sensing cell lineage
in mammary epithelium.

Kunasegaran K(1), Ho V(1), Chang TH(1), De Silva D(1), Bakker ML(2), Christoffels
VM(2), Pietersen AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Research, National Cancer Centre
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; Program in Cancer & Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS 
Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (2)Center for Heart
Failure Research, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Research, National Cancer Centre
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; Program in Cancer & Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS 
Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; Department of
Physiology, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

The transcriptional repressor Tbx3 is involved in lineage specification in
several tissues during embryonic development. Germ-line mutations in the Tbx3
gene give rise to Ulnar-Mammary Syndrome (comprising reduced breast development) 
and Tbx3 is required for mammary epithelial cell identity in the embryo. Notably 
Tbx3 has been implicated in breast cancer, which develops in adult mammary
epithelium, but the role of Tbx3 in distinct cell types of the adult mammary
gland has not yet been characterized. Using a fluorescent reporter knock-in
mouse, we show that in adult virgin mice Tbx3 is highly expressed in luminal
cells that express hormone receptors, and not in luminal cells of the alveolar
lineage (cells primed for milk production). Flow cytometry identified Tbx3
expression already in progenitor cells of the hormone-sensing lineage and
co-immunofluorescence confirmed a strict correlation between estrogen receptor
(ER) and Tbx3 expression in situ. Using in vivo reconstitution assays we
demonstrate that Tbx3 is functionally relevant for this lineage because knockdown
of Tbx3 in primary mammary epithelial cells prevented the formation of ER+ cells,
but not luminal ER- or basal cells. Interestingly, genes that are repressed by
Tbx3 in other cell types, such as E-cadherin, are not repressed in
hormone-sensing cells, highlighting that transcriptional targets of Tbx3 are cell
type specific. In summary, we provide the first analysis of Tbx3 expression in
the adult mammary gland at a single cell level and show that Tbx3 is important
for the generation of hormone-sensing cells.

PMCID: PMC4208772
PMID: 25343378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Gene. 2015 Jan 25;555(2):73-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.10.003. Epub 2014 Oct 7.

Distinct evolutionary rate in the eye field transcription factors found by
estimation of ancestral protein structure.

Kamijyo A(1), Yura K(2), Ogura A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Humanities and Sciences, Ochanomizu University, 2-1-1
Otsuka, Bunkyo, Tokyo 112-8610, Japan. (2)Graduate School of Humanities and
Sciences, Ochanomizu University, 2-1-1 Otsuka, Bunkyo, Tokyo 112-8610, Japan;
Center for Informational Biology, Ochanomizu University 2-1-1 Otsuka, Bunkyo,
Tokyo 112-8610, Japan; National Institute of Genetics, 1111 Yata, Mishima,
Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan. (3)Department of Computer Bio-Science, Nagahama
Institute of BioScience and Technology, 1266 Tamura, Nagahama, Shiga 526-0829,
Japan. Electronic address: aogu@wheilx.info.

Eye-field transcription factors (EFTFs) are a set of genes that compose a
regulatory network for eye development in animals, which are highly conserved
among various animal phyla. To investigate the processes of conservation and
diversification of the transcription factors for eye development, we examined the
structural changes in the EFTF proteins by estimating the ancestral sequences
with the available genome information. Among the different types of EFTFs, we
selected otx2, tbx3, rx1, pax6, six3/6, lhx2 and nr2e1 because they are highly
conserved in bilaterian animals. We searched the genome sequences of
representative animal phyla for EFTF protein sequences. With deduced ancestral
sequences and three-dimensional structures of EFTFs, we traced the evolutionary
changes in amino acid residues and found that the DNA-binding domains were always
more conserved than other regions, and that the other regions showed distinct
evolutionary rates. The EFTF rx1, which resides at the pivotal part of the EFTF
network, had a faster evolutionary rate than the others. These results indicated 
that the evolutionary rates of each protein in the EFTF network, which were
expected to be consistent with each other to maintain the interactions in the
network, were not constant among or within the factors, but rather, varied to a
significant extent.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25300250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2014 Oct 7;14:379. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-379.

Proteome profiling of lipopolysaccharide induced L6 rat skeletal muscle cells
response to flavonoids from Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi.

Kim JA, Nagappan A, Park HS, Saralamma VV, Hong GE, Yumnam S, Lee HJ, Raha S, Kim
EH, Young PS(1), Kim GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea. paik@catholic.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi is a commonly used medicinal herb in
several Asian countries like Korea, China and Japan for thousands of years. It
has been reported to have various medicinal properties such as anti-microbial,
anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer effects. However, the anti-inflammatory
mechanism of S. baicalensis G at proteome level has not yet been reported. Hence,
we performed a proteome analysis to study differentially expressed proteins and
its anti-inflammatory role in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulated L6 skeletal
muscle cells response to flavonoids isolated from S. baicalensis G.
METHODS: For that, 150 µg of proteins from the L6 cells of the control (Vehicle
only), LPS treated and flavonoid treated groups were separated using 18 cm, pH
4-7 IPG strips in the first dimension and resolved by 12% linear gradient
SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). The silver stained gels were
analyzed by using progenesis SameSpots software and twenty six differentially
expressed protein spots (= 2 fold, p < 0.05) were selected for matrix assisted
laser desorption ionization- time of flight mass spectroscopy/mass spectrometry
(MALDI-TOF/MS) analysis. Also, the expression of COX-2, iNOS and Annexin A2
proteins were analyzed by western blot.
RESULTS: Totally, 12 differentially expressed proteins were successfully
identified by MALDI-TOF/MS and database searching, that's involved in
inflammatory responses such vimentin, T-box transcription factor TBX3, annexin
A1, annexin A2 and annexin A5. In addition, flavonoids inhibited the expression
of COX-2, iNOS and Annexin A2 proteins in LPS-stimulated L6 skeletal muscle
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings revealed that the flavonoids from S. baicalensis G.
directly protect the LPS stimulated inflammation process in L6 cells and, would
be helpful to study further the muscle cell inflammatory mechanism. This is the
first proteome study provide the anti-inflammatory mechanism of flavonoids from
S. baicalensis G. in LPS stimulated L6 skeletal muscle cells.

PMCID: PMC4195865
PMID: 25287937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Feb 1;24(3):865-74. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu478. Epub 2014 Sep
23.

Genome-wide association study in Chinese identifies novel loci for blood pressure
and hypertension.

Lu X(1), Wang L(2), Lin X(3), Huang J(4), Charles Gu C(5), He M(6), Shen H(7), He
J(8), Zhu J(3), Li H(3), Hixson JE(9), Wu T(6), Dai J(7), Lu L(3), Shen C(10),
Chen S(1), He L(11), Mo Z(12), Hao Y(1), Mo X(1), Yang X(1), Li J(1), Cao J(1),
Chen J(1), Fan Z(13), Li Y(1), Zhao L(1), Li H(14), Lu F(15), Yao C(16), Yu
L(17), Xu L(18), Mu J(19), Wu X(20), Deng Y(20), Hu D(21), Zhang W(22), Ji X(23),
Guo D(24), Guo Z(25), Zhou Z(26), Yang Z(27), Wang R(28), Yang J(29), Zhou X(30),
Yan W(31), Sun N(32), Gao P(33), Gu D(34).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease Fuwai Hospital, National Center
for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100037, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular
Disease National Human Genome Center at Beijing, Beijing 100176, China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences and
Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(4)Hypertension Division Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100037, China. (5)Division of Biostatistics, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (6)MOE Key Lab of Environment and Health, 
School of Public Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, China. (7)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Ministry of Education Key Lab for Modern Toxicology School of
Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211166, China Section
of Clinical Epidemiology, Jiangsu Key Lab of Cancer Biomarkers, Prevention and
Treatment, Cancer Center, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029,
China. (8)Department of Epidemiology, Tulane University School of Public Health
and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (9)Department of Epidemiology,
University of Texas School of Public Health, Houston, TX 77025, USA.
(10)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Ministry of Education Key Lab
for Modern Toxicology School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 211166, China. (11)Bio-X Institutes, Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China. (12)Center for Genomic and
Personalized Medicine, Medical Scientific Research Center and Department of
Occupational Health and Environmental Health, School of Public Health, Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China. (13)Department of Cardiology,
Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100730, China. (14)National Human Genome Center at Beijing, Beijing
100176, China. (15)Cardio-Cerebrovascular Control and Research Center, Institute 
of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan, Shandong 250062, 
China. (16)School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 
211166, China. (17)Department of Cardiology, Fujian Provincial People's Hospital,
Fuzhou, Fujian 350004, China. (18)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital
of Beihua University, Beihua University, Jilin 132011, China. (19)Department of
Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, Shannxi 710061, China. (20)Center for Chronic and
Noncommunicable Disease Control and Prevention, Sichuan Center of Disease Control
and Prevention, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China. (21)School of Public Health,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450001, China School of Medicine, Shenzhen
University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518000, China. (22)School of Public Health,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450001, China. (23)Department of Internal 
Medicine, Xinle Red Cross Hospital, Xinle, Hebei 050700, China. (24)Department of
Internal Medicine, Yuxian Renmin Hospital, Yuxian, Shanxi 045100, China.
(25)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Medical College of
Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China. (26)Changshu Center of Disease
Control and Prevention, Changshu, Jiangsu 215501, China. (27)Nantong Center of
Disease Control and Prevention, Nantong, Jiangsu 226007, China. (28)Department of
Internal Medicine, Shijiazhuang Greatwall Hospital, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 052260,
China. (29)Department of Cardiology, Hanzhong People's Hospital, Hanzhong,
Shannxi 723000, China. (30)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan
University, Wuhan, Hubei 430060, China. (31)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, 
Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 200062, China. (32)Department
of Heart Center, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing 100044, China and. 
(33)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Shanghai Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. (34)State Key
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease Fuwai Hospital, National Center for
Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100037, China gudongfeng@vip.sina.com.

Hypertension is a common disorder and the leading risk factor for cardiovascular 
disease and premature deaths worldwide. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs)
in the European population have identified multiple chromosomal regions
associated with blood pressure, and the identified loci altogether explain only a
small fraction of the variance for blood pressure. The differences in
environmental exposures and genetic background between Chinese and European
populations might suggest potential different pathways of blood pressure
regulation. To identify novel genetic variants affecting blood pressure
variation, we conducted a meta-analysis of GWASs of blood pressure and
hypertension in 11 816 subjects followed by replication studies including 69 146 
additional individuals. We identified genome-wide significant (P < 5.0 × 10(-8)) 
associations with blood pressure, which included variants at three new loci
(CACNA1D, CYP21A2, and MED13L) and a newly discovered variant near SLC4A7. We
also replicated 14 previously reported loci, 8 (CASZ1, MOV10, FGF5, CYP17A1,
SOX6, ATP2B1, ALDH2, and JAG1) at genome-wide significance, and 6 (FIGN, ULK4,
GUCY1A3, HFE, TBX3-TBX5, and TBX3) at a suggestive level of P = 1.81 × 10(-3) to 
5.16 × 10(-8). These findings provide new mechanistic insights into the
regulation of blood pressure and potential targets for treatments.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4303798
PMID: 25249183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Genesis. 2014 Nov;52(11):889-96. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22821. Epub 2014 Oct 1.

Homologous recombination efficiency enhanced by inhibition of MEK and GSK3ß.

Lin Z(1), Zhang Y, Gao T, Wang L, Zhang Q, Zhou J, Zhao J.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Model Animal for Disease Study, Model Animal Research
Center of Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210061, People's Republic of
China.

Homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) is widely utilized in
genome engineering, particularly in the generation of gene targeted mice.
However, genome engineering is often plagued by the problem of low homologous
recombination efficiency. In this study, we developed a novel method to increase 
the efficiency of homologous recombination in ESCs by changing its culture
conditions. By comparing the efficiency of different ESCs in various culture
conditions, we determined that chemicals that inhibit the MEK and GSK3ß pathways 
(2i condition) enhance homologous recombination and eliminate differences in
efficiencies among cell lines. Analysis of gene expression patterns in ESCs
maintained in different culture conditions has identified several homologous
recombination-related candidates, including the pluripotent markers Eras and
Tbx3. The results of this study suggest that homologous recombination is
associated with ESC pluripotency.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25196127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 28;9(8):e106100. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106100.
eCollection 2014.

Differential expression of Meis2, Mab21l2 and Tbx3 during limb development
associated with diversification of limb morphology in mammals.

Dai M(1), Wang Y(1), Fang L(1), Irwin DM(2), Zhu T(1), Zhang J(1), Zhang S(1),
Wang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Ecology and Evolution, East China Normal University,
Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Bats are the only mammals capable of self-powered flight using wings. Differing
from mouse or human limbs, four elongated digits within a broad wing membrane
support the bat wing, and the foot of the bat has evolved a long calcar that
spread the interfemoral membrane. Our recent mRNA sequencing (mRNA-Seq) study
found unique expression patterns for genes at the 5' end of the Hoxd gene cluster
and for Tbx3 that are associated with digit elongation and wing membrane growth
in bats. In this study, we focused on two additional genes, Meis2 and Mab21l2,
identified from the mRNA-Seq data. Using whole-mount in situ hybridization (WISH)
we validated the mRNA-Seq results for differences in the expression patterns of
Meis2 and Mab21l2 between bat and mouse limbs, and further characterize the
timing and location of the expression of these two genes. These analyses suggest 
that Meis2 may function in wing membrane growth and Mab21l2 may have a role in AP
and DV axial patterning. In addition, we found that Tbx3 is uniquely expressed in
the unique calcar structure found in the bat hindlimb, suggesting a role for this
gene in calcar growth and elongation. Moreover, analysis of the coding sequences 
for Meis2, Mab21l2 and Tbx3 showed that Meis2 and Mab21l2 have high sequence
identity, consistent with the functions of genes being conserved, but that Tbx3
showed accelerated evolution in bats. However, evidence for positive selection in
Tbx3 was not found, which would suggest that the function of this gene has not
been changed. Together, our findings support the hypothesis that the modulation
of the spatiotemporal expression patterns of multiple functional conserved genes 
control limb morphology and drive morphological change in the diversification of 
mammalian limbs.

PMCID: PMC4148388
PMID: 25166052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Nov 1;328(2):340-50. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.08.022. Epub
2014 Aug 23.

TBX3, a downstream target of TGF-ß1, inhibits mesangial cell apoptosis.

Wensing LA(1), Campos AH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Av. Albert Einstein, 627, Morumbi,
2SS/Bloco A., São Paulo, São Paulo CEP 05651-901, Brazil; Departamento de
Fisiologia e Biofísica, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Av. Albert
Einstein, 627, Morumbi, 2SS/Bloco A., São Paulo, São Paulo CEP 05651-901, Brazil.
Electronic address: alexandre.campos@einstein.br.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is an increasingly common condition characterized by
progressive loss of functional nephrons leading to renal failure. TGF-ß1-induced 
mesangial cell (MC) phenotype alterations have been linked to the genesis of CKD.
Here we show that TGF-ß1 regulates TBX3 gene expression in MC. This gene encodes 
for two main isoforms, TBX3.1 and TBX3+2a. TBX3.1 has been implicated in cell
immortalization, proliferation and apoptosis by inhibiting p14(ARF)-Mdm2-p53
pathway, while TBX3+2a role has not been defined. We demonstrated that TBX3
overexpression abrogated MC apoptosis induced by serum deprivation. Moreover, we 
observed an enhancement in TBX3 protein expression both in glomerular and tubular
regions in the model of 5/6 nephrectomy, temporally related to increased
expression of TGF-ß1, type IV collagen and fibronectin. Our results indicate that
TBX3 acts as an anti-apoptotic factor in MC in vitro and may be involved in the
mechanism by which TGF-ß1 induces glomerulosclerosis and tubular fibrosis during 
the progression of nephropathies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25158279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Dec;1846(2):380-91. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2014.08.004. 
Epub 2014 Aug 19.

T-box transcription factors in cancer biology.

Wansleben S(1), Peres J(1), Hare S(1), Goding CR(2), Prince S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, 7925 Cape Town, South Africa. (2)Ludwig Institute for Cancer
Research, Oxford University, Old Road Campus, Headington, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK.
(3)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, 7925 Cape Town, South Africa. Electronic address:
sharon.prince@uct.ac.za.

The evolutionarily conserved T-box family of transcription factors have critical 
and well-established roles in embryonic development. More recently, T-box factors
have also gained increasing prominence in the field of cancer biology where a
wide range of cancers exhibit deregulated expression of T-box factors that
possess tumour suppressor and/or tumour promoter functions. Of these the best
characterised is TBX2, whose expression is upregulated in cancers including
breast, pancreatic, ovarian, liver, endometrial adenocarcinoma, glioblastomas,
gastric, uterine cervical and melanoma. Understanding the role and regulation of 
TBX2, as well as other T-box factors, in contributing directly to tumour
progression, and especially in suppression of senescence and control of
invasiveness suggests that targeting TBX2 expression or function alone or in
combination with currently available chemotherapeutic agents may represent a
therapeutic strategy for cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25149433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Cell Res. 2014 Oct;24(10):1201-13. doi: 10.1038/cr.2014.113. Epub 2014 Aug 22.

Baf250a orchestrates an epigenetic pathway to repress the Nkx2.5-directed
contractile cardiomyocyte program in the sinoatrial node.

Wu M(1), Peng S(1), Yang J(2), Tu Z(2), Cai X(3), Cai CL(3), Wang Z(4), Zhao
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA [2] Department of
Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One
Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA. (2)Department of Genetics and
Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy
Place, New York, NY 10029, USA. (3)1] Mindich Child Health and Development
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place,
New York, NY 10029, USA [2] Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(4)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Cardiovascular Research Center, University of
Michigan, 2800 Plymouth Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The sinoatrial node (SAN) is essential for rhythmic beating of the heart;
however, our understanding of what controls proper functioning of the SAN remains
primitive. To explore molecular control of SAN function, we specifically deleted 
Baf250a, a key regulatory component of the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling
complex SWI/SNF, in the SAN. Deletion of Baf250a in the SAN led to sinus
bradycardia. Time series analysis of dysregulated genes after deletion of Baf250a
reveals a transcriptional hierarchy maintaining pacemaker cell identity, i.e.,
Baf250a activates the expression of Tbx3, and Baf250a, Tbx3 and histone
deacetylase 3 coordinately repress the expression of Nkx2.5. Disruption of this
repressive pathway switches on expression of Nkx2.5, which stimulates expression 
of Gata4 and Tbx5. These three cardiac transcription factors further turn on a
contractile cardiomyocyte program in the SAN, which eventually leads to sick
sinus disease (SSD). Our study suggests that disruption of key genetic pathways
regulating cardiac lineage segregation may cause SSD and cardiac arrhythmias in
general.

PMCID: PMC4185344
PMID: 25145359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Circ Res. 2014 Aug 1;115(4):432-41. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.303591. Epub 2014
Jun 24.

A large permissive regulatory domain exclusively controls Tbx3 expression in the 
cardiac conduction system.

van Weerd JH(1), Badi I(1), van den Boogaard M(1), Stefanovic S(1), van de Werken
HJ(1), Gomez-Velazquez M(1), Badia-Careaga C(1), Manzanares M(1), de Laat W(1),
Barnett P(1), Christoffels VM(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology, Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (J.H.v.W., I.B., M.v.d.B., S.S., P.B.,
V.M.C.); Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands (H.J.G.v.d.W., W.d.L.); Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands (H.J.G.v.d.W.); and Cardiovascular
Development and Repair Department, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares, Madrid, Spain (M.G.-V., C.B.-C., M.M.). (2)From the Department 
of Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands (J.H.v.W., I.B., M.v.d.B., S.S., P.B., V.M.C.); Hubrecht
Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands
(H.J.G.v.d.W., W.d.L.); Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands (H.J.G.v.d.W.); and Cardiovascular Development and
Repair Department, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares, Madrid,
Spain (M.G.-V., C.B.-C., M.M.). v.m.christoffels@amc.uva.nl.

RATIONALE: The evolutionary conserved Tbx3/Tbx5 gene cluster encodes T-box
transcription factors that play crucial roles in the development and homeostasis 
of the cardiac conduction system in human and mouse. Both genes are expressed in 
overlapping patterns and function in strictly tissue-specific and dose-dependent 
manners, yet, their regulation is poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: To analyze the mechanism underlying the complex regulation of the
Tbx3/Tbx5 cluster.
METHODS AND RESULTS: By probing the 3-dimensional architecture of the Tbx3/Tbx5
cluster using high-resolution circular chromosome conformation capture sequencing
in vivo, we found that its regulatory landscape is in a preformed conformation
similar in embryonic heart, limbs, and brain. Tbx3 and its flanking gene desert
form a 1 Mbp loop between CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)-binding sites that is
separated from the neighboring Tbx5 loop. However, Ctcf inactivation did not
result in transcriptional regulatory interaction between Tbx3 and Tbx5. Multiple 
sites within the Tbx3 locus contact the promoter, including sites corresponding
to regions known to contain variations in the human genome influencing
conduction. We identified an atrioventricular-specific enhancer and a pan-cardiac
enhancer that contact the promoter and each other and synergize to activate
transcription in the atrioventricular conduction system.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide a high-resolution model of the 3-dimensional structure
and function of the Tbx3/Tbx5 locus and show that the locus is organized in a
preformed, permissive structure. The Tbx3 locus forms a CTCF-independent
autonomous regulatory domain with multiple combinatorial regulatory elements that
control the precise pattern of Tbx3 in the cardiac conduction system.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 24963028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. World J Cardiol. 2014 May 26;6(5):327-37. doi: 10.4330/wjc.v6.i5.327.

Elevated blood pressure: Our family's fault? The genetics of essential
hypertension.

Natekar A(1), Olds RL(1), Lau MW(1), Min K(1), Imoto K(1), Slavin TP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aniket Natekar, Randi L Olds, Meghann W Lau, Kathleen Min, Karra Imoto, Thomas
P Slavin, The John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu,
HI 96813, United States.

AIM: To provide an updated review on current genetic aspects possibly affecting
essential hypertension (EH), and to further elucidate their role in EH.
METHODS: We searched for genetic and epigenetic factors in major studies
associated with EH between Jan 2008-Oct 2013 using PubMed. We limited our search 
to reviews that discussed mostly human studies, and were accessible through the
university online resource. We found 11 genome wide association studies (GWAS),
as well as five methylation and three miRNA studies that fit our search criteria.
A distinction was not made between genes with protective effects or negative
effects, as this article is only meant to be a summary of genes associated with
any aspect of EH.
RESULTS: We found 130 genes from the studies that met our inclusion/exclusion
criteria. Of note, genes with multiple study references include: STK39, CYP17A1, 
MTHFR-NPPA, MTHFR-NPPB, ATP2B1, CSK, ZNF652, UMOD, CACNB2, PLEKHA7, SH2B3,
TBX3-TBX5, ULK4, CSK-ULK3, CYP1A2, NT5C2, CYP171A, PLCD3, SH2B3, ATXN2, CACNB2,
PLEKHA7, SH2B3, TBX3-TBX5, ULK4, and HFE. The following genes overlapped between 
the genetic studies and epigenetic studies: WNK4 and BDKRB2. Several of the
identified genes were found to have functions associated with EH. Many epigenetic
factors were also correlated with EH. Of the epigenetic factors, there were no
articles discussing siRNA and its effects on EH that met the search criteria,
thus the topic was not included in this review. Among the miRNA targets found to 
be associated with EH, many of the genes involved were also identified in the
GWAS studies.
CONCLUSION: Genetic hypertension risk algorithms could be developed in the future
but may be of limited benefit due to the multi-factorial nature of EH. With
emerging technologies, like next-generation sequencing, more direct causal
relationships between genetic and epigenetic factors affecting EH will likely be 
discovered creating a tremendous potential for personalized medicine using
pharmacogenomics.

PMCID: PMC4062117
PMID: 24944762  [PubMed]


71. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Apr 17;2(5):592-605. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.03.006.
eCollection 2014.

Programming and isolation of highly pure physiologically and pharmacologically
functional sinus-nodal bodies from pluripotent stem cells.

Jung JJ(1), Husse B(2), Rimmbach C(1), Krebs S(3), Stieber J(4), Steinhoff G(1), 
Dendorfer A(5), Franz WM(6), David R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Referenz und Translationszentrum für Kardiale Stammzelltherapie (RTC) der
Universität Rostock, 18057 Rostock, Germany. (2)Universitätsklinik für Innere
Medizin III, Kardiologie und Angiologie, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria ; Walter Brendel
Centre, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany. (3)Gene Center Munich, LMU Munich,
81377 Munich, Germany. (4)Institut für Experimentelle und Klinische Pharmakologie
und Toxikologie der FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. (5)Walter
Brendel Centre, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany ; German Center for
Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), partner site Munich Heart Alliance, Munich,
Germany. (6)Universitätsklinik für Innere Medizin III, Kardiologie und
Angiologie, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Therapeutic approaches for "sick sinus syndrome" rely on electrical pacemakers,
which lack hormone responsiveness and bear hazards such as infection and battery 
failure. These issues may be overcome via "biological pacemakers" derived from
pluripotent stem cells (PSCs). Here, we show that forward programming of PSCs
with the nodal cell inducer TBX3 plus an additional Myh6-promoter-based
antibiotic selection leads to cardiomyocyte aggregates consisting of >80%
physiologically and pharmacologically functional pacemaker cells. These induced
sinoatrial bodies (iSABs) exhibited highly increased beating rates (300-400 bpm),
coming close to those found in mouse hearts, and were able to robustly pace
myocardium ex vivo. Our study introduces iSABs as highly pure, functional nodal
tissue that is derived from PSCs and may be important for future cell therapies
and drug testing in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4050488
PMID: 24936448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jun 24;111(25):9181-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1405411111. Epub 2014 Jun 10.

Pitx2-microRNA pathway that delimits sinoatrial node development and inhibits
predisposition to atrial fibrillation.

Wang J(1), Bai Y(2), Li N(1), Ye W(3), Zhang M(2), Greene SB(1), Tao Y(1), Chen
Y(3), Wehrens XH(4), Martin JF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics. (2)Department of Molecular 
Physiology and Biophysics,Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M
Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030; and. (3)Department of Cell and
Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118. (4)Department of
Molecular Physiology and Biophysics,Department of Medicine, Division of
Cardiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030; (5)Department of
Molecular Physiology and Biophysics,Institute of Biosciences and Technology,
Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030; andTexas Heart Institute,
Houston, TX 77030;Program in Developmental Biology, and jfmartin@bcm.edu.

The molecular mechanisms underlying atrial fibrillation, the most common
sustained cardiac arrhythmia, remain poorly understood. Genome-wide association
studies uncovered a major atrial fibrillation susceptibility locus on human
chromosome 4q25 in close proximity to the paired-like homeodomain transcription
factor 2 (Pitx2) homeobox gene. Pitx2, a target of the left-sided Nodal signaling
pathway that initiates early in development, represses the sinoatrial node
program and pacemaker activity on the left side. To address the mechanisms
underlying this repressive activity, we hypothesized that Pitx2 regulates
microRNAs (miRs) to repress the sinoatrial node genetic program. MiRs are small
noncoding RNAs that regulate gene expression posttranscriptionally. Using an
integrated genomic approach, we discovered that Pitx2 positively regulates
miR-17-92 and miR-106b-25. Intracardiac electrical stimulation revealed that both
miR-17-92 and miR-106b-25 deficient mice exhibit pacing-induced atrial
fibrillation. Furthermore electrocardiogram telemetry revealed that mice with
miR-17-92 cardiac-specific inactivation develop prolonged PR intervals whereas
mice with miR-17-92 cardiac-specific inactivation and miR-106b-25 heterozygosity 
develop sinoatrial node dysfunction. Both arrhythmias are risk factors for atrial
fibrillation in humans. Importantly, miR-17-92 and miR-106b-25 directly repress
genes, such as Shox2 and Tbx3, that are required for sinoatrial node development.
Together, to our knowledge, these findings provide the first genetic evidence for
an miR loss-of-function that increases atrial fibrillation susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4078868
PMID: 24927531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Elife. 2014 May 29;3. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02805.

Coordinated control of senescence by lncRNA and a novel T-box3 co-repressor
complex.

Kumar P P(1), Emechebe U(2), Smith R(3), Franklin S(4), Moore B(5), Yandell M(5),
Lessnick SL(6), Moon AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Weis Center for Research, Geisinger Clinic, Danville, United States.
(2)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
United States. (3)The Centre for Children's Cancer Research, Huntsman Cancer
Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, United States. (4)Nora Eccles
Harrison Cardiovascular Research and Training Institute, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, United States. (5)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, United States. (6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, United States.

Cellular senescence is a crucial tumor suppressor mechanism. We discovered a
CAPERa/TBX3 repressor complex required to prevent senescence in primary cells and
mouse embryos. Critical, previously unknown roles for CAPERa in controlling cell 
proliferation are manifest in an obligatory interaction with TBX3 to regulate
chromatin structure and repress transcription of CDKN2A-p16INK and the RB
pathway. The IncRNA UCA1 is a direct target of CAPERa/TBX3 repression whose
overexpression is sufficient to induce senescence. In proliferating cells, we
found that hnRNPA1 binds and destabilizes CDKN2A-p16INK mRNA whereas during
senescence, UCA1 sequesters hnRNPA1 and thus stabilizes CDKN2A-p16INK. Thus
CAPERa/TBX3 and UCA1 constitute a coordinated, reinforcing mechanism to regulate 
both CDKN2A-p16INK transcription and mRNA stability. Dissociation of the
CAPERa/TBX3 co-repressor during oncogenic stress activates UCA1, revealing a
novel mechanism for oncogene-induced senescence. Our elucidation of CAPERa and
UCA1 functions in vivo provides new insights into senescence induction, and the
oncogenic and developmental properties of TBX3.

PMCID: PMC4071561
PMID: 24876127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Theriogenology. 2014 Jul 15;82(2):283-93. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2014.04.001. Epub 2014 Apr 19.

Generation and characterization of bat-induced pluripotent stem cells.

Mo X(1), Li N(1), Wu S(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University,
Beijing, 100193, China. Electronic address: swu@cau.edu.cn.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) were first generated from mouse embryonic 
fibroblasts in the year 2006. These cells resemble the typical morphology of
embryonic stem cells, express pluripotency markers, and are able to transmit
through germlines. To date, iPSCs of many species have been generated, whereas
generation of bat iPSCs (biPSCs) has not been reported. To facilitate in-depth
study of bats at the molecular and cellular levels, we describe the successful
derivation of biPSCs with a piggyBac (PB) vector that contains eight
reprogramming factors Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, Nanog, cMyc, Lin28, Nr5a2, and
miR302/367. These biPSCs were cultured in media containing leukemia inhibitory
factor and three small molecule inhibitors (CHIR99021, PD0325901, and A8301).
They retained normal karyotype, displayed alkaline phosphatase activity, and
expressed pluripotency markers Oct4, Sox2, Nanog, TBX3, and TRA-1-60. They could 
differentiate in vitro to form embryoid bodies and in vivo to form teratomas that
contained tissue cells of all three germ layers. Generation of biPSCs will
facilitate future studies on the mechanisms of antiviral immunity and longevity
of bats at the cellular level.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24853281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Nat Commun. 2014 May 13;5:3775. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4775.

Exercise training reduces resting heart rate via downregulation of the funny
channel HCN4.

D'Souza A(1), Bucchi A(2), Johnsen AB(3), Logantha SJ(1), Monfredi O(4), Yanni
J(4), Prehar S(4), Hart G(4), Cartwright E(4), Wisloff U(5), Dobryznski H(4),
DiFrancesco D(6), Morris GM(4), Boyett MR(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester 
M13 9NT, UK [2]. (2)1] Department of Biosciences, University of Milano, Milano
20133, Italy [2]. (3)1] Department of Circulation and Medical Imaging, Norwegian 
University of Science and Technology, Trondheim 7491, Norway [2]. (4)Institute of
Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9NT, UK.
(5)Department of Circulation and Medical Imaging, Norwegian University of Science
and Technology, Trondheim 7491, Norway. (6)Department of Biosciences, University 
of Milano, Milano 20133, Italy.

Comment in
    Pediatr Exerc Sci. 2015 Feb;27(1):18-20.

Endurance athletes exhibit sinus bradycardia, that is a slow resting heart rate, 
associated with a higher incidence of sinus node (pacemaker) disease and
electronic pacemaker implantation. Here we show that training-induced bradycardia
is not a consequence of changes in the activity of the autonomic nervous system
but is caused by intrinsic electrophysiological changes in the sinus node. We
demonstrate that training-induced bradycardia persists after blockade of the
autonomous nervous system in vivo in mice and in vitro in the denervated sinus
node. We also show that a widespread remodelling of pacemaker ion channels,
notably a downregulation of HCN4 and the corresponding ionic current, If. Block
of If abolishes the difference in heart rate between trained and sedentary
animals in vivo and in vitro. We further observe training-induced downregulation 
of Tbx3 and upregulation of NRSF and miR-1 (transcriptional regulators) that
explains the downregulation of HCN4. Our findings provide a molecular explanation
for the potentially pathological heart rate adaptation to exercise training.

PMCID: PMC4024745
PMID: 24825544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Dairy Sci. 2014 Jul;97(7):4322-8. doi: 10.3168/jds.2013-7771. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Short communication: Expression of T-box 2 and 3 in the bovine mammary gland.

Hoffman ML(1), McFadden KK(1), Hoagland TA(1), Kazmer GW(1), Govoni KE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Connecticut, Storrs 06269.
(2)Department of Animal Science, University of Connecticut, Storrs 06269.
Electronic address: kristen.govoni@uconn.edu.

To increase our understanding of the mechanisms by which growth hormone (GH) and 
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I influence bovine mammary gland development,
the potential roles of T-box2 (TBX2) and T-box3 (TBX3) were investigated.
Although no information regarding expression of either transcription factor in
the bovine mammary gland exists, it is known that TBX3 and its closely related
family member, TBX2, are required for mammary gland development in humans and
mice. Additionally, TBX3 mutations in humans and mice lead to ulnar mammary
syndrome. Evidence is present in bone that TBX3 is required for proliferation and
its expression is regulated by GH, an important regulator of mammary gland
development and milk production. We hypothesized that TBX2 and TBX3 are expressed
in the bovine mammary gland and that GH, IGF-I, or both increase TBX2 and TBX3
expression in bovine mammary epithelial cells (MEC). Bovine mammary gland tissue,
MAC-T cells, primary MEC, and fibroblasts were obtained and TBX2 and TBX3
expression was determined by real-time reverse transcription PCR. In addition,
TBX2 and TBX3 expression was examined in cells treated with 100 or 500 ng/mL of
GH or 100 or 200 ng/mL of IGF-I for 24 or 48 h. Both TBX2 and TBX3 were expressed
in bovine mammary tissue. Surprisingly, expression of TBX2 was only detected in
mammary fibroblast cells, whereas TBX3 was expressed in all 3 cell types. Growth 
hormone did not alter TBX3 expression in MAC-T cells or MEC. However, IGF-I
increased TBX3 expression in MAC-T, but not in primary MEC. We did not observe a 
change in TBX2 or TBX3 expression in fibroblasts treated with GH and IGF.
Therefore, we concluded that (1) TBX2 and TBX3 are expressed in bovine mammary
gland, (2) their expression is cell-type specific, and (3) IGF-I stimulates TBX3 
expression in MAC-T cells.

Copyright © 2014 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 24767885  [PubMed - in process]


77. Proc Biol Sci. 2014 Apr 2;281(1783):20133133. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2013.3133. Print 
2014 May 22.

Unique expression patterns of multiple key genes associated with the evolution of
mammalian flight.

Wang Z(1), Dai M, Wang Y, Cooper KL, Zhu T, Dong D, Zhang J, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Ecology and Evolution (iAIR), East China Normal
University, , Shanghai 200062, People's Republic of China, Division of Biological
Sciences, University of California, , San Diego, CA 92093, USA, Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, , Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Bats are the only mammals capable of true flight. Critical adaptations for flight
include a pair of dramatically elongated hands with broad wing membranes. To
study the molecular mechanisms of bat wing evolution, we perform genomewide mRNA 
sequencing and in situ hybridization for embryonic bat limbs. We identify seven
key genes that display unique expression patterns in embryonic bat wings and
feet, compared with mouse fore- and hindlimbs. The expression of all 5'HoxD genes
(Hoxd9-13) and Tbx3, six known crucial transcription factors for limb and digit
development, is extremely high and prolonged in the elongating wing area. The
expression of Fam5c, a tumour suppressor, in bat limbs is bat-specific and
significantly high in all short digit regions (the thumb and foot digits). These 
results suggest multiple genetic changes occurred independently during the
evolution of bat wings to elongate the hand digits, promote membrane growth and
keep other digits short. Our findings also indicate that the evolution of limb
morphology depends on the complex integration of multiple gene regulatory
networks and biological processes that control digit formation and identity,
chondrogenesis, and interdigital regression or retention.

PMCID: PMC3996600
PMID: 24695426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Anat Cell Biol. 2014 Mar;47(1):1-11. doi: 10.5115/acb.2014.47.1.1. Epub 2014 Mar 
13.

The expressions of stem cell markers: Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, nucleostemin, Bmi, Zfx, 
Tcl1, Tbx3, Dppa4, and Esrrb in bladder, colon, and prostate cancer, and certain 
cancer cell lines.

Amini S(1), Fathi F(2), Mobalegi J(3), Sofimajidpour H(4), Ghadimi T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Sanandaj Branch, Islamic Azad University, Sanandaj,
Iran. (2)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Kurdistan University of Medical 
Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran. (3)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine,
Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran. (4)Department of
Urology, Faculty of Medicine, Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj,
Iran.

Uncontrolled self-renewal plays a direct function in the progression of different
types of carcinomas. The same molecular pathway that manages self-renewal in
normal stem cells also seems to manage cancer stem cells. Here, we examine the
expressions of self-renewal regulatory factors Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, nucleostemin,
Zfx, Esrrb, Tcl1, Tbx3, and Dppa4 in tissue samples of colon, prostate, and
bladder carcinomas as well as cancer cell lines HT-29, Caco-2, HT-1376, LNCaP,
and HepG2. We used reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction to examine
expressions of the above mentioned regulatory factors in cancer cell lines HT-29,
Caco-2, HT-1376, LNCaP, and HepG2 and in 20 tumor tissue samples. Total RNA was
isolated by the ISOGEN method. RNA integrity was checked by agarose gel
electrophoresis and spectrophotometry. Expressions of Oct4 and nucleostemin at
the protein level were determined by immunocytochemistry. A significant
relationship was found between tumor grade and self-renewal gene expression.
Expressions of stem cell specific marker genes were detected in all examined
cancer cell lines, in 40% to 100% of bladder cancer samples, and in 60% to 100%
of colon and prostate cancer samples. Oct4 expressed in 100% of tumor tissue
samples. Our data show that stem cell markers Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, nucleostemin,
Bmi, Zfx, Esrrb, Tcl1, Tbx3, and Dppa4 significantly express in cancer cell lines
and cancer tissues. Hence, these markers might be useful as potential tumor
markers in the diagnosis and/or prognosis of tumors.

PMCID: PMC3968261
PMID: 24693477  [PubMed]


79. Dev Biol. 2014 Jun 15;390(2):191-207. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.03.008. Epub 2014
Mar 27.

AcvR1-mediated BMP signaling in second heart field is required for arterial pole 
development: implications for myocardial differentiation and regional identity.

Thomas PS(1), Rajderkar S(1), Lane J(1), Mishina Y(1), Kaartinen V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan - Ann
Arbor, 1011 N. University Ave, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (2)Department of
Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan - Ann Arbor, 1011 N.
University Ave, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. Electronic address: vesak@umich.edu.

BMP signaling plays an essential role in second heart field-derived heart and
arterial trunk development, including myocardial differentiation, right
ventricular growth, and interventricular, outflow tract and aortico-pulmonary
septation. It is mediated by a number of different BMP ligands, and receptors,
many of which are present simultaneously. The mechanisms by which they regulate
morphogenetic events and degree of redundancy amongst them have still to be
elucidated. We therefore assessed the role of BMP Type I receptor AcvR1 in
anterior second heart field-derived cell development, and compared it with that
of BmpR1a. By removing Acvr1 using the driver Mef2c[AHF]-Cre, we show that AcvR1 
plays an essential role in arterial pole morphogenesis, identifying defects in
outflow tract wall and cushion morphology that preceded a spectrum of septation
defects from double outlet right ventricle to common arterial trunk in mutants.
Its absence caused dysregulation in gene expression important for myocardial
differentiation (Isl1, Fgf8) and regional identity (Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx20, Tgfb2).
Although these defects resemble to some degree those in the equivalent Bmpr1a
mutant, a novel gene knock-in model in which Bmpr1a was expressed in the Acvr1
locus only partially restored septation in Acvr1 mutants. These data show that
both BmpR1a and AcvR1 are needed for normal heart development, in which they play
some non-redundant roles, and refine our understanding of the genetic and
morphogenetic processes underlying Bmp-mediated heart development important in
human congenital heart disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4057048
PMID: 24680892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Hand Surg Am. 2014 Apr;39(4):803-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2014.01.024.

Ulnar mammary syndrome.

Ramirez RN(1), Kozin SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Shriners Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA. Electronic address: Rey.ramirez@gmail.com. (2)Department of Orthopaedics,
Shriners Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA.

PMID: 24679913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. PLoS Genet. 2014 Mar 27;10(3):e1004247. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004247.
eCollection 2014.

TBX3 regulates splicing in vivo: a novel molecular mechanism for Ulnar-mammary
syndrome.

Kumar P P(1), Franklin S(2), Emechebe U(3), Hu H(4), Moore B(4), Lehman C(1),
Yandell M(4), Moon AM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United
States of America. (2)Department of Internal Medicine and the Nora Eccles
Harrison Cardiovascular Research & Training Institute, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah, United States of America; Department of Anesthesiology,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America. (3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah,
United States of America; Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America. (4)Department of Human
Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United
States of America; Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America; Department of Human Genetics,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America; Molecular
Medicine Program, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of
America; Weis Center for Research, Geisinger Clinic, Danville, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.

TBX3 is a member of the T-box family of transcription factors with critical roles
in development, oncogenesis, cell fate, and tissue homeostasis. TBX3 mutations in
humans cause complex congenital malformations and Ulnar-mammary syndrome.
Previous investigations into TBX3 function focused on its activity as a
transcriptional repressor. We used an unbiased proteomic approach to identify
TBX3 interacting proteins in vivo and discovered that TBX3 interacts with
multiple mRNA splicing factors and RNA metabolic proteins. We discovered that
TBX3 regulates alternative splicing in vivo and can promote or inhibit splicing
depending on context and transcript. TBX3 associates with alternatively spliced
mRNAs and binds RNA directly. TBX3 binds RNAs containing TBX binding motifs, and 
these motifs are required for regulation of splicing. Our study reveals that TBX3
mutations seen in humans with UMS disrupt its splicing regulatory function. The
pleiotropic effects of TBX3 mutations in humans and mice likely result from
disrupting at least two molecular functions of this protein: transcriptional
regulation and pre-mRNA splicing.

PMCID: PMC3967948
PMID: 24675841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 May;164A(5):1304-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36447. Epub 2014
Mar 24.

Phenotype of a patient with contiguous deletion of TBX5 and TBX3: expanding the
disease spectrum.

Bogarapu S(1), Bleyl SB, Calhoun A, Viskochil D, Saarel EV, Everitt MD, Frank DU.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The important roles that T-box genes play in the morphogenesis of the heart and
its conduction system has long been established, and a number of disorders are
linked to mutations in these T-box genes. Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), the classic
heart and hand syndrome, is clinically typified by radial ray upper limb
abnormalities and cardiac malformations, and is caused by mutations involving
TBX5. Another member of the T-box gene family, TBX3, is found in close proximity 
to TBX5 on chromosome 12q24. Mutations in TBX3 cause ulnar-mammary syndrome
(UMS), which is distinguished by upper limb malformations affecting the ulnar
ray, apocrine, and mammary gland hypoplasia, and genital defects. While disorders
involving isolated mutations of TBX5 and TBX3 have been well described,
contiguous deletions of these T-box genes remain exceptional. We report on a
patient with features of both HOS and UMS consisting of bilateral symmetric limb 
malformations, congenital cardiac defects, and rapidly progressive cardiac
conduction disease.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24664963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Feb 14;444(3):411-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.01.093. Epub 2014 Jan 25.

Tbx3 isoforms are involved in pluripotency maintaining through distinct
regulation of Nanog transcriptional activity.

Zhao D(1), Wu Y(1), Chen K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology 
and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Regenerative Biology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and
Regenerative Medicine, South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China. Electronic address:
chen_keshi@gibh.ac.cn.

Tbx3, a member of T-box gene family, has been reported to play critical roles in 
embryonic development and cell fate determination. In mammalian tissues, Tbx3 is 
expressed as two isoforms called Tbx3 and Tbx3+2a. However, the differences
between the two isoforms in pluripotency maintaining remain obscure. Here we show
that both Tbx3 and Tbx3+2a are highly expressed in mouse embryonic stem cells
(mESCs) or induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Overexpression of either Tbx3 
or Tbx3+2a could induce the differentiation of mESCs. Mechanistic studies suggest
both Tbx3 and Tbx3+2a inhibit the transcriptional activity of pluripotency
related transcription factor Nanog. Moreover, Tbx3+2a could directly interact
with Nanog while Tbx3 couldn't, indicating the requirement of the 2a domain in
Nanog binding. In summary, our results not only reveal the essential roles of
Tbx3 and Tbx3+2a in pluripotency maintaining, but also point out the different
mechanistic modes between these two isoforms.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24472544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Zoolog Sci. 2014 Jan;31(1):6-13. doi: 10.2108/zsj.31.6.

Conservation of position-specific gene expression in axolotl limb skin.

Satoh A(1), Makanae A.

Author information: 
(1)1 Okayama University, Research Core for Interdisciplinary Sciences (RCIS),
3-1-1, Tsushima-naka, Kita-ku, Okayama 700-8530, Japan.

Urodele amphibians can regenerate their limbs after amputation. After amputation,
undifferentiated cells appear on the amputation plane and form regeneration
blastema. A limb blastema recreates a complete replica of the original limb. It
is well known that disturbance of the location of limb tissues prior to
amputation perturbs limb patterning, suggesting that different intact limb
tissues carry different location information despite their identical appearance. 
The cause of such differences in intact tissues remains unknown. In this study,
we found that Lmx1b, Tbx2, and Tbx3 genes, which are expressed in developing limb
in a region specific manner, remained detectable in a mature axolotl limb.
Furthermore, those position-specific gene expression patterns were conserved in
mature limbs. Treatment with retinoic acid (RA), which is known to have
ventralizing activity, changed Lmx1b expression in intact dorsal skin and dorsal 
character to ventral, indicating that conserved Lmx1b expression was due to the
dorsal character and not leaky gene expression. Furthermore, we found that such
conserved gene expression was rewritable in regeneration blastemas. These results
suggest that axolotl limb cells can recognize their locations and maintain
limbness via conserved expression profiles of developmental genes.

PMID: 24410490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 7;289(10):6775-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.499210. Epub 2014 
Jan 6.

The transcription factor T-box 3 regulates colony-stimulating factor 1-dependent 
Jun dimerization protein 2 expression and plays an important role in
osteoclastogenesis.

Yao C(1), Yao GQ, Sun BH, Zhang C, Tommasini SM, Insogna K.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Internal Medicine.

Colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF1) is known to promote osteoclast progenitor
survival, but its roles in osteoclast differentiation and mature osteoclast
function are less well understood. In a microarray screen, Jun dimerization
protein 2 (JDP2) was identified as significantly induced by CSF1. Recent reports 
indicate that JDP2 is required for normal osteoclastogenesis and skeletal
metabolism. Because there are no reports on the transcriptional regulation of
this gene, the DNA sequence from -2612 to +682 bp (relative to the transcription 
start site) of the JDP2 gene was cloned, and promoter activity was analyzed. The 
T box-binding element (TBE) between -191 and -141 bp was identified as the
cis-element responsible for CSF1-dependent JDP2 expression. Using degenerate PCR,
Tbx3 was identified as the major isoform binding the TBE. Overexpression of Tbx3 
induced JDP2 promoter activity, whereas suppressing Tbx3 expression substantially
attenuated CSF1-induced transcription. Suppressing Tbx3 in osteoclast precursors 
reduced JDP2 expression and significantly impaired RANKL/CSF1-induced
osteoclastogenesis. A MEK1/2-specific inhibitor was found to block CSF1-induced
JDP2 expression. Consistent with these data, JDP2(-/-) mice were found to have
increased bone mass. In summary, CSF1 up-regulates JDP2 expression by inducing
Tbx3 binding to the JDP2 promoter. The downstream signaling cascade from
activated c-Fms involves the MEK1/2-ERK1/2 pathway. Tbx3 plays an important role 
in osteoclastogenesis at least in part by regulating CSF1-dependent expression of
JDP2.

PMCID: PMC3945339
PMID: 24394418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2014 May;63(5):434-40. doi: 10.1097/FJC.0000000000000068.

Effect of NRG-1/ErbB signaling intervention on the differentiation of bone marrow
stromal cells into sinus node-like cells.

Li Y(1), Li B, Zhang C, Zhang J, Zeng M, Zheng Z.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanchang University,
Nanchang, China; and Department of Vascular Surgery, Linyi People's Hospital,
Shandong, China.

The neuregulin-1 (NRG-1)/ErbB signaling pathway is a crucial regulator of cardiac
development and plays an important role in the formation of the cardiac special
conduction system. To establish a rat bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC)
cardiomyocyte (CM)-like differentiation model, BMSCs were treated with
5-azacytidine and fibroblast growth factor basic (FGF-basic) for 24 hours and
then cocultured with neonatal rat CMs in a Transwell culture system. The
feasibility of regulating the differentiation of BMSCs into sinoatrial node cells
by manipulating the NRG-1/ErbB pathway was investigated. Three weeks after
induction, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed that
inhibition of NRG-1/ErbB signaling (using AG1478) greatly enhanced the expression
of HCN4, Tbx3, and Tbx2. Additionally, Tbx3 protein levels were higher than in
the control group and even produced distinct nodal-type action potentials. The
expression of Nkx2.5 in the NRG-1 group (treated with exogenous NRG-1) was higher
than the other 2 groups. The expression of phospho-Akt was also increased in the 
NRG-1 group but decreased in the AG1478 group. Together, these data demonstrate
that inhibiting the endogenous NRG-1/ErbB signaling pathway when rat BMSCs
differentiate into CMs can greatly enhance the pacemaker phenotype. Akt signaling
may be one of the underlying molecular mechanisms responsible for these results.

PMID: 24390172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 30;8(12):e84407. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084407.
eCollection 2013.

WNT signaling pathway gene polymorphisms and risk of hepatic fibrosis and
inflammation in HCV-infected patients.

Liu Y(1), El-Serag HB(2), Jiao L(3), Lee J(4), Moore D(5), Franco LM(6),
Tavakoli-Tabasi S(7), Tsavachidis S(8), Kuzniarek J(9), Ramsey DJ(9), White
DL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United
States of America ; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center at Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America. (2)Section of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Clinical Epidemiology and Comparative 
Effectiveness Program, Section of Health Services Research (IQuEST), Michael E.
DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United 
States of America ; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center at Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Texas Medical Center Digestive Disease
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (3)Section of Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology, Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Clinical Epidemiology and
Comparative Effectiveness Program, Section of Health Services Research (IQuEST), 
Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas, United States of America ; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center at Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Texas Medical Center
Digestive Disease Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Center for
Translational Research on Inflammatory Diseases (CTRID), Michael E. DeBakey
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(4)Department of Systems Biology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas,
United States of America. (5)Department Molecular and Cell Biology and Department
of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of
America. (6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (7)Section of Infectious
Diseases, Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (8)Dan L. Duncan Cancer
Center at Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(9)Clinical Epidemiology and Comparative Effectiveness Program, Section of Health
Services Research (IQuEST), Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Chronic hepatitis C infection is the leading cause of hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC), a highly lethal malignancy with rapidly increasing prevalence in
the United States. Little is known about genetic variations and HCC risk. This
study aimed to determine if genetic variation in Wnt signaling pathway genes are 
associated with advanced hepatic fibrosis and inflammation risk in a hepatitis C 
virus (HCV) infected population.
METHODS: We performed a genetic association cross-sectional study evaluating
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 58 candidate genes and risk of
FibroSURE-Acti Test determined advanced fibrosis (F3/F4-F4 advanced cases vs.
F0-F3 mild controls) and inflammation (A2/A3-A3 advanced cases vs. A0-A2 mild
controls). We calculated odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
employing multivariate logistic regression. Haplotypes were inferred by the
HAPLO.STAT program, interactions were evaluated using multifactor dimensionality 
reduction (MDR) analysis.
RESULTS: Among 425 chronically HCV-infected male veterans, 155 (37%) had advanced
fibrosis and 180 (42%) had advanced inflammation. Of 3016 SNPs evaluated, eight
were significantly associated with fibrosis risk (e.g., SFRP2 rs11937424: OR =
2.19, 95% CI 1.48-3.23, P = 0.00004), and seven were significantly associated
with inflammation risk (e.g., SFRP1 rs16890282: OR = 2.15, 95% CI 1.39-3.16, P = 
0.0004). MDR analysis identified overweight/obese, SOST rs1405952, SFRP2
rs11937424, and FZD4 rs11234870 as the best interaction model for predicting risk
of fibrosis; whereas race/ethnicity, FZD1 rs1346665, and TBX3 rs1520177 as the
best interaction model for predicting risk of inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms in several genes involved in the Wnt signaling pathway
were associated with hepatic fibrosis or inflammation risk in HCV-infected males.
Additional studies in other multi-ethnic HCV cohorts are needed to validate our
findings in males and to assess if similar associations exist in chronically
HCV-infected females.

PMCID: PMC3875538
PMID: 24386373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013 Dec 19;2(6):e000246. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000246.

Functional, anatomical, and molecular investigation of the cardiac conduction
system and arrhythmogenic atrioventricular ring tissue in the rat heart.

Atkinson AJ(1), Logantha SJ, Hao G, Yanni J, Fedorenko O, Sinha A, Gilbert SH,
Benson AP, Buckley DL, Anderson RH, Boyett MR, Dobrzynski H.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, UK.

BACKGROUND: The cardiac conduction system consists of the sinus node, nodal
extensions, atrioventricular (AV) node, penetrating bundle, bundle branches, and 
Purkinje fibers. Node-like AV ring tissue also exists at the AV junctions, and
the right and left rings unite at the retroaortic node. The study aims were to
(1) construct a 3-dimensional anatomical model of the AV rings and retroaortic
node, (2) map electrical activation in the right ring and study its action
potential characteristics, and (3) examine gene expression in the right ring and 
retroaortic node.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Three-dimensional reconstruction (based on magnetic
resonance imaging, histology, and immunohistochemistry) showed the extent and
organization of the specialized tissues (eg, how the AV rings form the right and 
left nodal extensions into the AV node). Multiextracellular electrode array and
microelectrode mapping of isolated right ring preparations revealed robust
spontaneous activity with characteristic diastolic depolarization. Using laser
microdissection gene expression measured at the mRNA level (using quantitative
PCR) and protein level (using immunohistochemistry and Western blotting) showed
that the right ring and retroaortic node, like the sinus node and AV node but,
unlike ventricular muscle, had statistically significant higher expression of key
transcription factors (including Tbx3, Msx2, and Id2) and ion channels (including
HCN4, Cav3.1, Cav3.2, Kv1.5, SK1, Kir3.1, and Kir3.4) and lower expression of
other key ion channels (Nav1.5 and Kir2.1).
CONCLUSIONS: The AV rings and retroaortic node possess gene expression profiles
similar to that of the AV node. Ion channel expression and electrophysiological
recordings show the AV rings could act as ectopic pacemakers and a source of
atrial tachycardia.

PMCID: PMC3886739
PMID: 24356527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Stem Cell Rev. 2014 Apr;10(2):162-76. doi: 10.1007/s12015-013-9485-9.

Comparative gene expression signature of pig, human and mouse induced pluripotent
stem cell lines reveals insight into pig pluripotency gene networks.

Liu Y(1), Ma Y, Yang JY, Cheng D, Liu X, Ma X, West FD, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shaanxi Center for Stem Cell Engineering and
Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China.

Reported pig induced pluripotent stem cells (piPSCs) have shown either a
bFGF-dependent state with human embryonic stem cell (ESC) and mouse epiblast stem
cell (EpiSC) morphology and molecular features or piPSCs exist in a LIF-dependent
state and resemble fully reprogrammed mouse iPSCs. The features of authentic
piPSCs and molecular events during the reprogramming are largely unknown. In this
study, we assessed the transcriptome profile of multiple piPSC lines derived from
different laboratories worldwide and compared to mouse and human iPSCs to
determine the molecular signaling pathways that might play a central role in
authentic piPSCs. The results demonstrated that the up-regulation of endogenous
epithelial cells adhesion molecule (EpCAM) was correlated with the pluripotent
state of pig pluripotent cells, which could be utilized as a marker for
evaluating pig cell reprogramming. Comparison of key signaling pathways JAK-STAT,
NOTCH, TGFB1, WNT and VEGF in pig, mouse and human iPSCs showed that the core
transcriptional network to maintain pluripotency and self-renewal in pig were
different from that in mouse, but had significant similarities to human. Pig
iPSCs, which lacked expression of specific naïve state markers KLF2/4/5 and TBX3,
but expressed the primed state markers of Otx2 and Fabp7, share defining features
with human ESCs and mouse EpiSCs. The cluster of imprinted genes delineated by
the delta-like homolog 1 gene and the type III iodothyronine deiodinase gene
(DLK1-DIO3) were silenced in piPSCs as previously seen in mouse iPSCs that have
limited ability to contribute to chimaeras. These key differences in naïve state 
gene and imprinting gene expression suggests that so far known piPSC lines may be
more similar to primed state cells. The primed state of these cells may
potentially explain the rare ability of piPSCS to generate chimeras and cloned
offspring.

PMID: 24338594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Sci Rep. 2013 Dec 13;3:3492. doi: 10.1038/srep03492.

Roles for Tbx3 in regulation of two-cell state and telomere elongation in mouse
ES cells.

Dan J(1), Li M(1), Yang J(1), Li J(1), Okuka M(2), Ye X(1), Liu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology; Department of Cell Biology
and Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of South Florida College
of Medicine, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cell cultures exhibit heterogeneity and recently are
discovered to sporadically enter the 2-cell (2C)-embryo state, critical for ES
potency. Zscan4 could mark the sporadic 2C-state of ES cells. However, factors
that regulate the Zscan4(+)/2C state remain to be elucidated. We show that Tbx3
plays a novel role in regulation of Zscan4(+)/2C state. Tbx3 activates 2-cell
genes including Zscan4 and Tcstv1/3, but not vise versa. Ectopic expression of
Tbx3 results in telomere elongation, consistent with a role for Zscan4 in
telomere lengthening. Mechanistically, Tbx3 decreases Dnmt3b and increases Tet2
protein levels, and reduces binding of Dnmt3b to subtelomeres, resulting in
reduced DNA methylation and derepression of genes at subtelomeres, e.g. Zscan4.
These data suggest that Tbx3 can activate Zscan4(+)/2C state by negative
regulation of DNA methylation at repeated sequences, linking to telomere
maintenance and self-renewal of ES cells.

PMCID: PMC3861804
PMID: 24336466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Aug 29;1(3):248-65. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.08.002.
eCollection 2013.

TBX3 Directs Cell-Fate Decision toward Mesendoderm.

Weidgang CE(1), Russell R, Tata PR, Kühl SJ, Illing A, Müller M, Lin Q, Brunner
C, Boeckers TM, Bauer K, Kartikasari AE, Guo Y, Radenz M, Bernemann C, Weiß M,
Seufferlein T, Zenke M, Iacovino M, Kyba M, Schöler HR, Kühl M, Liebau S, Kleger 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm, Germany ;
International Graduate School in Molecular Medicine, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm,
Germany.

Erratum in
    Stem Cell Reports. 2014 May 8;2(5):747.

Cell-fate decisions and pluripotency are dependent on networks of key
transcriptional regulators. Recent reports demonstrated additional functions of
pluripotency-associated factors during early lineage commitment. The T-box
transcription factor TBX3 has been implicated in regulating embryonic stem cell
self-renewal and cardiogenesis. Here, we show that TBX3 is dynamically expressed 
during specification of the mesendoderm lineages in differentiating embryonic
stem cells (ESCs) in vitro and in developing mouse and Xenopus embryos in vivo.
Forced TBX3 expression in ESCs promotes mesendoderm specification by directly
activating key lineage specification factors and indirectly by enhancing
paracrine Nodal/Smad2 signaling. TBX3 loss-of-function analyses in the Xenopus
underline its requirement for mesendoderm lineage commitment. Moreover, we
uncovered a functional redundancy between TBX3 and Tbx2 during Xenopus
gastrulation. Taken together, we define further facets of TBX3 actions and map
TBX3 as an upstream regulator of the mesendoderm transcriptional program during
gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC3849240
PMID: 24319661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2013;77(12):2397-404. Epub 2013 Dec 7.

Apicidin-resistant HA22T hepatocellular carcinoma cells strongly activated the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway and MMP-2 expression via the IGF-IR/PI3K/Akt
signaling pathway enhancing cell metastatic effect.

Hsieh CH(1), Cheng LH, Hsu HH, Ho TJ, Tu CC, Lin YM, Chen MC, Tsai FJ, Hsieh YL, 
Huang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Nutritional Biotechnology, Asia University.

The IGF-IR/PI3K/Akt signaling pathway inhibited GSK3-ß activity by
phosphorylation and this promoted ß-catenin nuclear localization. Our previous
study indicated that ß-catenin mRNA level was significantly higher in tumor areas
than in non-tumor ones, especially in late pathologic stage tumors. However,
ß-catenin inhibition resulted in significantly suppressed migration and invasion 
ability of HA22T cells. Thus, Wnt/ß-catenin pathway over-activation might be
involved in metastatic enhancement of apicidin-resistant HA22T cell metastasis.
Apicidin-resistant (AR) HA22T cells showed higher ß-catenin nuclear accumulation 
and significantly decreased GSK-3-ß protein level, in relation to parental cells.
Results also indicated that AR cells increased abundantly in Tbx3, a downstream
target of Wnt/ß-catenin that it is implicated in liver cancer. AR cells also
inhibited the MEK/ERK/PEA3 pathway which promoted MMP-2 activation. But,
apicidin-resistant effect was totally reversed by LY294002 and AG1024. In
conclusion, Apicidin-R HA22T cells activated the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and
induced, MMP-2 expression via IGF-IR/PI3K/Akt signaling further enhancing cell
the metastatic effects.

PMID: 24317053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cell Signal. 2014 Mar;26(3):580-93. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.11.015. Epub 2013
Dec 6.

A new PKCa/ß/TBX3/E-cadherin pathway is involved in PLCe-regulated invasion and
migration in human bladder cancer cells.

Du HF(1), Ou LP(1), Yang X(1), Song XD(1), Fan YR(1), Tan B(2), Luo CL(3), Wu
XH(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Diagnostics Medicine designated by the Ministry of
Education, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China. (3)The Key Laboratory of
Diagnostics Medicine designated by the Ministry of Education, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
luochunli79@126.com.

Although PLCe has been verified to enhance bladder cancer cell invasion, the
signaling pathways responsible for this remain elusive. Protein kinase C
(PKCa/ß), which is involved in cancer development and progression, has been
demonstrated to be activated by PLCe. However, the roles of PKCa/ß in
PLCe-mediated bladder carcinoma cell invasion and migration have not been clearly
identified. In this study, to determine what role PKCa/ß plays in PLCe-mediated
bladder cancer cell invasion and migration, we silenced PLCe gene by
adenovirus-shPLCe in T24 and BIU-87 cells and then revealed that it significantly
inhibited cell migration and invasion. Further research indicated that cell
bio-function of PLCe-regulated was related with PKCa/ß activity. These in vitro
findings were supported by data from bladder carcinoma patient samples. In 35
case bladder cancer tumor samples, PLCe-overexpressing tumors showed
significantly higher positive rates of PKCa/ß membrane immunohistochemistry
staining than PLCe-low-expressing tumors. Mechanistically, study further showed
that PLCe knockdown gene induced E-cadherin expression and decreased TBX3
expression, both of which were dependent on PKCa/ß activity. In addition, we
demonstrated that treatment cells with TBX3-specific shorting hairpin RNA (shRNA)
up-regulated E-cadherin expression and inhibited cell invasion/migration.
Moreover, in in vivo experiment, immunohistochemistry analysis of
Ad-shPLCe-infected tumor tissue showed low expression levels of phospho-PKCa/ß
and TBX3 and high expression levels of E-cadherin compared with those of the
control group. In summary, our findings uncover that PKCa/ß is critical for
PLCe-mediated cancer cell invasion and migration and provide valuable insights
for current and future Ad-shPLCe and PKCa/ß clinical trials.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24316392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Dec 5;13(6):663-75. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.11.015.

Induction of a human pluripotent state with distinct regulatory circuitry that
resembles preimplantation epiblast.

Chan YS(1), Göke J, Ng JH, Lu X, Gonzales KA, Tan CP, Tng WQ, Hong ZZ, Lim YS, Ng
HH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore 138672,
Singapore. Electronic address: chanysw@gis.a-star.edu.sg.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are derived from the inner cell mass of the
blastocyst. Despite sharing the common property of pluripotency, hESCs are
notably distinct from epiblast cells of the preimplantation blastocyst. Here we
use a combination of three small-molecule inhibitors to sustain hESCs in a LIF
signaling-dependent hESC state (3iL hESCs) with elevated expression of NANOG and 
epiblast-enriched genes such as KLF4, DPPA3, and TBX3. Genome-wide transcriptome 
analysis confirms that the expression signature of 3iL hESCs shares similarities 
with native preimplantation epiblast cells. We also show that 3iL hESCs have a
distinct epigenetic landscape, characterized by derepression of preimplantation
epiblast genes. Using genome-wide binding profiles of NANOG and OCT4, we identify
enhancers that contribute to rewiring of the regulatory circuitry. In summary,
our study identifies a distinct hESC state with defined regulatory circuitry that
will facilitate future analysis of human preimplantation embryogenesis and
pluripotency.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24315441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 18;8(11):e79845. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079845.
eCollection 2013.

Gli activity is critical at multiple stages of embryonic mammary and nipple
development.

Chandramouli A(1), Hatsell SJ, Pinderhughes A, Koetz L, Cowin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York, United States of America ; The Ronald O. Perelman Department of
Dermatology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York, United
States of America.

Gli3 is a transcriptional regulator of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling that functions as 
a repressor (Gli3(R)) or activator (Gli3(A)) depending upon cellular context.
Previously, we have shown that Gli3(R) is required for the formation of mammary
placodes #3 and #5. Here, we report that this early loss of Gli3 results in
abnormal patterning of two critical regulators: Bmp4 and Tbx3, within the
presumptive mammary rudiment (MR) #3 zone. We also show that Gli3 loss leads to
failure to maintain mammary mesenchyme specification and loss of epithelial Wnt
signaling, which impairs the later development of remaining MRs: MR#2 showed
profound evagination and ectopic hairs formed within the presumptive areola; MR#4
showed mild invagination defects and males showed inappropriate retention of
mammary buds in Gli3(xt/xt) mice. Importantly, mice genetically manipulated to
misactivate Hh signaling displayed the same phenotypic spectrum demonstrating
that the repressor function of Gli3(R) is essential during multiple stages of
mammary development. In contrast, positive Hh signaling occurs during nipple
development in a mesenchymal cuff around the lactiferous duct and in muscle cells
of the nipple sphincter. Collectively, these data show that repression of Hh
signaling by Gli3(R) is critical for early placodal patterning and later mammary 
mesenchyme specification whereas positive Hh signaling occurs during nipple
development.

PMCID: PMC3832531
PMID: 24260306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Anim Sci Biotechnol. 2013 Oct 29;4(1):40. doi: 10.1186/2049-1891-4-40.

Culture conditions for equine bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells and expression
of key transcription factors during their differentiation into osteoblasts.

Glynn ER, Londono AS, Zinn SA, Hoagland TA, Govoni KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Connecticut, 3636 Horsebarn Road
Ext,, Unit 4040, Storrs, CT 06269-4040, USA. kristen.govoni@uconn.edu.

BACKGROUND: The use of equine bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSC) is a
novel method to improve fracture healing in horses. However, additional research 
is needed to identify optimal culture conditions and to determine the mechanisms 
involved in regulating BMSC differentiation into osteoblasts. The objectives of
the experiments were to determine: 1) if autologous or commercial serum is better
for proliferation and differentiation of equine BMSC into osteoblasts, and 2) the
expression of key transcription factors during the differentiation of equine BMSC
into osteoblasts. Equine BMSC were isolated from the sterna of 3 horses, treated 
with purchased fetal bovine serum (FBS) or autologous horse serum (HS), and cell 
proliferation determined. To induce osteoblast differentiation, cells were
incubated with L-ascorbic acid-2-phosphate and glycerol-2-phosphate in the
presence or absence of human bone morphogenetic protein2 (BMP2), dexamethasone
(DEX), or combination of the two. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, a marker
of osteoblast differentiation, was determined by ELISA. Total RNA was isolated
from differentiating BMSC between d 0 to 18 to determine expression of
runt-related transcription factor2 (Runx2), osterix (Osx), and T-box3 (Tbx3).
Data were analyzed by ANOVA.
RESULTS: Relative to control, FBS and HS increased cell number (133<U+2009>±<U+2009>5 and
116<U+2009>±<U+2009>5%, respectively; P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU)
incorporation (167<U+2009>±<U+2009>6 and 120<U+2009>±<U+2009>6%, respectively; P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). Treatment with DEX
increased ALP activity compared with control (1,638<U+2009>±<U+2009>38%; P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). In the
absence and presence of Dex, BMP-2 did not alter ALP activity (P<U+2009>><U+2009>0.8).
Runt-related transcription factor2 expression increased 3-fold (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) by d 6
of culture. Osterix expression increased 9-fold (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) by d 18 of culture.
Expression of Tbx3 increased 1.8-fold at d 3 (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01); however expression was
reduced 4-fold at d 18 (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Dexamethasone, but not BMP-2, is required for differentiation of
equine BMSC into osteoblasts. In addition, expression of Runx2 and osterix
increased and expression of Tbx3 is reduced during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3874597
PMID: 24169030  [PubMed]


97. Stem Cells. 2014 Jan;32(1):204-15. doi: 10.1002/stem.1564.

Critical components of the pluripotency network are targets for the p300/CBP
interacting protein (p/CIP) in embryonic stem cells.

Chitilian JM(1), Thillainadesan G, Manias JL, Chang WY, Walker E, Isovic M,
Stanford WL, Torchia J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The London Regional Cancer Program and the Lawson
Health Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada; Department of Biochemistry,
The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

p/CIP, also known as steroid receptor coactivator 3 (SRC-3)/Nuclear Receptor
Coactivator 3 (NCoA3), is a transcriptional coactivator that binds liganded
nuclear hormone receptors, as well as other transcription factors, and
facilitates transcription through direct recruitment of accessory factors. We
have found that p/CIP is highly expressed in undifferentiated mouse embryonic
stem cells (mESCs) and is downregulated during differentiation. siRNA-mediated
knockdown of p/CIP decreased transcript levels of Nanog, but not Oct4 or Sox2.
Microarray expression analysis showed that Klf4, Tbx3, and Dax-1 are
significantly downregulated in mESCs when p/CIP is knocked down. Subsequent
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis demonstrated that Tbx3, Klf4, and
Dax-1 are direct transcriptional targets of p/CIP. Using the piggyBac
transposition system, a mouse ESC line that expresses Flag-p/CIP in a
doxycycline-dependent manner was generated. p/CIP overexpression increased the
level of target genes and promoted the formation of undifferentiated colonies.
Collectively, these results indicate that p/CIP contributes to the maintenance of
ESC pluripotency through direct regulation of essential pluripotency genes. To
better understand the mechanism by which p/CIP functions in ESC pluripotency, we 
integrated our ChIP and transcriptome data with published protein-protein
interaction and promoter occupancy data to draft a p/CIP gene regulatory network.
The p/CIP gene regulatory network identifies various feed-forward modules
including one in which p/CIP activates members of the extended pluripotency
network, demonstrating that p/CIP is a component of this extended network.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24115386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cancer. 2013 Oct 7;12(1):117. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-117.

The T-box transcription factor, TBX3, is sufficient to promote melanoma formation
and invasion.

Peres J(1), Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, Cape Town 7925, South Africa. Sharon.prince@uct.ac.za.

The T-box transcription factor, TBX3, is overexpressed in several cancers and has
been proposed as a chemotherapeutic target. Several lines of evidence suggest
that TBX3 may be a key contributor to malignant melanoma, a highly aggressive and
intractable disease. Using in vitro and in vivo assays we demonstrate here for
the first time that overexpressing TBX3 in non-tumourigenic early stage melanoma 
cells is sufficient to promote tumour formation and invasion. Furthermore, we
show that TBX3 may play an important role as a reciprocal switch between
substrate dependent cell proliferation and tumour invasion.

PMCID: PMC3851469
PMID: 24098938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Stem Cell Res. 2013 Nov;11(3):1299-313. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.09.001. Epub 2013
Sep 13.

MicroRNA-137 represses Klf4 and Tbx3 during differentiation of mouse embryonic
stem cells.

Jiang K(1), Ren C, Nair VD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029,
USA.

MicroRNA-137 (miR-137) has been shown to play an important role in the
differentiation of neural stem cells. Embryonic stem (ES) cells have the
potential to differentiate into different cell types including neurons; however, 
the contribution of miR-137 in the maintenance and differentiation of ES cells
remains unknown. Here, we show that miR-137 is mainly expressed in ES cells at
the mitotic phase of the cell cycle and highly upregulated during
differentiation. We identify that ES cell transcription factors, Klf4 and Tbx3,
are downstream targets of miR-137, and we show that endogenous miR-137 represses 
the 3' untranslated regions of Klf4 and Tbx3. Transfection of ES cells with
mature miR-137 RNA duplexes led to a significant reduction in cell proliferation 
and the expression of Klf4, Tbx3, and other self-renewal genes. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that increased miR-137 expression accelerates differentiation of ES
cells in vitro. Loss of miR-137 during ES cell differentiation significantly
impeded neuronal gene expression and morphogenesis. Taken together, our results
suggest that miR-137 regulates ES cell proliferation and differentiation by
repressing the expression of downstream targets, including Klf4 and Tbx3.

© 2013.

PMID: 24084696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(9):e1003785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003785. Epub 2013 Sep 
19.

MicroRNA-17-92, a direct Ap-2a transcriptional target, modulates T-box factor
activity in orofacial clefting.

Wang J(1), Bai Y, Li H, Greene SB, Klysik E, Yu W, Schwartz RJ, Williams TJ,
Martin JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2013 Dec;9(12).
doi:10.1371/annotation/90602bc3-5052-49ac-a7fb-33210d7c8b4d.

Among the most common human congenital anomalies, cleft lip and palate (CL/P)
affects up to 1 in 700 live births. MicroRNA (miR)s are small, non-coding RNAs
that repress gene expression post-transcriptionally. The miR-17-92 cluster
encodes six miRs that have been implicated in human cancers and heart
development. We discovered that miR-17-92 mutant embryos had severe craniofacial 
phenotypes, including incompletely penetrant CL/P and mandibular hypoplasia.
Embryos that were compound mutant for miR-17-92 and the related miR-106b-25
cluster had completely penetrant CL/P. Expression of Tbx1 and Tbx3, the
DiGeorge/velo-cardio-facial (DGS) and Ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS) disease genes,
was expanded in miR-17-92 mutant craniofacial structures. Both Tbx1 and Tbx3 had 
functional miR seed sequences that mediated gene repression. Analysis of
miR-17-92 regulatory regions uncovered conserved and functional AP-2a recognition
elements that directed miR-17-92 expression. Together, our data indicate that
miR-17-92 modulates expression of critical T-box transcriptional regulators
during midface development and is itself a target of Bmp-signaling and the
craniofacial pioneer factor AP-2a. Our data are the first genetic evidence that
an individual miR or miR cluster is functionally important in mammalian CL/P.

PMCID: PMC3777996
PMID: 24068957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Nov;24(22):3569-76. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-05-0273. Epub 2013
Sep 11.

The oncogenic TBX3 is a downstream target and mediator of the TGF-ß1 signaling
pathway.

Li J(1), Weinberg MS, Zerbini L, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, 7925 Cape Town, South Africa International Centre for Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology and Division of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Cape Town, 7925 Cape Town, South Africa Antiviral Gene
Therapy Research Unit, Department of Molecular Medicine and Haematology,
University of the Witwatersrand Medical School, Parktown 2193, South Africa.

The T-box transcription factor, TBX3, plays an important role in embryonic
development, and haploinsufficiency of TBX3 causes ulnar-mammary syndrome.
Overexpression of TBX3, on the other hand, is associated with several cancers,
and preliminary evidence suggests that increased levels of TBX3 may inhibit cell 
proliferation but promote tumor migration and invasion. Although this suggests
that deregulated levels of TBX3 are deleterious in development and promotes
disease, very little is known about the signaling pathways that regulate TBX3
expression. Here we show that overexpressing TBX3 inhibits proliferative ability 
while promoting the migration of breast epithelial cells. We demonstrate that the
transforming growth factor ß1 (TGF-ß1) pathway up-regulates TBX3 protein and mRNA
levels and show a detailed transcriptional mechanism by which this occurs. Using 
in vitro and in vivo assays, we show that Smad3/4 and JunB bind and cooperatively
regulate TBX3 promoter activity through a Smad-binding element at -67 base pairs.
Further, we show that TBX3 plays a pivotal role in mediating the
antiproliferative and promigratory role of TGF-ß1 in breast epithelial and skin
keratinocytes. This study identifies the TGF-ß1 signaling pathway as a
potentially important player in the regulation of TBX3 in development and cancer.

PMCID: PMC3826994
PMID: 24025717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 25;8(7):e70149. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070149. Print 2013.

Lack of genetic interaction between Tbx20 and Tbx3 in early mouse heart
development.

Gavrilov S(1), Harvey RP, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York, United States of America.

Members of the T-box family of transcription factors are important regulators
orchestrating the complex regionalization of the developing mammalian heart.
Individual mutations in Tbx20 and Tbx3 cause distinct congenital heart
abnormalities in the mouse: Tbx20 mutations result in failure of heart looping,
developmental arrest and lack of chamber differentiation, while hearts of Tbx3
mutants progress further, loop normally but show atrioventricular convergence and
outflow tract defects. The two genes have overlapping areas of expression in the 
atrioventricular canal and outflow tract of the heart but their potential genetic
interaction has not been previously investigated. In this study we produced
compound mutants to investigate potential genetic interactions at the earliest
stages of heart development. We find that Tbx20; Tbx3 double heterozygous mice
are viable and fertile with no apparent abnormalities, while double homozygous
mutants are embryonic lethal by midgestation. Double homozygous mutant embryos
display abnormal cardiac morphogenesis, lack of heart looping, expression
patterns of cardiac genes and time of death that are indistinguishable from Tbx20
homozygous mutants. Prior to death, the double homozygotes show an overall
developmental delay similar to Tbx3 homozygous mutants. Thus the effects of Tbx20
are epistatic to Tbx3 in the heart but Tbx3 is epistatic to Tbx20 with respect to
developmental delay.

PMCID: PMC3723716
PMID: 23936153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Nov;383(1-2):161-71. doi: 10.1007/s11010-013-1764-x. Epub 
2013 Jul 23.

Genetic isolation of stem cell-derived pacemaker-nodal cardiac myocytes.

Hashem SI(1), Claycomb WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, 1901 Perdido Street, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.

Dysfunction of the cardiac pacemaker tissues due to genetic defects, acquired
diseases, or aging results in arrhythmias. When arrhythmias occur, artificial
pacemaker implants are used for treatment. However, the numerous limitations of
electronic implants have prompted studies of biological pacemakers that can
integrate into the myocardium providing a permanent cure. Embryonic stem (ES)
cells cultured as three-dimensional (3D) spheroid aggregates termed embryoid
bodies possess the ability to generate all cardiac myocyte subtypes. Here, we
report the use of a SHOX2 promoter and a Cx30.2 enhancer to genetically identify 
and isolate ES cell-derived sinoatrial node (SAN) and atrioventricular node (AVN)
cells, respectively. The ES cell-derived Shox2 and Cx30.2 cardiac myocytes
exhibit a spider cell morphology and high intracellular calcium loading
characteristic of pacemaker-nodal myocytes. These cells express abundant levels
of pacemaker genes such as endogenous HCN4, Cx45, Cx30.2, Tbx2, and Tbx3. These
cells were passaged, frozen, and thawed multiple times while maintaining their
pacemaker-nodal phenotype. When cultured as 3D aggregates in an attempt to create
a critical mass that simulates in vivo architecture, these cell lines exhibited
an increase in the expression level of key regulators of cardiovascular
development, such as GATA4 and GATA6 transcription factors. In addition, the
aggregate culture system resulted in an increase in the expression level of
several ion channels that play a major role in the spontaneous diastolic
depolarization characteristic of pacemaker cells. We have isolated pure
populations of SAN and AVN cells that will be useful tools for generating
biological pacemakers.

PMID: 23877224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 2;8(7):e67841. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067841. Print 2013.

Mouse TBX3 mutants suggest novel molecular mechanisms for Ulnar-mammary syndrome.

Frank DU(1), Emechebe U, Thomas KR, Moon AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United
States of America.

The transcription factor TBX3 plays critical roles in development and TBX3
mutations in humans cause Ulnar-mammary syndrome. Efforts to understand how
altered TBX3 dosage and function disrupt the development of numerous structures
have been hampered by embryonic lethality of mice bearing presumed null alleles. 
We generated a novel conditional null allele of Tbx3: after Cre-mediated
recombination, no mRNA or protein is detectable. In contrast, a putative null
allele in which exons 1-3 are deleted produces a truncated protein that is
abnormally located in the cytoplasm. Heterozygotes and homozygotes for this
allele have different phenotypes than their counterparts bearing a true null
allele. Our observations with these alleles in mice, and the different types of
TBX3 mutations observed in human ulnar-mammary syndrome, suggest that not all
mutations observed in humans generate functionally null alleles. The possibility 
that mechanisms in addition to TBX3 haploinsufficiency may cause UMS or other
malformations merits investigation in the human UMS population.

PMCID: PMC3699485
PMID: 23844108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Exp Mol Pathol. 2013 Oct;95(2):156-65. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2013.06.012. Epub
2013 Jul 4.

Impact of LIF (leukemia inhibitory factor) expression in malignant melanoma.

Kuphal S(1), Wallner S, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Molecular Pathology, University of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany. Electronic address: Silke.Kuphal@klinik.uni-regensburg.de.

Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) signaling regulates cellular processes to
maintain the self-renewal and pluripotency of embryonic stem (ES) cells.
Independent of these capabilities, LIF was also identified to be responsible for 
cancer development and progression. However, its detailed cellular function in
cancer remains unclear thus far. We found LIF to be expressed in melanoma cell
lines of primary and metastatic origin and in melanoma tissue. We further
elucidated stimuli that are responsible for the high expression levels of LIF.
Interestingly, hypoxia, specifically through HIF-1a, is involved in regulating
LIF. Furthermore, our data showed that the signaling of LIF was not mediated by
the classically described pathway via STAT3, but rather through BMP4 and BMP7. We
hypothesize that the co-expression of LIF and BMP is necessary for a
de-differentiated cancer phenotype. Ancillary to BMP4 and BMP7, classical stem
cell proteins, e.g., SOX2, NANOG, OCT3/4 and GBX2, are regulated by LIF. We
therefore speculate that LIF can induce a typical "cancer stem cell"-like
behavior, as the appropriate genes are regulated by LIF. Particularly, the
expression of these genes has been proposed as a driving force for tumorigenesis 
and the initiation of metastasis. Notably, LIF has an important role not only for
ES cells but also for cancer development. Melanoblast-related cells (MBrcs),
which resemble the neural crest precursor cells of melanocytes, expressed LIF in 
minor amounts compared to normal human melanocytes. These data, along with the
data that LIF is upregulated in melanoma cell lines compared to melanocytes,
strongly indicate that LIF is important for the stabilization of the melanoma
phenotype. To elucidate the role of LIF in cellular melanoma behavior, we
analyzed proliferation, attachment, migration and colony formation after
silencing LIF by siRNA, and found all four characteristics restricted. In
summary, we can show that LIF is an important factor in melanoma progression.

© 2013.

PMID: 23831429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cardiovasc Res. 2013 Oct 1;100(1):160-9. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvt164. Epub 2013 Jun
19.

Characterization of a right atrial subsidiary pacemaker and acceleration of the
pacing rate by HCN over-expression.

Morris GM(1), D'Souza A, Dobrzynski H, Lei M, Choudhury M, Billeter R, Kryukova
Y, Robinson RB, Kingston PA, Boyett MR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, Core
Technology Facility, 46 Grafton Street, Manchester M13 9NT, UK.

AIMS: Although the right atrium (RA contains subsidiary atrial pacemaker (SAP)
tissue that can take over from the sinoatrial node (SAN) in sick sinus syndrome
(SSS), SAP tissue is bradycardic. Little is known about SAP tissue and one aim of
the study was to characterize ion channel expression to obtain insight into SAP
pacemaker mechanisms. A second aim was to determine whether HCN over-expression
(a 'biopacemaker'-like strategy) can accelerate the pacemaker rate producing a
pacemaker that is similar in nature to the SAN.
METHODS AND RESULTS: SAP tissue was isolated from the rat and the leading
pacemaker site was characterized. Cell size at the leading pacemaker site in the 
SAP was smaller than in the RA and comparable to that in the SAN. mRNA levels
showed the SAP to be similar to, but distinct from, the SAN. For example, in the 
SAN and SAP, expression of Tbx3 and HCN1 was higher and Nav1.5 and Cx43 lower
than in the RA. Organ-cultured SAP tissue beat spontaneously, but at a slower
rate than the SAN. Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer of HCN2 and the chimeric
protein HCN212 significantly increased the pacemaker rate of the SAP close to
that of the native SAN, but HCN4 was ineffective.
CONCLUSION: SAP tissue near the inferior vena cava is bradycardic, but shares
characteristics with the SAN. Pacing can be accelerated by the over-expression of
HCN2 or HCN212. This provides proof of concept for the use of SAP tissue as a
substrate for biopacemaking in the treatment of SSS.

PMID: 23787003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Nov 1;22(21):2915-26. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0123. Epub 2013 
Jul 26.

Shox2 regulates the pacemaker gene program in embryoid bodies.

Hashem SI(1), Lam ML, Mihardja SS, White SM, Lee RJ, Claycomb WC.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center , New Orleans, Louisiana.

The pacemaker tissues of the heart are a complex set of specialized cells that
initiate the rhythmic heartbeat. The sinoatrial node (SAN) serves as the primary 
pacemaker, whereas the atrioventricular node can serve as a subsidiary pacemaker 
in cases of SAN failure or block. The elucidation of genetic networks regulating 
the development of these tissues is crucial for understanding the mechanisms
underlying arrhythmias and for the design of targeted therapies. Here we report
temporal and spatial self-organized formation of the pacemaker and contracting
tissues in three-dimensional aggregate cultures of mouse embryonic stem cells
termed embryoid bodies (EBs). Using genetic marker expression and
electrophysiological analyses we demonstrate that in EBs the pacemaker potential 
originates from a localized population of cells and propagates into the adjacent 
contracting region forming a functional syncytium. When Shox2, a major
determinant of the SAN genetic pathway, was ablated we observed substantial
slowing of spontaneous contraction rates and an altered gene expression pattern
including downregulation of HCN4, Cx45, Tbx2, Tbx3, and bone morphogenetic
protein 4 (BMP4); and upregulation of Cx40, Cx43, Nkx2.5, and Tbx5. This
phenotype could be rescued by adding BMP4 to Shox2 knockout EBs in culture from
days 6 to 16 of differentiation. When wild-type EBs were treated with Noggin, a
potent BMP4 inhibitor, we observed a phenotype consistent with the Shox2 knockout
EB. Altogether, we have generated a reproducible in vitro model that will be an
invaluable tool for studying the molecular pathways regulating the development of
cardiac pacemaker tissues.

PMID: 23767866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Circ Res. 2013 Aug 2;113(4):389-98. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.301283. Epub 2013
Jun 10.

Embryonic stem cell-derived CD166+ precursors develop into fully functional
sinoatrial-like cells.

Scavone A(1), Capilupo D, Mazzocchi N, Crespi A, Zoia S, Campostrini G, Bucchi A,
Milanesi R, Baruscotti M, Benedetti S, Antonini S, Messina G, DiFrancesco D,
Barbuti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy.

RATIONALE: A cell-based biological pacemaker is based on the differentiation of
stem cells and the selection of a population displaying the molecular and
functional properties of native sinoatrial node (SAN) cardiomyocytes. So far,
such selection has been hampered by the lack of proper markers. CD166 is
specifically but transiently expressed in the mouse heart tube and sinus venosus,
the prospective SAN.
OBJECTIVE: We have explored the possibility of using CD166 expression for
isolating SAN progenitors from differentiating embryonic stem cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We found that in embryonic day 10.5 mouse hearts, CD166 and 
HCN4, markers of the pacemaker tissue, are coexpressed. Sorting embryonic stem
cells for CD166 expression at differentiation day 8 selects a population of
pacemaker precursors. CD166+ cells express high levels of genes involved in SAN
development (Tbx18, Tbx3, Isl-1, Shox2) and function (Cx30.2, HCN4, HCN1, CaV1.3)
and low levels of ventricular genes (Cx43, Kv4.2, HCN2, Nkx2.5). In culture,
CD166+ cells form an autorhythmic syncytium composed of cells morphologically
similar to and with the electrophysiological properties of murine SAN myocytes.
Isoproterenol increases (+57%) and acetylcholine decreases (-23%) the beating
rate of CD166-selected cells, which express the ß-adrenergic and muscarinic
receptors. In cocultures, CD166-selected cells are able to pace neonatal
ventricular myocytes at a rate faster than their own. Furthermore, CD166+ cells
have lost pluripotency genes and do not form teratomas in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated for the first time the isolation of a nonteratogenic
population of cardiac precursors able to mature and form a fully functional
SAN-like tissue.

PMID: 23753573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cell Tissue Res. 2013 Sep;353(3):425-33. doi: 10.1007/s00441-013-1653-3. Epub
2013 Jun 4.

Expression of miR-206 during the initiation of mammary gland development.

Lee MJ(1), Yoon KS, Cho KW, Kim KS, Jung HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division in Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Department of Oral Biology,
Brain Korea 21 Project, Oral Science Research Center, College of Dentistry,
Yonsei Center of Biotechnology, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemoon-Gu,
Seoul, 120-752, Korea.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small noncoding RNAs that control gene
expression by targeting mRNAs and triggering either translational repression or
RNA degradation. The aberrant expression of miRNAs might be involved in human
diseases, including cancer. The expression of miR-206 in estrogen receptor alpha 
(ER-a)-positive human breast cancer tissues is well known. However, the
expression and regulation of miR-206 in the developing mammary gland has not yet 
been studied. To understand the effects of miR-206 on mammary gland development, 
we have profiled gene expression in scramble-transfected and
miR-206-overexpressing developing mammary buds. The genes that are potentially
regulated by miR-206 in the mammary epithelium and/or mesenchyme, such as
Tachykinin1 and Gata3, are known to be breast cancer markers. The expression of
Wnt, which is involved in gland positioning, and of the transcription factors
Tbx3 and Lef1, which are essential for mammary gland development, changes after
miR-206 overexpression. Using a mammary bud in vitro culture system, we have
demonstrated that miR-206 acts downstream of ER-a during mammary gland growth.
Thus, miR-206 might be a novel candidate for morphogenesis during the initiation 
of mammary gland formation and the regulation of genes related to mammary gland
development and breast cancer.

PMID: 23733266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jul;161A(7):1797-802. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36054. Epub 2013
May 24.

Contiguous gene deletion of TBX5 and TBX3 leads to a varible phenotype with
combined features of Holt-Oram and ulnar-mammary syndromes.

Alby C(1), Bessieres B, Bieth E, Attie-Bitach T, Fermont L, Citony I, Razavi F,
Vekemans M, Escande F, Manouvrier S, Malan V, Amiel J.

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, Hôpital Necker-Enfant Malades, AP-HP,
Paris, France.

We report on a combination of congenital malformations in a mother and her fetus 
harboring a heterozygous deletion encompassing the TBX5 and TBX3 genes, which are
disease-causing in Holt-Oram and ulnar-mammary syndromes, respectively. This
contiguous gene syndrome is reminiscent of Okihiro syndrome and emphasizes the
importance of array-CGH as a diagnostic tool in atypical syndromic presentations 
with intrafamilial variability.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23713051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Development. 2013 Jun;140(11):2299-309. doi: 10.1242/dev.094524.

Inhibition of Sox2-dependent activation of Shh in the ventral diencephalon by
Tbx3 is required for formation of the neurohypophysis.

Trowe MO(1), Zhao L, Weiss AC, Christoffels V, Epstein DJ, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30625
Hannover, Germany.

Tbx2 and Tbx3 are two highly related members of the T-box transcription factor
gene family that regulate patterning and differentiation of a number of tissue
rudiments in the mouse. Both genes are partially co-expressed in the ventral
diencephalon and the infundibulum; however, a functional requirement in murine
pituitary development has not been reported. Here, we show by genetic lineage
tracing that Tbx2(+) cells constitute the precursor population of the
neurohypophysis. However, Tbx2 is dispensable for neurohypophysis development as 
revealed by normal formation of this organ in Tbx2-deficient mice. By contrast,
loss of Tbx3 from the ventral diencephalon results in a failure to establish the 
Tbx2(+) domain in this region, and a lack of evagination of the infundibulum and 
formation of the neurohypophysis. Rathke's pouch is severely hypoplastic,
exhibits defects in dorsoventral patterning, and degenerates after E12.5. In
Tbx3-deficient embryos, the ventral diencephalon is hyperproliferative and
displays an abnormal cellular architecture, probably resulting from a failure to 
repress transcription of Shh. We further show that Tbx3 and Tbx2 repress Shh by
sequestering the SRY box-containing transcription factor Sox2 away from a Shh
forebrain enhancer (SBE2), thus preventing its activation. These data suggest
that Tbx3 is required in the ventral diencephalon to establish a Shh(-) domain to
allow formation of the infundibulum.

PMCID: PMC3653555
PMID: 23674600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Biomark Med. 2013 Apr;7(2):198.

Variations in four genes may lead to an increase in colorectal cancer.

Nagda P.

PMID: 23667939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. APMIS. 2014 Feb;122(2):161-3. doi: 10.1111/apm.12106. Epub 2013 May 8.

Mutations in exon 2 of TBX3 are rare in common human tumors.

Yoo NJ(1), Kim MS, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cancer Evolution Research Center, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

PMID: 23656610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jun;164A(6):1347-71. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35896. Epub 2013 
Apr 30.

Development of the human heart.

Sylva M(1), van den Hoff MJ, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology & Physiology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Molecular and genetic studies around the turn of this century have revolutionized
the field of cardiac development. We now know that the primary heart tube, as
seen in the early embryo contains little more than the precursors for the left
ventricle, whereas the precursor cells for the remainder of the cardiac
components are continuously added, to both the venous and arterial pole of the
heart tube, from a single center of growth outside the heart. While the primary
heart tube is growing by addition of cells, it does not show significant cell
proliferation, until chamber differentiation and expansion starts locally in the 
tube, by which the chambers balloon from the primary heart tube. The
transcriptional repressors Tbx2 and Tbx3 locally repress the chamber-specific
program of gene expression, by which these regions are allowed to differentiate
into the distinct components of the conduction system. Molecular genetic lineage 
analyses have been extremely valuable to assess the distinct developmental origin
of the various component parts of the heart, which currently can be unambiguously
identified by their unique molecular phenotype. Despite the enormous advances in 
our knowledge on cardiac development, even the most common congenital cardiac
malformations are only poorly understood. The challenge of the newly developed
molecular genetic techniques is to unveil the basic gene regulatory networks
underlying cardiac morphogenesis.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23633400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Stem Cell Rev. 2013 Oct;9(5):700-8. doi: 10.1007/s12015-013-9439-2.

Tbx3 and Nr5a2 play important roles in pig pluripotent stem cells.

Wang J(1), Gu Q, Hao J, Jia Y, Xue B, Jin H, Ma J, Wei R, Hai T, Kong Q, Bou G,
Xia P, Zhou Q, Wang L, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Northeast Agricultural University of China, Harbin,
150030, People's Republic China.

Pigs are valuable animal models in pre-clinical research due to their anatomical 
and similarity to human-beings. Little is known about porcine embryonic
development and porcine pluripotent stem cells. Recently, porcine-induced
pluripotent stem cells (piPSCs) have been generated with Oct4 (Pou5f1), Sox2,
Klf4 and c-Myc (termed OSKM, 4 F). Here, we found two other factors (Tbx3 and
Nr5a2, termed TN), with important roles in piPSCs induction. They could improve
the generation of piPSCs by supplementing these two factors on the basis of OSKM 
(OSKMTN, 6 F) orientated to mouse ESCs-like. Surprisingly, Nr5a2 alone could
induce piPSCs formation in the presence or absence of c-Myc. These results
suggested that Tbx3 and Nr5a2 may have vital roles in Sus scrofa and proposed new
insights into pig pluripotent stem cells.

PMID: 23625189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2013 Jun;18(2):143-7. doi:
10.1007/s10911-013-9282-8. Epub 2013 Apr 28.

The T-box transcription factors TBX2 and TBX3 in mammary gland development and
breast cancer.

Douglas NC(1), Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Reproductive
Endocrinology and Infertility, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032, USA.

TBX2 and TBX3, closely related members of the T-box family of transcription
factor genes, are expressed in mammary tissue in both humans and mice. Ulnar
mammary syndrome (UMS), an autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in
TBX3, underscores the importance of TBX3 in human breast development, while
abnormal mammary gland development in Tbx2 or Tbx3 mutant mice provides models
for experimental investigation. In addition to their roles in mammary
development, aberrant expression of TBX2 and TBX3 is associated with breast
cancer. TBX2 is preferentially amplified in BRCA1/2-associated breast cancers and
TBX3 overexpression has been associated with advanced stage disease and
estrogen-receptor-positive breast tumors. The regulation of Tbx2 and Tbx3 and the
downstream targets of these genes in development and disease are not as yet fully
elucidated. However, it is clear that the two genes play unique,
context-dependent roles both in mammary gland development and in mammary
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3692603
PMID: 23624936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 16;8(4):e60907. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060907. Print 2013.

ERK2 suppresses self-renewal capacity of embryonic stem cells, but is not
required for multi-lineage commitment.

Hamilton WB(1), Kaji K, Kunath T.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom. william.hamilton@sund.ku.dk

Activation of the FGF-ERK pathway is necessary for naïve mouse embryonic stem
(ES) cells to exit self-renewal and commit to early differentiated lineages. Here
we show that genetic ablation of Erk2, the predominant ERK isozyme expressed in
ES cells, results in hyper-phosphorylation of ERK1, but an overall decrease in
total ERK activity as judged by substrate phosphorylation and immediate-early
gene (IEG) induction. Normal induction of this subset of canonical ERK targets,
as well as p90RSK phosphorylation, was rescued by transgenic expression of either
ERK1 or ERK2 indicating a degree of functional redundancy. In contrast to
previously published work, Erk2-null ES cells exhibited no detectable defect in
lineage specification to any of the three germ layers when induced to
differentiate in either embryoid bodies or in defined neural induction
conditions. However, under self-renewing conditions Erk2-null ES cells express
increased levels of the pluripotency-associated transcripts, Nanog and Tbx3, a
decrease in Nanog-GFP heterogeneity, and exhibit enhanced self-renewal in colony 
forming assays. Transgenic add-back of ERK2 is capable of restoring normal
pluripotent gene expression and self-renewal capacity. We show that ERK2
contributes to the destabilization of ES cell self-renewal by reducing expression
of pluripotency genes, such as Nanog, but is not specifically required for the
early stages of germ layer specification.

PMCID: PMC3628700
PMID: 23613754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Aug;380(1-2):67-72. doi: 10.1007/s11010-013-1658-y. Epub
2013 Apr 20.

Time-dependent regulation of neuregulin-1ß/ErbB/ERK pathways in cardiac
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Chen M(1), Bi LL, Wang ZQ, Zhao F, Gan XD, Wang YG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
dr_chenming@163.com

Neuregulin-1ß (NRG-1ß)/ErbB signaling plays crucial roles in the cardiac
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs), but its roles and the
underlying mechanisms in cardiac differentiation are incompletely understood.
This study showed that NRG-1ß significantly increased the percentage of beating
embryoid bodies (EBs) and up-regulated the gene expressions of Nkx2.5, GATA4,
a-actin, MLC-2v, and ANF in a time-dependent manner, with no effect on the gene
expressions of HCN4 and Tbx3. Inhibition of ErbB receptors with AG1478
significantly decreased the percentage of beating EBs; down-regulated the gene
expressions of Nkx2.5, GATA4, MLC-2v, ANF, and a-actin; and concomitantly
up-regulated the gene expressions of HCN4 and Tbx3 in a time-dependent manner.
Moreover, the up-regulation of transcripts for Nkx2.5 and GATA4 by NRG-1ß was
blocked by the extracellular signal-related kinases (ERK) 1/2 inhibitor, U0126.
However, U0126 could not inhibit the transcript up-regulations of MLC-2v and ANF 
by NRG-1ß. The protein quantitation results were consistent with those of gene
quantitation. Our results suggest that NRG-1ß/ErbB signaling plays critical roles
in the cardiac differentiation of mouse ESCs and in the subtype specification of 
cardiomyocytes in a time-dependent manner. The ERK1/2 pathway may be involved in 
the early cardiogenesis, but not in the subtype specification of cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 23606057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Nov;70(21):4157-68. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1336-y. Epub 
2013 Apr 18.

Function of the C. elegans T-box factor TBX-2 depends on SUMOylation.

Huber P(1), Crum T, Clary LM, Ronan T, Packard AV, Okkema PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Laboratory for Molecular Biology,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

T-box transcription factors are critical developmental regulators in all
multi-cellular organisms, and altered T-box factor activity is associated with a 
variety of human congenital diseases and cancers. Despite the biological
significance of T-box factors, their mechanism of action is not well understood. 
Here we examine whether SUMOylation affects the function of the C. elegans Tbx2
sub-family T-box factor TBX-2. We have previously shown that TBX-2 interacts with
the E2 SUMO-conjugating enzyme UBC-9, and that loss of TBX-2 or UBC-9 produces
identical defects in ABa-derived pharyngeal muscle development. We now show that 
TBX-2 is SUMOylated in mammalian cell assays, and that both UBC-9 interaction and
SUMOylation depends on two SUMO consensus sites located in the T-box DNA binding 
domain and near the TBX-2 C-terminus, respectively. In co-transfection assays, a 
TBX-2:GAL4 fusion protein represses expression of a 5xGal4:tk:luciferase
construct. However, this activity does not require SUMOylation, indicating SUMO
is not generally required for TBX-2 repressor activity. In C. elegans, reducing
SUMOylation enhances the phenotype of a temperature-sensitive tbx-2 mutant and
results in ectopic expression of a gene normally repressed by TBX-2,
demonstrating that SUMOylation is important for TBX-2 function in vivo. Finally, 
we show mammalian orthologs of TBX-2, Tbx2, and Tbx3, can also be SUMOylated,
suggesting SUMOylation may be a conserved mechanism controlling T-box factor
activity.

PMCID: PMC3802552
PMID: 23595631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Invest Dermatol. 2013 May;133(5):1135-7. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.474.

Mutant BRAF: a novel mediator of microenvironmental escape in melanoma?

Smalley KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, The Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA. keiran.smalley@moffitt.org

Comment on
    J Invest Dermatol. 2013 May;133(5):1269-77.

The acquisition of mutant BRAF is an important initiating event for melanoma
development, although the process by which transformed melanocytes escape from
keratinocyte control and disseminate to other organs is not well understood. Boyd
et al. (2012) provide evidence that oncogenic BRAF contributes to the
microenvironmental escape of melanocytes through the downregulation of E-cadherin
expression via the transcriptional suppressor Tbx3.

PMID: 23594535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. EMBO J. 2013 May 15;32(10):1393-408. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.78. Epub 2013 Apr
12.

The histone demethylase Jmjd3 sequentially associates with the transcription
factors Tbx3 and Eomes to drive endoderm differentiation.

Kartikasari AE(1), Zhou JX, Kanji MS, Chan DN, Sinha A, Grapin-Botton A, Magnuson
MA, Lowry WE, Bhushan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 
90095-7073, USA.

Stem cell differentiation depends on transcriptional activation driven by
lineage-specific regulators as well as changes in chromatin organization.
However, the coordination of these events is poorly understood. Here, we show
that T-box proteins team up with chromatin modifying enzymes to drive the
expression of the key lineage regulator, Eomes during endodermal differentiation 
of embryonic stem (ES) cells. The Eomes locus is maintained in a
transcriptionally poised configuration in ES cells. During early differentiation 
steps, the ES cell factor Tbx3 associates with the histone demethylase Jmjd3 at
the enhancer element of the Eomes locus to allow enhancer-promoter interactions. 
This spatial reorganization of the chromatin primes the cells to respond to
Activin signalling, which promotes the binding of Jmjd3 and Eomes to its own
bivalent promoter region to further stimulate Eomes expression in a positive
feedback loop. In addition, Eomes activates a transcriptional network of core
regulators of endodermal differentiation. Our results demonstrate that Jmjd3
sequentially associates with two T-box factors, Tbx3 and Eomes to drive stem cell
differentiation towards the definitive endoderm lineage.

PMCID: PMC3655467
PMID: 23584530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60148. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060148. Epub 2013 Apr 5.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 inhibition enhances translation of
pluripotency-associated transcription factors to contribute to maintenance of
mouse embryonic stem cell self-renewal.

Sanchez-Ripoll Y(1), Bone HK, Owen T, Guedes AM, Abranches E, Kumpfmueller B,
Spriggs RV, Henrique D, Welham MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regenerative Medicine and Department of Pharmacy & Pharmacology,
University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.

Maintenance of embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and pluripotency are
controlled by extrinsic factors, molecular signaling pathways and transcriptional
regulators. While many of the key players have been studied in depth, how the
molecular signals interact with transcription factors of the pluripotency network
to regulate their action remains less well understood. Inhibition of glycogen
synthase kinase 3 (Gsk-3) has been implicated in the maintenance of mouse ESC
pluripotency, although there is contradictory data on its role, with enhancement 
of cell survival and metabolism, stabilisation of c-Myc and activation of Wnt
signalling proposed as potential mechanisms. We have discovered that suppression 
of Gsk-3 activity leads to enhanced protein levels of key transcriptional
regulators of the pluripotency network, notably Nanog, Tbx3 and c-Myc. Protein
stability was unchanged following Gsk-3 inhibition, although interestingly, Nanog
and Tbx3 proteins were found to have half-lives of 1-3 h, while that of Oct4
protein was longer, at 6 h. We demonstrate that the effects on protein levels
seen following inhibition of Gsk-3 are due to both enhanced de novo synthesis of 
Nanog protein and increases in the proportion of Nanog and Tbx3 RNAs bound to
polysomes, findings consistent with Gsk-3 regulating translation of these
factors. These effects were not due to changes in regulators of general
translation initiation machinery nor mediated via the 5' or 3' UTR sequences of
Nanog alone. The data we present provide both new conceptual insight into the
mechanisms regulated by Gsk-3 that may contribute to ESC self-renewal and,
importantly, establish control of protein translation as an additional mechanism 
involved in modulation of ESC pluripotency.

PMCID: PMC3618116
PMID: 23577087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Oct;70(20):3929-45. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1305-5. Epub 
2013 Mar 12.

Regulation of organogenesis and stem cell properties by T-box transcription
factors.

Takashima Y(1), Suzuki A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organogenesis and Regeneration, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, 
Japan.

T-box transcription factors containing the common DNA-binding domain T-box
contribute to the organization of multiple tissues in vertebrates and
invertebrates. In mammals, 17 T-box genes are divided into five subfamilies
depending on their amino acid homology. The proper distribution and expression of
individual T-box transcription factors in different tissues enable regulation of 
the proliferation and differentiation of tissue-specific stem cells and
progenitor cells in a suitable time schedule for tissue organization.
Consequently, uncontrollable expressions of T-box genes induce abnormal tissue
organization, and eventually cause various diseases with malformation and
malfunction of tissues and organs. Furthermore, some T-box transcription factors 
are essential for maintaining embryonic stem cell pluripotency, improving the
quality of induced pluripotent stem cells, and inducing cell-lineage conversion
of differentiated cells. These lines of evidence indicate fundamental roles of
T-box transcription factors in tissue organization and stem cell properties, and 
suggest that these transcription factors will be useful for developing
therapeutic approaches in regenerative medicine.

PMID: 23479132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Jul 15;22(14):2017-25. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0651. Epub 2013
Mar 28.

Zic3 enhances the generation of mouse induced pluripotent stem cells.

Declercq J(1), Sheshadri P, Verfaillie CM, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Institute , KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Zinc finger protein of the cerebellum (Zic)3, a member of Gli family of
transcription factors (TFs), is essential for maintaining pluripotency of
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and has been reported to activate TF Nanog in an
Oct4/Sox2-independent manner. Previously, we showed that Zic3 (Z), in combination
with the Yamanka factors OCT4, SOX2, and KLF4 (OSK), induces neural
progenitor-like cells from human fibroblasts. However, a similar combination of
TFs (OSKZ) transduced in mouse embryonic fibroblasts resulted in enhanced induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) formation compared with OSK alone, but not
neuroprogenitors. OSKZ-derived iPSCs are indistinguishable from mESCs in colony
morphology, expression of alkaline phosphatase and pluripotency genes, and
embryoid body and teratoma formation. Zic3 activates the transcription of Nanog, 
a key pluripotency regulator, as evidenced by a luciferase promoter assay. During
the course of iPSC derivation, Zic3-mediated enhanced expression of Nanog and
Tbx3, gene known to enhance iPSCs derivation, is observed. Not only does Zic3
enhance the reprogramming efficiency, but also reactivation of the endogenous
Zic3 protein is essential for the generation of iPSCs, as knockdown of Zic3
during the iPSC generation with OSKM significantly reduced the number of
colonies. Together, our result uncovers an important role of Zic3 in generating
mouse iPSCs.

PMCID: PMC3700107
PMID: 23421367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Arch Toxicol. 2013 Jun;87(6):1103-13. doi: 10.1007/s00204-013-1018-4. Epub 2013
Feb 10.

Monitoring of deiodinase deficiency based on transcriptomic responses in SH-SY5Y 
cells.

Song M(1), Song MK, Choi HS, Ryu JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Toxicology Laboratory, Center for Integrated Risk
Research, Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST), P.O. Box 131,
Cheongryang, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Iodothyronine deiodinase types I, II, and III (D1, D2, and D3, respectively),
which constitute a family of selenoenzymes, activate and inactivate thyroid
hormones through the removal of specific iodine moieties from thyroxine and its
derivatives. These enzymes are important in the biological effects mediated by
thyroid hormones. The expression of activating and inactivating deiodinases plays
a critical role in a number of cell systems, including the neuronal system,
during development as well as in adult vertebrates. To investigate
deiodinase-disrupting chemicals based on transcriptomic responses, we examined
differences in gene expression profiles between T3-treated and
deiodinase-knockdown SH-SY5Y cells using microarray analysis and quantitative
real-time RT-PCR. A total of 1,558 genes, consisting of 755 upregulated and 803
downregulated genes, were differentially expressed between the T3-treated and
deiodinase-knockdown cells. The expression levels of 10 of these genes (ID2, ID3,
CCL2, TBX3, TGOLN2, C1orf71, ZNF676, GULP1, KLF9, and ITGB5) were altered by
deiodinase-disrupting chemicals (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin,
polychlorinated biphenyls, propylthiouracil, iodoacetic acid, methylmercury,
ß-estradiol, methimazole, 3-methylcholanthrene, aminotriazole, amiodarone,
cadmium chloride, dimethoate, fenvalerate, octylmethoxycinnamate, iopanoic acid, 
methoxychlor, and 4-methylbenzylidene-camphor). These genes are potential
biomarkers for detecting deiodinase deficiency and predicting their effects on
thyroid hormone production.

PMID: 23397585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Virol. 2013 Apr;87(8):4461-74. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01803-12. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

The transcription factors TBX2 and TBX3 interact with human papillomavirus 16
(HPV16) L2 and repress the long control region of HPVs.

Schneider MA(1), Scheffer KD, Bund T, Boukhallouk F, Lambert C, Cotarelo C,
Pflugfelder GO, Florin L, Spoden GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Hygiene, University Medical Center of Johannes 
Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

The minor capsid protein L2 of human papillomaviruses (HPVs) has multiple
functions during the viral life cycle. Although L2 is required for effective
invasion and morphogenesis, only a few cellular interaction partners are known so
far. Using yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified the transcription factor
TBX2 as a novel interaction partner of HPV type 16 (HPV16) L2.
Coimmunoprecipitations and immunofluorescence analyses confirmed the L2-TBX2
interaction and revealed that L2 also interacts with TBX3, another member of the 
T-box family. Transcription of the early genes during HPV infection is under the 
control of an upstream enhancer and early promoter region, the long control
region (LCR). In promoter-reporter gene assays, we observed that TBX2 and TBX3
repress transcription from the LCR and that this effect is enhanced by L2.
Repression of the HPV LCR by TBX2/3 seems to be a conserved mechanism, as it was 
also observed with the LCRs of different HPV types. Finally, interaction of TBX2 
with the LCR was detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation, and we found a strong
colocalization of L2 and TBX2 in HPV16-positive cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN) I-II tissue sections. These results suggest that TBX2/3 might
play a role in the regulation of HPV gene expression during the viral life cycle.

PMCID: PMC3624339
PMID: 23388722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biol Pharm Bull. 2013;36(2):166-70.

Transcription factor network in embryonic stem cells: heterogeneity under the
stringency.

Nakai-Futatsugi Y(1), Niwa H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent Stem Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, 223 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 6500047, Japan.

Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) signaling regulates transcription factors to
maintain the self-renewability and pluripotency of embryonic stem (ES) cells.
Recently, we have proposed a network model that consists of transcription factors
such as, Klf4, Sox2, Tbx3, Nanog, and Oct3/4, which form a parallel pathway
downstream from LIF signaling (Nature, 460, 2009, Niwa et al.). In this parallel 
pathway, the transcription factors maintain the pluripotency of ES cells through 
mutual balance with some degree of redundancy and compensation. While
self-renewability and pluripotency are maintained well under such seemingly
stringent regulation, studies of single cells revealed heterogeneity among
individual ES cells. This heterogeneity may underlie the mechanism that allows ES
cells to exit self-renewal and enter into differentiation to exert pluripotency. 
Here we focus on recent studies on the heterogeneity of ES cells and discuss
their inherent metastability.

PMID: 23370346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Stem Cells. 2013 Apr;31(4):752-64. doi: 10.1002/stem.1321.

Canonical Wnt signaling induces a primitive endoderm metastable state in mouse
embryonic stem cells.

Price FD(1), Yin H, Jones A, van Ijcken W, Grosveld F, Rudnicki MA.

Author information: 
(1)Sprott Center For Stem Cell Research, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,
Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Activation of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway synergizes with leukemia
inhibitory factor (LIF) to maintain pluripotency of mouse embryonic stem cells
(mESCs). However, in the absence of LIF, Wnt signaling is unable to maintain ESCs
in the undifferentiated state. To investigate the role of canonical Wnt signaling
in pluripotency and lineage specification, we expressed Wnt3a in mESCs and
characterized them in growth and differentiation. We found that activated
canonical Wnt signaling induced the formation of a reversible metastable
primitive endoderm state in mESC. Upon subsequent differentiation,
Wnt3a-stimulated mESCs gave rise to large quantities of visceral endoderm.
Furthermore, we determined that the ability of canonical Wnt signaling to induce 
a metastable primitive endoderm state was mediated by Tbx3. Our data demonstrates
a specific role for canonical Wnt signaling in promoting pluripotency while at
the same time priming cells for subsequent differentiation into the primitive
endoderm lineage.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23307624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Int J Dev Biol. 2013;57(11-12):853-63. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.130302bk.

Remodeling of the myocardium in early trabeculation and cardiac valve formation; 
a role for TGFß2.

Kruithof BP(1), Kruithof-De-Julio M, Poelmann RE, Gittenberger-De-Groot AC,
Gaussin V, Goumans MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Cell Biology and Molecular
Medicine, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New Jersey Medical 
School, Newark, New Jersey, USA. b.p.t.kruithof@lumc.nl.

Trabeculation and the formation of the leaflets of the mitral and tricuspid
valves both involve remodeling of the embryonic myocardium. The nature and
possible connection of these myocardial remodeling processes, however, are
unclear. Therefore, we examined the morphogenesis of the early ventricular and
atrioventricular (AV) myocardium and report for the first time that the formation
of the early trabeculae and the positioning of the valve primordia (endocardial
cushions) into the ventricular lumen are part of one continuous myocardial
remodeling process, which involves the dissociation of the myocardial layers. For
the endocardial cushions, this process results in delamination from the AV
myocardium. The AV myocardium that will harbor the right lateral cushion is the
exception and becomes positioned in the ventricular lumen by folding of the right
ventricle. As a consequence, remodeling of the left and right AV myocardium
occurs differently with implications for the formation of the mural leaflets and 
annulus fibrosis. At both the right and left side, the valvular myocardium
harbors a distinct molecular phenotype and its removal from the cardiac leaflets 
involves a second wave of delamination. Interestingly, in the TGFß2-KO mouse,
which is a known model for cushion and valve defects, remodeling of the early
myocardium is disturbed as indicated by defective trabeculae formation,
persistence of valvular myocardium, disturbed myocardial phenotypes and
differential defects at left and right side of the AV canal. Based on these
results we propose a new model clarifying early trabeculae formation and AV valve
formation and provide new inroads for an enhanced understanding of congenital
heart defects.

PMID: 24623077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Gene. 2013 Mar 1;516(1):138-42. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.051. Epub 2012 Dec
22.

Prenatal diagnosis and molecular cytogenetic characterization of de novo partial 
trisomy 12q (12q24.21<U+2192>qter) and partial monosomy 6q (6q27<U+2192>qter) associated with
coarctation of the aorta, ventriculomegaly and thickened nuchal fold.

Chen CP(1), Chen YY, Chern SR, Wu PS, Su JW, Chen YT, Chen LF, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. cpc_mmh@yahoo.com

We present rapid aneuploidy diagnosis of de novo partial trisomy 12q
(12q24.21<U+2192>qter) and partial monosomy 6q (6q27<U+2192>qter) by aCGH using uncultured
amniocytes in a fetus with coarctation of the aorta, ventriculomegaly and
thickened nuchal fold. We discuss the association of TBX3, TBX5 and MED13L gene
duplication with coarctation of the aorta, and the association of RNASET2 gene
haploinsufficiency with ventriculomegaly in this case.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23266815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Gastroenterology. 2013 Apr;144(4):799-807.e24. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.12.020.
Epub 2012 Dec 22.

Identification of Genetic Susceptibility Loci for Colorectal Tumors in a
Genome-Wide Meta-analysis.

Peters U(1), Jiao S, Schumacher FR, Hutter CM, Aragaki AK, Baron JA, Berndt SI,
Bézieau S, Brenner H, Butterbach K, Caan BJ, Campbell PT, Carlson CS, Casey G,
Chan AT, Chang-Claude J, Chanock SJ, Chen LS, Coetzee GA, Coetzee SG, Conti DV,
Curtis KR, Duggan D, Edwards T, Fuchs CS, Gallinger S, Giovannucci EL, Gogarten
SM, Gruber SB, Haile RW, Harrison TA, Hayes RB, Henderson BE, Hoffmeister M,
Hopper JL, Hudson TJ, Hunter DJ, Jackson RD, Jee SH, Jenkins MA, Jia WH, Kolonel 
LN, Kooperberg C, Küry S, Lacroix AZ, Laurie CC, Laurie CA, Le Marchand L, Lemire
M, Levine D, Lindor NM, Liu Y, Ma J, Makar KW, Matsuo K, Newcomb PA, Potter JD,
Prentice RL, Qu C, Rohan T, Rosse SA, Schoen RE, Seminara D, Shrubsole M, Shu XO,
Slattery ML, Taverna D, Thibodeau SN, Ulrich CM, White E, Xiang Y, Zanke BW, Zeng
YX, Zhang B, Zheng W, Hsu L; Colon Cancer Family Registry and the Genetics and
Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA. upeters@fhcrc.org

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Heritable factors contribute to the development of colorectal 
cancer. Identifying the genetic loci associated with colorectal tumor formation
could elucidate the mechanisms of pathogenesis.
METHODS: We conducted a genome-wide association study that included 14 studies,
12,696 cases of colorectal tumors (11,870 cancer, 826 adenoma), and 15,113
controls of European descent. The 10 most statistically significant, previously
unreported findings were followed up in 6 studies; these included 3056 colorectal
tumor cases (2098 cancer, 958 adenoma) and 6658 controls of European and Asian
descent.
RESULTS: Based on the combined analysis, we identified a locus that reached the
conventional genome-wide significance level at less than 5.0 × 10(-8): an
intergenic region on chromosome 2q32.3, close to nucleic acid binding protein 1
(most significant single nucleotide polymorphism: rs11903757; odds ratio [OR],
1.15 per risk allele; P = 3.7 × 10(-8)). We also found evidence for 3 additional 
loci with P values less than 5.0 × 10(-7): a locus within the laminin gamma 1
gene on chromosome 1q25.3 (rs10911251; OR, 1.10 per risk allele; P = 9.5 ×
10(-8)), a locus within the cyclin D2 gene on chromosome 12p13.32 (rs3217810 per 
risk allele; OR, 0.84; P = 5.9 × 10(-8)), and a locus in the T-box 3 gene on
chromosome 12q24.21 (rs59336; OR, 0.91 per risk allele; P = 3.7 × 10(-7)).
CONCLUSIONS: In a large genome-wide association study, we associated
polymorphisms close to nucleic acid binding protein 1 (which encodes a
DNA-binding protein involved in DNA repair) with colorectal tumor risk. We also
provided evidence for an association between colorectal tumor risk and
polymorphisms in laminin gamma 1 (this is the second gene in the laminin family
to be associated with colorectal cancers), cyclin D2 (which encodes for cyclin
D2), and T-box 3 (which encodes a T-box transcription factor and is a target of
Wnt signaling to ß-catenin). The roles of these genes and their products in
cancer pathogenesis warrant further investigation.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3636812
PMID: 23266556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Food Chem. 2013 May 1;138(1):278-85. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2012.10.038. Epub
2012 Nov 8.

Rhubarb inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma cell metastasis via GSK-3-ß activation 
to enhance protein degradation and attenuate nuclear translocation of ß-catenin.

Tsai KH(1), Hsien HH, Chen LM, Ting WJ, Yang YS, Kuo CH, Tsai CH, Tsai FJ, Tsai
HJ, Huang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Chi Mei Hospital, Liouying, Tainan, Taiwan.

The aim of our study was to investigate the mechanisms by which rhubarb regulates
ß-catenin as well as metastasis of hepatocellular carcinomas. Our results
revealed that rhubarb extract inhibited HA22T cell migration ability in wound
healing, migration and invasion assays in a dose-dependent manner. Rhubarb also
reduced ß-catenin protein level, downregulated its downstream proteins, cyclin D,
Tbx3 and c-Myc, and attenuated the expression of MMP9 and contactin-1 metastatic 
factors. Additionally, rhubarb inhibited ß-catenin nuclear accumulation and
induced its degradation via proteasome-mediated pathway. Furthermore, we found
that rhubarb suppressed the p-ser(9) GSK-3-ß protein level to inactivate Wnt
signalling and reduce ß-catenin protein level. Taken together; we found that
rhubarb blocked the metastatic process of HA22T hepatocellular carcinoma cells
mediated through GSK-3-ß activation, and enhancement of protein degradation as
well as reduction of the nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23265488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Invest Dermatol. 2013 May;133(5):1269-77. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.421. Epub 2012 
Nov 29.

Oncogenic B-RAF(V600E) signaling induces the T-Box3 transcriptional repressor to 
repress E-cadherin and enhance melanoma cell invasion.

Boyd SC(1), Mijatov B, Pupo GM, Tran SL, Gowrishankar K, Shaw HM, Goding CR,
Scolyer RA, Mann GJ, Kefford RF, Rizos H, Becker TM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Sydney at Westmead Millennium Institute, Westmead Hospital,
Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2013 May;133(5):1135-7.

Approximately 50% of melanomas require oncogenic B-RAF(V600E) signaling for
proliferation, survival, and metastasis, and the use of highly selective B-RAF
inhibitors has yielded remarkable, although short-term, clinical responses.
Reactivation of signaling downstream of B-RAF is frequently associated with
acquired resistance to B-RAF inhibitors, and the identification of B-RAF targets 
may therefore provide new strategies for managing melanoma. In this report, we
applied whole-genome expression analyses to reveal that oncogenic B-RAF(V600E)
regulates genes associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition in normal
cutaneous human melanocytes. Most prominent was the B-RAF-mediated
transcriptional repression of E-cadherin, a keratinocyte-melanoma adhesion
molecule whose loss is intimately associated with melanoma invasion and
metastasis. Here we identify a link between oncogenic B-RAF, the transcriptional 
repressor Tbx3, and E-cadherin. We show that B-RAF(V600E) induces the expression 
of Tbx3, which potently represses E-cadherin expression in melanocytes and
melanoma cells. Tbx3 expression is normally restricted to developmental embryonic
tissues and promoting cell motility, but it is also aberrantly increased in
various cancers and has been linked to tumor cell invasion and metastasis. We
propose that this B-RAF/Tbx3/E-cadherin pathway has a critical role in promoting 
the metastasis of B-RAF-mutant melanomas.

PMCID: PMC3788590
PMID: 23190890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Gene. 2013 Jan 10;512(2):185-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.10.066. Epub 2012 Oct
29.

Genetic analysis of the TBX3 gene promoter in ventricular septal defects.

Chen D(1), Qiao Y, Meng H, Pang S, Huang W, Zhang H, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment,
Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining,
Shandong 272029, China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defect in humans. Genetic
causes and underlying molecular mechanisms for CHD remain largely unknown. T-box 
transcription factor 3 (TBX3) plays a critical role in the developing heart in a 
dose-dependent manner. TBX3 represses chamber myocardial gene expression.
Mutations in TBX3 gene have been associated to ulnar-mammary syndrome with
multiple developmental defects, including cardiac defects. We hypothesized that
the sequence variants within TBX3 gene promoter that change TBX3 levels may
mediate CHD development. In this study, TBX3 gene promoter was genetically
analyzed in large cohorts of patients with ventricular septal defect (VSD)
(n=325) and ethnic-matched healthy controls (n=359). Seven sequence variants,
including two single-nucleotide polymorphisms (g.3863 C>T and g.4095G>T), three
novel deletions (g.4433_4435del, g.4672_4675del and g.4820_4821del) and two novel
insertions (g.3913_3914ins and g.4735_4736ins), were identified. Five of the
seven variants were identified in VSD patients and controls with similar
frequencies. Two other variants were found only in controls. These variants,
which were observed in high frequencies, did not modify or interrupt the critical
binding site for basic transcription factors. Taken together, these results
suggested that the sequence variants within the TBX3 gene promoter did not
contribute to VSD etiology.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23116943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. BMC Cancer. 2012 Oct 19;12:481. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-481.

Tbx3 represses PTEN and is over-expressed in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Burgucu D(1), Guney K, Sahinturk D, Ozbudak IH, Ozel D, Ozbilim G, Yavuzer U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Akdeniz University, Antalya
07058, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Despite advances in diagnostic and treatment strategies, head and
neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC) constitutes one of the worst cancer types in
terms of prognosis. PTEN is one of the tumour suppressors whose expression and/or
activity have been found to be reduced in HNSCC, with rather low rates of
mutations within the PTEN gene (6-8%). We reasoned that low expression levels of 
PTEN might be due to a transcriptional repression governed by an oncogene. Tbx2
and Tbx3, both of which are transcriptional repressors, have been found to be
amplified or over-expressed in various cancer types. Thus, we hypothesize that
Tbx3 may be over expressed in HNSCC and may repress PTEN, thus leading to cancer 
formation and/or progression.
METHODS: Using immunohistochemistry and quantitative PCR (qPCR), protein and mRNA
levels of PTEN and Tbx3 were identified in samples excised from cancerous and
adjacent normal tissues from 33 patients who were diagnosed with HNSCC. In
addition, HeLa and HEK cell lines were transfected with a Tbx3 expressing plasmid
and endogenous PTEN mRNA and protein levels were determined via qPCR and flow
cytometry. Transcription assays were performed to demonstrate effects of Tbx3 on 
PTEN promoter activity. Mann-Whitney, Spearman's Correlation and Wilcoxon
signed-rank tests were used to analyze the data.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that in HNSCC samples, Tbx3 mRNA levels are increased
with respect to their normal tissue counterparts (p<0.001), whereas PTEN mRNA
levels are significantly reduced in cancer tissues. Moreover, Tbx3 protein is
also increased in HNSCC tissue sections. Over-expression of Tbx3 in HeLa and HEK 
cell lines causes reduction in endogenous PTEN mRNA and protein levels. In
addition, transcription activity assays reveal that Tbx3 is capable of repressing
both the basal and induced promoter activity of PTEN.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that Tbx3 is up-regulated in tissue samples of HNSCC
patients and that Tbx3 represses PTEN transcription. Thus, our data not only
reveals a new mechanism that may be important in cancer formation, but also
suggests that Tbx3 can be used as a potential biomarker in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3517435
PMID: 23082988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47644. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047644. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

Identification and functional characterization of cardiac pacemaker cells in
zebrafish.

Tessadori F(1), van Weerd JH, Burkhard SB, Verkerk AO, de Pater E, Boukens BJ,
Vink A, Christoffels VM, Bakkers J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

In the mammalian heart a conduction system of nodes and conducting cells
generates and transduces the electrical signals evoking myocardial contractions. 
Specialized pacemaker cells initiating and controlling cardiac contraction
rhythmicity are localized in an anatomically identifiable structure of myocardial
origin, the sinus node. We previously showed that in mammalian embryos sinus node
cells originate from cardiac progenitors expressing the transcription factors
T-box transcription factor 3 (Tbx3) and Islet-1 (Isl1). Although cardiac
development and function are strikingly conserved amongst animal classes, in
lower vertebrates neither structural nor molecular distinguishable components of 
a conduction system have been identified, questioning its evolutionary origin.
Here we show that zebrafish embryos lacking the LIM/homeodomain-containing
transcription factor Isl1 display heart rate defects related to pacemaker
dysfunction. Moreover, 3D reconstructions of gene expression patterns in the
embryonic and adult zebrafish heart led us to uncover a previously unidentified, 
Isl1-positive and Tbx2b-positive region in the myocardium at the junction of the 
sinus venosus and atrium. Through their long interconnecting cellular protrusions
the identified Isl1-positive cells form a ring-shaped structure. In vivo labeling
of the Isl1-positive cells by transgenic technology allowed their isolation and
electrophysiological characterization, revealing their unique pacemaker activity.
In conclusion we demonstrate that Isl1-expressing cells, organized as a
ring-shaped structure around the venous pole, hold the pacemaker function in the 
adult zebrafish heart. We have thereby identified an evolutionary conserved,
structural and molecular distinguishable component of the cardiac conduction
system in a lower vertebrate.

PMCID: PMC3473062
PMID: 23077655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Apr;1833(4):783-94. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.10.004.
Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Evolution and development of the building plan of the vertebrate heart.

Jensen B(1), Wang T, Christoffels VM, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology and Physiology, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Early cardiac development involves the formation of a heart tube, looping of the 
tube and formation of chambers. These processes are highly similar among all
vertebrates, which suggest the existence of evolutionary conservation of the
building plan of the heart. From the jawless lampreys to man, T-box transcription
factors like Tbx5 and Tbx20 are fundamental for heart formation, whereas Tbx2 and
Tbx3 repress chamber formation on the sinu-atrial and atrioventricular borders.
Also, electrocardiograms from different vertebrates are alike, even though the
fish heart only has two chambers whereas the mammalian heart has four chambers
divided by septa and in addition has much higher heart rates. We conclude that
most features of the high-performance hearts of mammals and birds can be traced
back to less developed traits in the hearts of ectothermic vertebrates. This
article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Cardiomyocyte biology: Cardiac
pathways of differentiation, metabolism and contraction.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Integr Bioinform. 2012 Sep 18;9(2):211. doi: 10.2390/biecoll-jib-2012-211.

Computer and statistical analysis of transcription factor binding and chromatin
modifications by ChIP-seq data in embryonic stem cell.

Orlov Y(1), Xu H, Afonnikov D, Lim B, Heng JC, Yuan P, Chen M, Yan J, Clarke N,
Orlova N, Huss M, Gunbin K, Podkolodnyy N, Ng HH.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore 138672, Singapore.
orlov@bionet.nsc.ru

Advances in high throughput sequencing technology have enabled the identification
of transcription factor (TF) binding sites in genome scale. TF binding studies
are important for medical applications and stem cell research. Somatic cells can 
be reprogrammed to a pluripotent state by the combined introduction of factors
such as Oct4, Sox2, c-Myc, Klf4. These reprogrammed cells share many
characteristics with embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and are known as induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). The signaling requirements for maintenance of
human and murine embryonic stem cells (ESCs) differ considerably. Genome wide
ChIP-seq TF binding maps in mouse stem cells include Oct4, Sox2, Nanog, Tbx3,
Smad2 as well as group of other factors. ChIP-seq allows study of new candidate
transcription factors for reprogramming. It was shown that Nr5a2 could replace
Oct4 for reprogramming. Epigenetic modifications play important role in
regulation of gene expression adding additional complexity to transcription
network functioning. We have studied associations between different histone
modification using published data together with RNA Pol II sites. We found strong
associations between activation marks and TF binding sites and present it
qualitatively. To meet issues of statistical analysis of genome ChIP-sequencing
maps we developed computer program to filter out noise signals and find
significant association between binding site affinity and number of sequence
reads. The data provide new insights into the function of chromatin organization 
and regulation in stem cells.

PMID: 22987856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Oct;158A(10):2463-72. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35565. Epub 2012
Sep 10.

Evaluation of genes involved in limb development, angiogenesis, and coagulation
as risk factors for congenital limb deficiencies.

Browne ML(1), Carter TC, Kay DM, Kuehn D, Brody LC, Romitti PA, Liu A, Caggana M,
Druschel CM, Mills JL.

Author information: 
(1)Congenital Malformations Registry, New York State Department of Health, Troy, 
USA. mlb10@health.state.ny.us

We conducted a population-based case-control study of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in selected genes to find common variants that play a role
in the etiology of limb deficiencies (LDs). Included in the study were 389
infants with LDs of unknown cause and 980 unaffected controls selected from all
births in New York State (NYS) for the years 1998-2005. We used cases identified 
from the NYS Department of Health (DOH) Congenital Malformations Registry.
Genotypes were obtained for 132 SNPs in genes involved in limb development (SHH, 
WNT7A, FGF4, FGF8, FGF10, TBX3, TBX5, SALL4, GREM1, GDF5, CTNNB1, EN1, CYP26A1,
CYP26B1), angiogenesis (VEGFA, HIF1A, NOS3), and coagulation (F2, F5, MTHFR).
Genotype call rates were >97% and SNPs were tested for departure from
Hardy-Weinberg expectations by race/ethnic subgroups. For each SNP, odds ratios
(OR)s and confidence intervals (CI)s were estimated and corrected for multiple
comparisons for all LDs combined and for LD subtypes. Among non-Hispanic white
infants, associations between FGF10 SNPs rs10805683 and rs13170645 and all LDs
combined were statistically significant following correction for multiple testing
(OR = 1.99; 95% CI = 1.43-2.77; uncorrected P = 0.000043 for rs10805683
heterozygous genotype, and OR = 2.37; 95% CI = 1.48-3.78; uncorrected P = 0.00032
for rs13170645 homozygous minor genotype). We also observed suggestive evidence
for associations with SNPs in other genes including CYP26B1 and WNT7A. Animal
studies have shown that FGF10 induces formation of the apical ectodermal ridge
and is necessary for limb development. Our data suggest that common variants in
FGF10 increase the risk for a wide range of non-syndromic limb deficiencies.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3448837
PMID: 22965740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Hum Reprod. 2012 Dec;18(12):585-92. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gas034. Epub 2012 Aug
19.

Molecular studies of the congenital malformation induced by Largehead
Atractylodes Rhizome, the most commonly used Chinese medicine for threatened
miscarriage.

Tang LY(1), Li L, Borchert A, Lau CB, Leung PC, Wang CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong.

Largehead Atractylodes Rhizome (LAR) is the most commonly used Chinese herbal
medicine for threatened miscarriage. Potential reproductive toxicity of LAR was
identified in early pregnancy in animals. Skeletal anomalies including loss of
ulna and distal digits, shortening of humerus and radius were observed in higher 
clinical dose groups. Here, we aimed to study the molecular mechanism of the
congenital malformation induced by LAR. In vitro whole mouse embryo culture was
used to confirm the embryotoxicity effects of LAR on developing limb buds during 
early organogenesis. A pregnant mouse model was employed to study the
developmental gene expression by quantitative PCR and whole hybridization and
apoptosis by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling
staining, in the forelimbs and hindlimbs during development in vivo. Severe
growth retardation, multiple embryonic malformations and delayed limb bud
development were observed. Limb-specific Tbx gene expressions in both developing 
forelimbs and hindlimbs were significantly decreased. Increased developmental
apoptosis in apical ectodermal ridge and mesenchymal mesoderm of the developing
limb buds was identified. Overexpressions of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in embryos in vitro
rescued LAR-induced abnormal limb development and reduced apoptosis in the
developing forelimb buds. In conclusion, LAR affects limb development by
suppressing the expression of limb developmental genes and disturbing programmed 
cell death during limb formation in mice.

PMID: 22907872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Stem Cells. 2012 Oct;30(10):2152-63. doi: 10.1002/stem.1187.

TBX3 promotes human embryonic stem cell proliferation and neuroepithelial
differentiation in a differentiation stage-dependent manner.

Esmailpour T(1), Huang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, University of
California, Irvine, California 92697, USA.

T-box 3 (Tbx3) is a member of the T-box family of genes. Mutations that result in
the haploinsufficiency of TBX3 cause ulnar mammary syndrome in humans
characterized by mammary gland hypoplasia as well as other congenital defects. In
mice, homozygous mutations are embryonic lethal, suggesting that Tbx3 is
essential for embryo development. Studies in mice have shown that Tbx3 is
essential in the maintenance of mouse embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and 
in their differentiation into extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn). The role TBX3 plays
in regulating human ESCs (hESCs) has not been explored. Since mouse and hESCs are
known to represent distinct pluripotent states, it is important to address the
role of TBX3 in hESC self-renewal and differentiation. Using overexpression and
knockdown strategies, we found that TBX3 overexpression promotes hESC
proliferation possibly by repressing the expression of both NF<U+03BA>BIB and p14(ARF) ,
known cell cycle regulators. During differentiation, TBX3 knockdown resulted in
decreased neural rosette formation and in decreased expression of neuroepithelial
and neuroectoderm markers (PAX6, LHX2, FOXG1, and RAX). Taken together, our data 
suggest a role for TBX3 in hESC proliferation and reveal an unrecognized novel
role of TBX3 in promoting neuroepithelial differentiation. Our results suggest
that TBX3 plays distinct roles in regulating self-renewal and differentiation in 
both hESCs and mouse ESCs.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3517731
PMID: 22865636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Circulation. 2012 Aug 28;126(9):1058-66. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.103390. 
Epub 2012 Jul 26.

Myocardial Notch signaling reprograms cardiomyocytes to a conduction-like
phenotype.

Rentschler S(1), Yen AH, Lu J, Petrenko NB, Lu MM, Manderfield LJ, Patel VV,
Fishman GI, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pennsylvania, 421 Curie Blvd,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. srentsch@dom.wustl.edu

Comment in
    Circulation. 2012 Aug 28;126(9):1009-11.

BACKGROUND: Notch signaling has previously been shown to play an essential role
in regulating cell fate decisions and differentiation during cardiogenesis in
many systems including Drosophila, Xenopus, and mammals. We hypothesized that
Notch may also be involved in directing the progressive lineage restriction of
cardiomyocytes into specialized conduction cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In hearts where Notch signaling is activated within the
myocardium from early development onward, Notch promotes a conduction-like
phenotype based on ectopic expression of conduction system-specific genes and
cell autonomous changes in electrophysiology. With the use of an in vitro assay
to activate Notch in newborn cardiomyocytes, we observed global changes in the
transcriptome, and in action potential characteristics, consistent with
reprogramming to a conduction-like phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Notch can instruct the differentiation of chamber cardiac
progenitors into specialized conduction-like cells. Plasticity remains in
late-stage cardiomyocytes, which has potential implications for engineering of
specialized cardiovascular tissues.

PMCID: PMC3607542
PMID: 22837163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 15;18(18):4997-5007. Epub 2012 Jul 18.

Wnt-pathway activation in two molecular classes of hepatocellular carcinoma and
experimental modulation by sorafenib.

Lachenmayer A(1), Alsinet C, Savic R, Cabellos L, Toffanin S, Hoshida Y,
Villanueva A, Minguez B, Newell P, Tsai HW, Barretina J, Thung S, Ward SC, Bruix 
J, Mazzaferro V, Schwartz M, Friedman SL, Llovet JM.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai Liver Cancer Program, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029, USA.

PURPOSE: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a heterogeneous cancer with active Wnt
signaling. Underlying biologic mechanisms remain unclear and no drug targeting
this pathway has been approved to date. We aimed to characterize Wnt-pathway
aberrations in HCC patients, and to investigate sorafenib as a potential Wnt
modulator in experimental models of liver cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The Wnt-pathway was assessed using mRNA (642 HCCs and 21
liver cancer cell lines) and miRNA expression data (89 HCCs),
immunohistochemistry (108 HCCs), and CTNNB1-mutation data (91 HCCs). Effects of
sorafenib on Wnt signaling were evaluated in four liver cancer cell lines with
active Wnt signaling and a tumor xenograft model.
RESULTS: Evidence for Wnt activation was observed for 315 (49.1%) cases, and was 
further classified as CTNNB1 class (138 cases [21.5%]) or Wnt-TGFß class (177
cases [27.6%]). CTNNB1 class was characterized by upregulation of liver-specific 
Wnt-targets, nuclear ß-catenin and glutamine-synthetase immunostaining, and
enrichment of CTNNB1-mutation-signature, whereas Wnt-TGFß class was characterized
by dysregulation of classical Wnt-targets and the absence of nuclear ß-catenin.
Sorafenib decreased Wnt signaling and ß-catenin protein in HepG2 (CTNNB1 class), 
SNU387 (Wnt-TGFß class), SNU398 (CTNNB1-mutation), and Huh7
(lithium-chloride-pathway activation) cell lines. In addition, sorafenib
attenuated expression of liver-related Wnt-targets GLUL, LGR5, and TBX3. The
suppressive effect on CTNNB1 class-specific Wnt-pathway activation was validated 
in vivo using HepG2 xenografts in nude mice, accompanied by decreased tumor
volume and increased survival of treated animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Distinct dysregulation of Wnt-pathway constituents characterize two 
different Wnt-related molecular classes (CTNNB1 and Wnt-TGFß), accounting for
half of all HCC patients. Sorafenib modulates ß-catenin/Wnt signaling in
experimental models that harbor the CTNNB1 class signature.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3446854
PMID: 22811581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39380. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039380. Epub 2012 Jun 28.

A homolog of Subtilisin-like Proprotein Convertase 7 is essential to anterior
neural development in Xenopus.

Senturker S(1), Thomas JT, Mateshaytis J, Moos M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Gene Therapies, Center for Biologics, Evaluation and 
Research, United States Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland, United 
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Subtilisin-like Proprotein Convertase 7 (SPC7) is a member of the
subtilisin/kexin family of pro-protein convertases. It cleaves many pro-proteins 
to release their active proteins, including members of the bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) family of signaling molecules. Other SPCs are known to be required 
during embryonic development but corresponding data regarding SPC7 have not been 
reported previously.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We demonstrated that Xenopus SPC7 (SPC7) was
expressed predominantly in the developing brain and eye, throughout the neural
plate initially, then more specifically in the lens and retina primordia as
development progressed. Since no prior functional information has been reported
for SPC7, we used gain- and loss-of-function experiments to investigate the
possibility that it may also convey patterning or tissue specification
information similarly to Furin, SPC4, and SPC6. Overexpression of SPC7 was
without effect. In contrast, injection of SPC7 antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides (MO) into a single blastomere at the 2- or 4-cell stage produced
marked disruption of head structures; anophthalmia was salient. Bilateral
injections suppressed head and eye formation completely. In parallel with
suppression of eye and brain development by SPC7 knockdown, expression of early
anterior neural markers (Sox2, Otx2, Rx2, and Pax6) and late eye-specific markers
(ß-Crystallin and Opsin), and of BMP target genes such as Tbx2 and Tbx3, was
reduced or eliminated. Taken together, these findings suggest a critical role for
SPC7-perhaps, at least in part, due to activation of one or more BMPs-in early
patterning of the anterior neural plate and its derivatives.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: SPC7 is required for normal development of the eye and
brain, possibly through processing BMPs, though other potential substrates cannot
be excluded.

PMCID: PMC3386266
PMID: 22761776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Nature. 2012 May 16;486(7403):400-4. doi: 10.1038/nature11017.

The landscape of cancer genes and mutational processes in breast cancer.

Stephens PJ(1), Tarpey PS, Davies H, Van Loo P, Greenman C, Wedge DC, Nik-Zainal 
S, Martin S, Varela I, Bignell GR, Yates LR, Papaemmanuil E, Beare D, Butler A,
Cheverton A, Gamble J, Hinton J, Jia M, Jayakumar A, Jones D, Latimer C, Lau KW, 
McLaren S, McBride DJ, Menzies A, Mudie L, Raine K, Rad R, Chapman MS, Teague J, 
Easton D, Langerød A; Oslo Breast Cancer Consortium (OSBREAC), Lee MT, Shen CY,
Tee BT, Huimin BW, Broeks A, Vargas AC, Turashvili G, Martens J, Fatima A, Miron 
P, Chin SF, Thomas G, Boyault S, Mariani O, Lakhani SR, van de Vijver M, van 't
Veer L, Foekens J, Desmedt C, Sotiriou C, Tutt A, Caldas C, Reis-Filho JS,
Aparicio SA, Salomon AV, Børresen-Dale AL, Richardson AL, Campbell PJ, Futreal
PA, Stratton MR.

Collaborators: Karesen R, Schlichting E, Naume B, Sauer T, Ottestad L.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome 
Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2012;14(5):323.
    Nature. 2012 Jun 21;486(7403):328-9.

All cancers carry somatic mutations in their genomes. A subset, known as driver
mutations, confer clonal selective advantage on cancer cells and are causally
implicated in oncogenesis, and the remainder are passenger mutations. The driver 
mutations and mutational processes operative in breast cancer have not yet been
comprehensively explored. Here we examine the genomes of 100 tumours for somatic 
copy number changes and mutations in the coding exons of protein-coding genes.
The number of somatic mutations varied markedly between individual tumours. We
found strong correlations between mutation number, age at which cancer was
diagnosed and cancer histological grade, and observed multiple mutational
signatures, including one present in about ten per cent of tumours characterized 
by numerous mutations of cytosine at TpC dinucleotides. Driver mutations were
identified in several new cancer genes including AKT2, ARID1B, CASP8, CDKN1B,
MAP3K1, MAP3K13, NCOR1, SMARCD1 and TBX3. Among the 100 tumours, we found driver 
mutations in at least 40 cancer genes and 73 different combinations of mutated
cancer genes. The results highlight the substantial genetic diversity underlying 
this common disease.

PMCID: PMC3428862
PMID: 22722201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Clin Invest. 2012 Jul;122(7):2519-30. doi: 10.1172/JCI62613. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Genetic variation in T-box binding element functionally affects SCN5A/SCN10A
enhancer.

van den Boogaard M(1), Wong LY, Tessadori F, Bakker ML, Dreizehnter LK, Wakker V,
Bezzina CR, 't Hoen PA, Bakkers J, Barnett P, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology, Heart Failure Research
Center, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

The contraction pattern of the heart relies on the activation and conduction of
the electrical impulse. Perturbations of cardiac conduction have been associated 
with congenital and acquired arrhythmias as well as cardiac arrest. The pattern
of conduction depends on the regulation of heterogeneous gene expression by key
transcription factors and transcriptional enhancers. Here, we assessed the
genome-wide occupation of conduction system-regulating transcription factors
TBX3, NKX2-5, and GATA4 and of enhancer-associated coactivator p300 in the mouse 
heart, uncovering cardiac enhancers throughout the genome. Many of the enhancers 
colocalized with ion channel genes repressed by TBX3, including the clustered
sodium channel genes Scn5a, essential for cardiac function, and Scn10a. We
identified 2 enhancers in the Scn5a/Scn10a locus, which were regulated by TBX3
and its family member and activator, TBX5, and are functionally conserved in
humans. We also provided evidence that a SNP in the SCN10A enhancer associated
with alterations in cardiac conduction patterns in humans disrupts TBX3/TBX5
binding and reduces the cardiac activity of the enhancer in vivo. Thus, the
identification of key regulatory elements for cardiac conduction helps to explain
how genetic variants in noncoding regulatory DNA sequences influence the
regulation of cardiac conduction and the predisposition for cardiac arrhythmias.

PMCID: PMC3386824
PMID: 22706305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Jul 6;11(1):62-74. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.03.001. Epub
2012 May 17.

O-GlcNAc regulates pluripotency and reprogramming by directly acting on core
components of the pluripotency network.

Jang H(1), Kim TW, Yoon S, Choi SY, Kang TW, Kim SY, Kwon YW, Cho EJ, Youn HD.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory for Metabolic Checkpoint, Departments of
Biomedical Sciences and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Republic of Korea.

O-linked-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) has emerged as a critical regulator of
diverse cellular processes, but its role in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and
pluripotency has not been investigated. Here we show that O-GlcNAcylation
directly regulates core components of the pluripotency network. Blocking
O-GlcNAcylation disrupts ESC self-renewal and reprogramming of somatic cells to
induced pluripotent stem cells. The core reprogramming factors Oct4 and Sox2 are 
O-GlcNAcylated in ESCs, but the O-GlcNAc modification is rapidly removed upon
differentiation. O-GlcNAc modification of threonine 228 in Oct4 regulates Oct4
transcriptional activity and is important for inducing many pluripotency-related 
genes, including Klf2, Klf5, Nr5a2, Tbx3, and Tcl1. A T228A point mutation that
eliminates this O-GlcNAc modification reduces the capacity of Oct4 to maintain
ESC self-renewal and reprogram somatic cells. Overall, our study makes a direct
connection between O-GlcNAcylation of key regulatory transcription factors and
the activity of the pluripotency network.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22608532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Neurosci. 2012 May 9;32(19):6651-64. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4876-11.2012.

Differential modulation of the oligodendrocyte transcriptome by sonic hedgehog
and bone morphogenetic protein 4 via opposing effects on histone acetylation.

Wu M(1), Hernandez M, Shen S, Sabo JK, Kelkar D, Wang J, O'Leary R, Phillips GR, 
Cate HS, Casaccia P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Friedman Brain Institute, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) into mature
oligodendrocytes is regulated by the interplay between extrinsic signals and
intrinsic epigenetic determinants. In this study, we analyze the effect that the 
extracellular ligands sonic hedgehog (Shh) and bone morphogenetic protein 4
(BMP4), have on histone acetylation and gene expression in cultured OPCs. Shh
treatment favored the progression toward oligodendrocytes by decreasing histone
acetylation and inducing peripheral chromatin condensation. BMP4 treatment, in
contrast, inhibited the progression toward oligodendrocytes and favored
astrogliogenesis by favoring global histone acetylation and retaining
euchromatin. Pharmacological treatment or silencing of histone deacetylase 1
(Hdac1) or histone deacetylase 2 (Hdac2) in OPCs did not affect BMP4-dependent
astrogliogenesis, while it prevented Shh-induced oligodendrocyte differentiation 
and favored the expression of astrocytic genes. Transcriptional profiling of
treated OPCs, revealed that BMP4-inhibition of oligodendrocyte differentiation
was accompanied by increased levels of Wnt (Tbx3) and Notch-target genes (Jag1,
Hes1, Hes5, Hey1, and Hey2), decreased recruitment of Hdac and increased histone 
acetylation at these loci. Similar upregulation of Notch-target genes and
increased histone acetylation were observed in the corpus callosum of mice
infused with BMP4 during cuprizone-induced demyelination. We conclude that Shh
and Bmp4 differentially regulate histone acetylation and chromatin structure in
OPCs and that BMP4 acts as a potent inducer of gene expression, including Notch
and Wnt target genes, thereby enhancing the crosstalk among signaling pathways
that are known to inhibit myelination and repair.

PMCID: PMC3412138
PMID: 22573687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Jun;23(12):2362-72. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-09-0790. Epub 2012
Apr 25.

The ulnar-mammary syndrome gene, Tbx3, is a direct target of the retinoic acid
signaling pathway, which regulates its expression during mouse limb development.

Ballim RD(1), Mendelsohn C, Papaioannou VE, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, 7925 Cape Town, South Africa.

TBX3, a member of the T-box transcription factor gene family, is a
transcriptional repressor that is required for the development of the heart,
limbs, and mammary glands. Mutations in TBX3 that result in reduced functional
protein lead to ulnar-mammary syndrome, a developmental disorder characterized by
limb, mammary gland, tooth, and genital abnormalities. Increased levels of TBX3
have been shown to contribute to the oncogenic process, and TBX3 is overexpressed
in several cancers, including breast cancer, liver cancer, and melanoma. Despite 
its important role in development and postnatal life, little is known about the
signaling pathways that modulate TBX3 expression. Here we show, using in vitro
and in vivo assays, that retinoic acid (RA) activates endogenous TBX3 expression,
which is mediated by an RA-receptor complex directly binding and activating the
TBX3 promoter, and we provide evidence that this regulation may be functionally
relevant in mouse embryonic limb development. Our data identify TBX3 as a direct 
target of the RA signaling pathway and extend our understanding of the role and
regulation of TBX3 in limb development.

PMCID: PMC3374754
PMID: 22535523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 15;21(14):3299-305. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds158. Epub 2012
Apr 24.

Identification of a novel percent mammographic density locus at 12q24.

Stevens KN(1), Lindstrom S, Scott CG, Thompson D, Sellers TA, Wang X, Wang A,
Atkinson E, Rider DN, Eckel-Passow JE, Varghese JS, Audley T, Brown J, Leyland J,
Luben RN, Warren RM, Loos RJ, Wareham NJ, Li J, Hall P, Liu J, Eriksson L, Czene 
K, Olson JE, Pankratz VS, Fredericksen Z, Diasio RB, Lee AM, Heit JA, DeAndrade
M, Goode EL, Vierkant RA, Cunningham JM, Armasu SM, Weinshilboum R, Fridley BL,
Batzler A, Ingle JN, Boyd NF, Paterson AD, Rommens J, Martin LJ, Hopper JL,
Southey MC, Stone J, Apicella C, Kraft P, Hankinson SE, Hazra A, Hunter DJ,
Easton DF, Couch FJ, Tamimi RM, Vachon CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Charlton 6-239, 200 First
St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Percent mammographic density adjusted for age and body mass index (BMI) is one of
the strongest risk factors for breast cancer and has a heritable component that
remains largely unidentified. We performed a three-stage genome-wide association 
study (GWAS) of percent mammographic density to identify novel genetic loci
associated with this trait. In stage 1, we combined three GWASs of percent
density comprised of 1241 women from studies at the Mayo Clinic and identified
the top 48 loci (99 single nucleotide polymorphisms). We attempted replication of
these loci in 7018 women from seven additional studies (stage 2). The
meta-analysis of stage 1 and 2 data identified a novel locus, rs1265507 on 12q24,
associated with percent density, adjusting for age and BMI (P = 4.43 × 10(-8)).
We refined the 12q24 locus with 459 additional variants (stage 3) in a combined
analysis of all three stages (n = 10 377) and confirmed that rs1265507 has the
strongest association in the 12q24 region (P = 1.03 × 10(-8)). Rs1265507 is
located between the genes TBX5 and TBX3, which are members of the
phylogenetically conserved T-box gene family and encode transcription factors
involved in developmental regulation. Understanding the mechanism underlying this
association will provide insight into the genetics of breast tissue composition.

PMCID: PMC3384385
PMID: 22532574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Jul;366(1-2):309-18. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1309-8. Epub 
2012 Apr 17.

Endothelin-induced differentiation of Nkx2.5<U+207A> cardiac progenitor cells into
pacemaking cells.

Zhang X(1), Guo JP, Chi YL, Liu YC, Zhang CS, Yang XQ, Lin HY, Jiang EP, Xiong
SH, Zhang ZY, Liu BH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, The Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China.

The mechanisms governing the development of cardiac pacemaking and conduction
system are not well understood. In order to provide evidence for the derivation
of pacemaking cells and the signal that induce and maintain the cells in the
developing heart, Nkx2.5(+) cardiac progenitor cells (CPCs) were isolated from
embryonic heart tubes of rats. Endothelin-1 was subsequently added to the CPCs to
induce differentiation of them towards cardiac pacemaking cells. After the
treatment, Nkx2.5(+) CPCs displayed spontaneous beating and spontaneously
electrical activity as what we have previously described. Furthermore, RT-PCR and
immunofluorescence staining demonstrated that Tbx3 expression was increased and
Nkx2.5 expression was decreased in the induced cells 4 days after ET-1 treatment.
And the significantly increased expression of Hcn4 and connexin-45 were detected 
in the induced cells 10 days after the treatment. In addition, Nkx2.5(+) CPCs
were transfected with pGCsi-Tbx3 4 days after ET-1 treatment in an attempt to
determine the transcription regulatory factor governing the differentiation of
the cells into cardiac pacemaking cells. The results showed that silencing of
Tbx3 decreased the pacemaking activity and led to down-regulation of pacemaker
genes in the induced cells. These results confirmed that Nkx2.5(+) CPCs
differentiated into cardiac pacemaking cells after being treated with ET-1 and
suggested that an ET-1-Tbx3 molecular pathway govern/mediate this process. In
conclusion, our study support the notion that pacemaking cells originate from
Nkx2.5(+) CPCs present in embryonic heart tubes and endothelin-1 might be
involved in diversification of cardiomyogenic progenitors toward the cells.

PMID: 22527936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Cardiovasc Res. 2012 Jun 1;94(3):398-9. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvs154. Epub 2012 Apr
20.

Tbx3: a new trick for an 'old' myocyte?

Ebert SN.

Comment on
    Cardiovasc Res. 2012 Jun 1;94(3):439-49.

PMID: 22523095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Dongwuxue Yanjiu. 2012 Apr;33(2):158-64. doi: 10.3724/SP.J.1141.2012.02158.

[Cloning and expression of Tbx3 gene in Siberian sturgeon, Acipenser baerii].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang H(1), Fan CX, Song JK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Marine Biosystem and Neurosciences, Shanghai Ocean University,
Shanghai, China.

Tbx3, a member of the TBX2 subfamily of T-box gene family, encodes a
transcription factor with a highly conserved DNA-binding domain, which called
T-domain. Tbx3 is involved in morphogenesis and organogenesis in vertebrates,
such as limb development, heart remodeling, and neural placode differentiation.
In the present study, a full-length 2 908 bp Tbx3 cDNA from Acipenser baerii
(AbTbx3) was obtained using RT-PCR and RACE technique, which includes a 2 166 bp 
complete open reading frame encoding a putative peptide of 721 amino acids.
AbTbx3 shares 73.5% identity with its human homolog. Particularly, the
DNA-binding domain of AbTbx3 shared 95.2% identity with human Tbx3. Phylogenetic 
analysis revealed that AbTbx3 was grouped with Tbx3s in other vertebrates, which 
were clustered with Tbx2s and separated from Tbx4/5s. The predicted secondary and
three-dimensional structures of the T-domain of AbTbx3 were remarkably similar to
human Tbx3. Through semi-quantity RT-PCR, the expression of AbTbx3 was first
detected at blastula stage during Siberian sturgeon embryonic development,
increased gradually, reached its peak at early tail-bud stage and then decreased 
slightly. In adult sturgeon, AbTbx3 was strongly expressed in eye, brain, gill,
intestines, pectoral fin and pelvic fin, but not in liver, blood, heart, kidney
and muscle. The whole mount in situ hybridization showed that AbTbx3 was mainly
expressed in the otic vesicle, hindbrain, dorsal notochord, pineal organ and
dorsal fin bud in the larvae of stage 37 and 43.

PMID: 22467390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cardiovasc Res. 2012 Jun 1;94(3):439-49. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvs120. Epub 2012 Mar
14.

T-box transcription factor TBX3 reprogrammes mature cardiac myocytes into
pacemaker-like cells.

Bakker ML(1), Boink GJ, Boukens BJ, Verkerk AO, van den Boogaard M, den Haan AD, 
Hoogaars WM, Buermans HP, de Bakker JM, Seppen J, Tan HL, Moorman AF, 't Hoen PA,
Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 15, Room L2-108, 1105 AZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2012 Jun 1;94(3):398-9.

AIM: Treatment of disorders of the sinus node or the atrioventricular node
requires insights into the molecular mechanisms of development and homoeostasis
of these pacemaker tissues. In the developing heart, transcription factor TBX3 is
required for pacemaker and conduction system development. Here, we explore the
role of TBX3 in the adult heart and investigate whether TBX3 is able to
reprogramme terminally differentiated working cardiomyocytes into pacemaker
cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: TBX3 expression was ectopically induced in cardiomyocytes of
adult transgenic mice using tamoxifen. Expression analysis revealed an efficient 
switch from the working myocardial expression profile to that of the pacemaker
myocardium. This included suppression of genes encoding gap junction subunits
(Cx40, Cx43), the cardiac Na(+) channel (Na(V)1.5; I(Na)), and inwardly
rectifying K(+) ion channels (K(ir) genes; I(K1)). Concordantly, we observed
conduction slowing in these hearts and reductions in I(Na) and I(K1) in
cardiomyocytes isolated from these hearts. The reduction in I(K1) resulted in a
more depolarized maximum diastolic potential, thus enabling spontaneous diastolic
depolarization. Neither ectopic pacemaker activity nor pacemaker current I(f) was
observed. Lentiviral expression of TBX3 in ventricular cardiomyocytes resulted in
conduction slowing and development of heterogeneous phenotypes, including
depolarized and spontaneously active cardiomyocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: TBX3 reprogrammes terminally differentiated working cardiomyocytes
and induces important pacemaker properties. The ability of TBX3 to reduce
intercellular coupling to overcome current-to-load mismatch and the ability to
reduce I(K1) density to enable diastolic depolarization are promising TBX3
characteristics that may facilitate biological pacemaker formation strategies.

PMID: 22419669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Dev Biol. 2012 May 1;365(1):259-66. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.02.020. Epub 2012
Feb 24.

Retinoic acid signaling and the initiation of mammary gland development.

Cho KW(1), Kwon HJ, Shin JO, Lee JM, Cho SW, Tickle C, Jung HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division in Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Department of Oral Biology,
Research Center for Orofacial Hard Tissue Regeneration, Brain Korea 21 Project,
Oral Science Research Center, College of Dentistry, Yonsei Center of
Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Retinoic acid receptors (RARs), which are involved in retinoic acid signal
transduction, are essential for maintaining the differentiated state of
epithelial tissues. Mammary glands are skin appendages whose development is
initiated through continuous cell-cell interactions between the ectoderm and the 
adjacent mesenchyme. Considerable progress has been made in elucidating the
molecular basis of these interactions in mammary gland formation in mouse
embryos, including the network of initiating signals comprising Fgfs, Wnts and
Bmps involved in gland positioning and the transcription factors, Tbx3 and Lef1, 
essential for mammary gland development. Here, we provide evidence that retinoic 
acid signaling may also be involved in mammary gland development. We documented
the expression of gene-encoding enzymes that produce retinoic acid (Raldh2) and
enzymes that degrade it (Cyp26a1, Cyp26b1). We also analyzed the expression of
RAR-ß, a direct transcriptional target of retinoic acid signaling. Raldh2 and
RAR-ß were expressed in E10-E10.5 mouse embryos in somites adjacent to the flank 
region where mammary buds 2, 3 and 4 develop. These expression patterns
overlapped with that of Fgf10, which is known to be required for mammary gland
formation. RAR-ß was also expressed in the mammary mesenchyme in E12 mouse
embryos; RAR-ß protein was expressed in the mammary epithelium and developing fat
pad. Retinoic acid levels in organ cultures of E10.5 mouse embryo flanks were
manipulated by adding either retinoic acid or citral, a retinoic acid synthesis
inhibitor. Reduced retinoic acid synthesis altered the expression of genes
involved in retinoic acid homeostasis and also demonstrated that retinoic acid
signaling is required for Tbx3 expression, whereas high levels of retinoic acid
signaling inhibited Bmp4 expression and repressed Wnt signaling. The results of
the experiments using RNAi against Tbx3 and Wnt10b suggested feedback
interactions that regulate retinoic acid homeostasis in mammary gland-forming
regions. We produced a molecular model for mammary gland initiation that
incorporated retinoic acid signaling.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22387209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Biotechnol J. 2012 Jun;7(6):789-97. doi: 10.1002/biot.201100356. Epub 2012 Feb
29.

Methods for iPS cell generation for basic research and clinical applications.

Mochiduki Y(1), Okita K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan.

The induction of pluripotency can be achieved by forced expression of defined
factors in somatic cells. The established cells, termed induced pluripotent stem 
(iPS) cells, have pluripotency and an infinite capacity for self-renewal in
common with embryonic stem (ES) cells. Patient-specific iPS cells could be a
useful source for drug discovery and cell transplantation therapies; however, the
original method for iPS cell generation had several issues that were obstacles to
their clinical application. Recent studies have brought about various
improvements for iPS cell generation and uncovered several characteristics of iPS
cells. Here we summarize the current status of iPS cell studies, with a focus on 
the improved methods that can be used to generate iPS cells, and also refer to
the future challenges.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22378737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Reproduction. 2012 Apr;143(4):477-89. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0379. Epub 2012 Feb 24.

Effect of ectopic expression of homeoprotein EGAM1C on the cell morphology,
growth, and differentiation in a mouse embryonic stem cell line, MG1.19 cells.

Iha M(1), Watanabe M, Kihara Y, Sugawara S, Saito K, Soma M, Sato S, Mori Y,
Kasuga K, Kojima I, Sasamura R, Murata J, Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Animal Cell Technology, Graduate School of Bioresource
Sciences, Akita Prefectural University, Akita 010-0195, Japan.

The homeoprotein EGAM1C was identified in preimplantation mouse embryos and
embryonic stem (ES) cells. To explore the impact of EGAM1C on the hallmarks of
mouse ES cells, MG1.19 cells stably expressing EGAM1C at levels similar to those 
in blastocysts were established using an episomal expression system. In the
presence of leukemia inhibitory factor (+LIF), control transfectants with an
empty vector formed flattened cell colonies, while Egam1c transfectants formed
compacted colonies with increased E-CADHERIN expression. In Egam1c transfectants,
the cellular contents of POU5F1 (OCT4), SOX2, TBX3, and NANOG increased. Cell
growth was accelerated in an undifferentiated state sustained by LIF and in the
course of differentiation. During clonal proliferation, EGAM1C stabilized the
undifferentiated state. In adherent culture conditions, EGAM1C partly inhibited
the progression of differentiation at least within a 4-day culture period in the 
presence of retinoic acid by preventing the downregulation of LIF signaling with 
a robust increase in TBX3 expression. Conversely, EGAM1C enhanced the expression 
of lineage marker genes Fgf5 (epiblast), T (mesoderm), Gata6 (primitive
endoderm), and Cdx2 (trophectoderm) in -LIF conditions. In embryoid bodies
expressing EGAM1C, the expression of marker genes for extraembryonic cell
lineages, including Tpbpa (spongiotrophoblast) and Plat (parietal endoderm),
increased. These results demonstrated that the ectopic expression of EGAM1C is
capable of affecting the stabilization of an undifferentiated state and the
progression of differentiation in MG1.19 ES cells, in addition to affecting
cellular morphology and growth.

PMID: 22367590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med. 2012 May-Jun;4(3):273-83. doi:
10.1002/wsbm.1162. Epub 2012 Feb 14.

Diverse functional networks of Tbx3 in development and disease.

Washkowitz AJ(1), Gavrilov S, Begum S, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY, USA.

The T-box transcription factor Tbx3 plays multiple roles in normal development
and disease. In order to function in different tissues and on different target
genes, Tbx3 binds transcription factors or other cofactors specific to temporal
or spatial locations. Examining the development of the mammary gland, limbs, and 
heart as well as the biology of stem cells and cancer provides insights into the 
diverse and common functions that Tbx3 can perform. By either repressing or
activating transcription of target genes in a context-dependent manner, Tbx3 is
able to modulate differentiation of immature progenitor cells, control the rate
of cell proliferation, and mediate cellular signaling pathways. Because the
direct regulators of these cellular processes are highly context-dependent, it is
essential that Tbx3 has the flexibility to regulate transcription of a large
group of targets, but only become a active on a small cohort of them at any given
time or place. Moreover, Tbx3 must be responsive to the variety of different
upstream factors that are present in different tissues. Only by understanding the
network of genes, proteins, and molecules with which Tbx3 interacts can we hope
to understand the role that Tbx3 plays in normal development and how its aberrant
expression can lead to disease. Because of its myriad functions in disparate
developmental and disease contexts, Tbx3 is an ideal candidate for a
systems-based approach to genetic function and interaction.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3328642
PMID: 22334480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Eur Urol. 2012 Jun;61(6):1245-56. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2012.01.011. Epub 2012
Jan 18.

Genome-wide analysis of CpG island methylation in bladder cancer identified TBX2,
TBX3, GATA2, and ZIC4 as pTa-specific prognostic markers.

Kandimalla R(1), van Tilborg AA, Kompier LC, Stumpel DJ, Stam RW, Bangma CH,
Zwarthoff EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation markers could serve as useful biomarkers, both as
markers for progression and for urine-based diagnostic assays.
OBJECTIVE: Identify bladder cancer (BCa)-specific methylated DNA sequences for
predicting pTa-specific progression and detecting BCa in voided urine.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Genome-wide methylation analysis was performed
on 44 bladder tumours using the Agilent 244K Human CpG Island Microarray (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Validation was done using a custom Illumina 
384-plex assay (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) in a retrospective group of 77
independent tumours. Markers for progression were identified in pTa (n = 24)
tumours and validated retrospectively in an independent series of 41 pTa tumours 
by the SNaPshot method (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).
MEASUREMENTS: The percentage of methylation in tumour and urine samples was used 
to identify markers for detection and related to the end point of progression to 
muscle-invasive disease with Kaplan-Meier models and multivariate analysis.
RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: In the validation set, methylation of the T-box 2
(TBX2), T-box 3 (TBX3), GATA binding protein 2 (GATA2), and Zic family member 4
(ZIC4) genes was associated with progression to muscle-invasive disease in pTa
tumours (p = 0.003). Methylation of TBX2 alone showed a sensitivity of 100%, a
specificity of 80%, a positive predictive value of 78%, and a negative predictive
value of 100%, with an area under the curve of 0.96 (p<0.0001) for predicting
progression. Multivariate analysis showed that methylation of TBX3 and GATA2 are 
independent predictors of progression when compared to clinicopathologic
variables (p = 0.04 and p = 0.03, respectively). The predictive accuracy improved
by 23% by adding methylation of TBX2, TBX3, and GATA2 to the European
Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer risk scores. We further
identified and validated 110 CpG islands (CGIs) that are differentially
methylated between tumour cells and control urine. The limitation of this study
is the small number of patients analysed for testing and validating the
prognostic markers.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified four methylation markers that predict progression
in pTa tumours, thereby allowing stratification of patients for personalised
follow-up. In addition, we identified CGIs that will enable detection of bladder 
tumours in voided urine.

Copyright © 2012 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 22284968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Dev Dyn. 2012 Feb;241(2):365-75. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23710. Epub 2011 Dec 16.

Dynamic expression of Tbx2 subfamily genes in development of the mouse
reproductive system.

Douglas NC(1), Heng K, Sauer MV, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York 10032, USA. nd2058@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx4, and Tbx5, members of the Tbx2 subfamily of T-box
transcription factor genes, are important for many aspects of embryonic
development and mutations in some human TBX2 subfamily genes cause developmental 
syndromes. In addition, TBX2 and TBX3 are overexpressed in a variety of cancers, 
including reproductive system cancers. This study characterizes the expression of
Tbx2 subfamily genes during development of the reproductive system.
RESULTS: We show that these genes are expressed in both the internal and external
reproductive systems. Tbx2 is expressed in gonads and genital ducts, the Wolffian
and Müllerian ducts, while Tbx3 is only expressed in genital ducts. Tbx4 is
expressed in embryonic and postnatal germ cells. All four genes are expressed in 
mesenchyme in external genitalia, with Tbx3 and Tbx5 expression in the epithelium
as well.
CONCLUSION: This study lays the foundation for investigation of functional
requirements for Tbx2 subfamily genes in development of the mammalian
reproductive system.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3503486
PMID: 22223620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 17;109(3):E154-63. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1115165109. Epub 2011 Dec 27.

Lethal arrhythmias in Tbx3-deficient mice reveal extreme dosage sensitivity of
cardiac conduction system function and homeostasis.

Frank DU(1), Carter KL, Thomas KR, Burr RM, Bakker ML, Coetzee WA,
Tristani-Firouzi M, Bamshad MJ, Christoffels VM, Moon AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84158, USA.

TBX3 is critical for human development: mutations in TBX3 cause congenital
anomalies in patients with ulnar-mammary syndrome. Data from mice and humans
suggest multiple roles for Tbx3 in development and function of the cardiac
conduction system. The mechanisms underlying the functional development,
maturation, and maintenance of the conduction system are not well understood. We 
tested the requirements for Tbx3 in these processes. We generated a unique series
of Tbx3 hypomorphic and conditional mouse mutants with varying levels and
locations of Tbx3 activity within the heart, and developed techniques for
evaluating in vivo embryonic conduction system function. Disruption of Tbx3
function in different regions of the developing heart causes discrete phenotypes 
and lethal arrhythmias: sinus pauses and bradycardia indicate sinoatrial node
dysfunction, whereas preexcitation and atrioventricular block reveal
abnormalities in the atrioventricular junction. Surviving Tbx3 mutants are at
increased risk for sudden death. Arrhythmias induced by knockdown of Tbx3 in
adults reveal its requirement for conduction system homeostasis. Arrhythmias in
Tbx3-deficient embryos are accompanied by disrupted expression of multiple ion
channels despite preserved expression of previously described conduction system
markers. These findings indicate that Tbx3 is required for the conduction system 
to establish and maintain its correct molecular identity and functional
properties. In conclusion, Tbx3 is required for the functional development,
maturation, and homeostasis of the conduction system in a highly dosage-sensitive
manner. TBX3 and its regulatory targets merit investigation as candidates for
human arrhythmias.

PMCID: PMC3271904
PMID: 22203979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Feb 15;318(4):379-90. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.11.011. Epub
2011 Nov 29.

Transcriptional profiling identifies upregulated genes following induction of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in squamous carcinoma cells.

Humtsoe JO(1), Koya E, Pham E, Aramoto T, Zuo J, Ishikawa T, Kramer RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Tissue Biology, School of Dentistry, 521 Parnassus
Avenue, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. 
joseph.humtsoe@ucsf.edu

During the progression of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), the
induction of an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program may play a
critical role in the dissemination of cells from the primary tumor to distant
metastatic foci. The process of EMT involves the activation of several important 
genes and pathways to help maintain survival and growth and evolve into highly
invasive and metastatic variants. In this study, expression microarray analysis
identified a set of 145 upregulated genes in EMT-like HNSCC cells. Some of the
strongly upregulated transcripts include genes that are reportedly involved in
invasion and metastasis, such as DOCK10, LOX, ROBO1 and SRGN. Importantly, the
Tbx3 gene, a member of the T-box transcription factor, was strongly upregulated
in SCC cells displaying an EMT-like phenotype compared to cells with an
epitheloid, non-EMT behavior. Tbx3 was also found to be strongly upregulated at
the protein and gene expression level in an experimental model of snail-induced
EMT cells. In addition, siRNA-induced Tbx3 depletion modestly suppressed cell
invasion while enhancing Tbx3-mediated resistance to anoikis. Our findings
provide evidence that Tbx3 overexpression promotes SCC cell survival displaying
an EMT phenotype. This set of newly identified genes that are modulated during
EMT-like conversion may be important diagnostic biomarkers during the process of 
HNSCC progression.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22154512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Apr;69(8):1377-89. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0884-2. Epub
2011 Dec 1.

Tbx2 and Tbx3 induce atrioventricular myocardial development and endocardial
cushion formation.

Singh R(1), Hoogaars WM, Barnett P, Grieskamp T, Rana MS, Buermans H, Farin HF,
Petry M, Heallen T, Martin JF, Moorman AF, 't Hoen PA, Kispert A, Christoffels
VM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Germany.

A key step in heart development is the coordinated development of the
atrioventricular canal (AVC), the constriction between the atria and ventricles
that electrically and physically separates the chambers, and the development of
the atrioventricular valves that ensure unidirectional blood flow. Using
knock-out and inducible overexpression mouse models, we provide evidence that the
developmentally important T-box factors Tbx2 and Tbx3, in a functionally
redundant manner, maintain the AVC myocardium phenotype during the process of
chamber differentiation. Expression profiling and ChIP-sequencing analysis of
Tbx3 revealed that it directly interacts with and represses chamber myocardial
genes, and induces the atrioventricular pacemaker-like phenotype by activating
relevant genes. Moreover, mutant mice lacking 3 or 4 functional alleles of Tbx2
and Tbx3 failed to form atrioventricular cushions, precursors of the valves and
septa. Tbx2 and Tbx3 trigger development of the cushions through a regulatory
feed-forward loop with Bmp2, thus providing a mechanism for the co-localization
and coordination of these important processes in heart development.

PMCID: PMC3314179
PMID: 22130515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Mar 15;21(6):1217-29. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr553. Epub 2011 Nov 
24.

Identification of a Tbx1/Tbx2/Tbx3 genetic pathway governing pharyngeal and
arterial pole morphogenesis.

Mesbah K(1), Rana MS, Francou A, van Duijvenboden K, Papaioannou VE, Moorman AF, 
Kelly RG, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Institute of Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille University,
CNRS UMR6216, Marseille, France.

The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) is the most common microdeletion
disorder and is characterized by abnormal development of the pharyngeal apparatus
and heart. Cardiovascular malformations (CVMs) affecting the outflow tract (OFT) 
are frequently observed in 22q11.2DS and are among the most commonly occurring
heart defects. The gene encoding T-box transcription factor 1 (Tbx1) has been
identified as a major candidate for 22q11.2DS. However, CVMs are generally
considered to have a multigenic basis and single-gene mutations underlying these 
malformations are rare. The T-box family members Tbx2 and Tbx3 are individually
required in regulating aspects of OFT and pharyngeal development. Here, using
expression and three-dimensional reconstruction analysis, we show that Tbx1 and
Tbx2/Tbx3 are largely uniquely expressed but overlap in the caudal pharyngeal
mesoderm during OFT development, suggesting potential combinatorial requirements.
Cross-regulation between Tbx1 and Tbx2/Tbx3 was analyzed using mouse genetics and
revealed that Tbx1 deficiency affects Tbx2 and Tbx3 expression in neural
crest-derived cells and pharyngeal mesoderm, whereas Tbx2 and Tbx3 function
redundantly upstream of Tbx1 and Hh ligand expression in pharyngeal endoderm and 
bone morphogenetic protein- and fibroblast growth factor-signaling in cardiac
progenitors. Moreover, in vivo, we show that loss of two of the three genes
results in severe pharyngeal hypoplasia and heart tube extension defects. These
findings reveal an indispensable T-box gene network governing pharyngeal and OFT 
development and identify TBX2 and TBX3 as potential modifier genes of the
cardiopharyngeal phenotypes found in TBX1-haploinsufficient 22q11.2DS patients.

PMCID: PMC3491916
PMID: 22116936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. BMC Dev Biol. 2011 Oct 31;11:65. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-11-65.

TBX3 over-expression causes mammary gland hyperplasia and increases mammary
stem-like cells in an inducible transgenic mouse model.

Liu J(1), Esmailpour T, Shang X, Gulsen G, Liu A, Huang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, University of
California, Irvine, USA.

BACKGROUND: The T-box transcription factor TBX3 is necessary for early embryonic 
development and for the normal development of the mammary gland. Homozygous
mutations, in mice, are embryonic lethal while heterozygous mutations result in
perturbed mammary gland development. In humans, mutations that result in the
haploinsufficiency of TBX3 causes Ulnar Mammary Syndrome (UMS) characterized by
mammary gland hypoplasia as well as other congenital defects. In addition to its 
role in mammary gland development, various studies have also supported a role for
Tbx3 in breast cancer development. TBX3 is over-expressed in various breast
cancer cell lines as well as cancer tissue and has been found to contribute to
breast cancer cell migration. Previous studies have suggested that TBX3
contributes to cancer development by its ability to bypass senescence by
repressing the expression of p14(ARF)-tumor suppressor. Although many studies
have shown that a dysregulation of TBX3 expression may contribute to cancer
progression, no direct evidence shows TBX3 causes breast cancer.
RESULTS: In this study, we created doxycycline inducible double transgenic mice
(MMTV-rtTA;tet-myc-TBX3-IRES-Luciferase) to test whether TBX3 over-expression can
induce tumor formation within the mammary gland. Although over-expression of
TBX3, alone, did not induce tumor formation it did promote accelerated mammary
gland development by increasing mammary epithelial cell proliferation. We also
show that TBX3 directly binds to and represses NF<U+03BA>BIB, an inhibitor of the NF-<U+03BA>B 
pathway known to play a role in regulating cell proliferation. Lastly, we also
show that the over-expression of TBX3 is associated with an increase in mammary
stem-like cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our data suggests that over-expression of TBX3 may
contribute to breast cancer development by promoting accelerated mammary gland
development through the inhibition of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway and stimulation of both
mammary epithelial cell and stem-like cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3217876
PMID: 22039763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Dev Biol. 2011 Dec 15;360(2):381-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.023. Epub 2011 
Oct 1.

Myocardial Tbx20 regulates early atrioventricular canal formation and endocardial
epithelial-mesenchymal transition via Bmp2.

Cai X(1), Nomura-Kitabayashi A, Cai W, Yan J, Christoffels VM, Cai CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Center for Molecular
Cardiology of the Child Health and Development Institute, the Black Family Stem
Cell Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

During early embryogenesis, the formation of the cardiac atrioventricular canal
(AVC) facilitates the transition of the heart from a linear tube into a chambered
organ. However, the genetic pathways underlying this developmental process are
poorly understood. The T-box transcription factor Tbx20 is expressed
predominantly in the AVC of early heart tube. It was shown that Tbx20 activates
Nmyc1 and suppresses Tbx2 expression to promote proliferation and specification
of the atrial and ventricular chambers, yet it is not known if Tbx20 is involved 
in early AVC development. Here, we report that mice lacking Tbx20 in the AVC
myocardium fail to form the AVC constriction, and the endocardial
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is severely perturbed. Tbx20 maintains
expression of a variety of genes, including Bmp2, Tbx3 and Hand1 in the AVC
myocardium. Intriguingly, we found Bmp2 downstream genes involved in the EMT
initiation are also downregulated. In addition, re-expression of Bmp2 in the AVC 
myocardium substantially rescues the EMT defects resulting from the lack of
Tbx20, suggesting Bmp2 is one of the key downstream targets of Tbx20 in AVC
development. Our data support a complex signaling network with Tbx20 suppressing 
Tbx2 in the AVC myocardium but also indirectly promoting Tbx2 expression through 
Bmp2. The spatiotemporal expression of Tbx2 in the AVC appears to be balanced
between these two opposing signals. Overall, our study provides genetic evidence 
that Tbx20 has essential roles in regulating AVC development that coordinate
early cardiac chamber formation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3217163
PMID: 21983003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Atherosclerosis. 2011 Dec;219(2):709-14. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2011.09.006. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

Genetic variations in CYP17A1, CACNB2 and PLEKHA7 are associated with blood
pressure and/or hypertension in She ethnic minority of China.

Lin Y(1), Lai X, Chen B, Xu Y, Huang B, Chen Z, Zhu S, Yao J, Jiang Q, Huang H,
Wen J, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Ningde Municipal Hospital, Ningde 352100, China.

OBJECTIVES: Two large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWAs) have
identified multiple variants associated with blood pressure (BP) or hypertension.
The present study was to investigate whether some variations were associated with
BP traits and hypertension or even prehypertension in adult She ethnic minority
of China.
METHODS: The population of the present study comprised 4460 (1979 males and 2481 
females, respectively) unrelated she ethnic minority based on a cross-sectional
study from Ningde City in Fujian province of China. There were 1692
hypertensives, 1600 prehypertensives and 1168 normotensive controls,
respectively. We genotyped 7 variants in CYP17A1, PLEKHA7, CACNB2, ATP2B1,
TBX3-TBX5, CSK-ULK3 and SH2B3 reported by the previous GWAs on Europeans. All
analyses were performed in an additive genetic model.
RESULTS: As the minor allele of rs653178 in/near SH2B3 was very rare with the
frequency of 0.018, we excluded this single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the 
further analyses. Of the other 6 loci, linear regression analyses revealed that
rs11191548 in CYP17A1 and rs11014166 in CACNB2 were significantly associated with
systolic BP (ß = -1.17, P = 0.002 and ß = -0.50, P = 0.006, respectively), while 
only SNP rs11191548 was significantly associated with diastolic BP (ß = -0.56,
P=0.002) after adjusted by age, sex and BMI. Two variants in CACNB2 and PLEKHA7
were found to be significantly related to hypertension (odds ratios [OR] and (95%
confidence interval [CI]): 0.79 (0.65-0.97) and 1.19 (1.01-1.41), respectively)
in logistic regression analyses after adjusted by age, sex and BMI. In addition, 
we found that combined risk alleles of the 6 SNPs increased risk of hypertension 
in a stepwise fashion (P for trend < 0.001). However, none of the 6 SNPs was
significantly associated with BMI or prehypertension status. While logistic
analysis showed that subjects with cumulative risk alleles more than 9 had
significantly higher risk for prehypertension (adjusted OR: 3.10, P < 0.001)
compared with those with risk alleles less than 4.
CONCLUSIONS: We replicated that variations in CYP17A1, CACNB2 and PLEKHA7 were
related to BP traits and/or hypertension in She population. In addition, although
we failed to observe single gene associated with prehypertension, we first found 
that conjoint effect of multiple risk alleles on BP might increase the risk of
progressing to prehypertension.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21963141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Gene Expr Patterns. 2011 Dec;11(8):476-83. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2011.08.003. Epub
2011 Aug 17.

Dynamic expression of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in developing mouse pancreas.

Begum S(1), Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032, USA.

Tbx2 and Tbx3 are closely related members of the T-box family of transcription
factors that are important regulators during normal development as well as major 
contributors to human developmental syndromes when mutated. Although there is
evidence for the involvement of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in pancreatic cancer, so far there 
are no reports characterizing the normal expression pattern of these genes in the
pancreas. In this study, we examined spatial and temporal expression of Tbx2 and 
Tbx3 in mouse pancreas during development and in the adult using in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Our results show that Tbx2 and Tbx3 are
both expressed in the pancreatic mesenchyme throughout development beginning at
embryonic day (E) 9.5. In addition, Tbx2 is expressed in pancreatic vasculature
during development and in epithelial-derived endocrine and ductal cells during
late fetal stages, postnatal development and in adult pancreas. In contrast, Tbx3
is expressed in exocrine tissue in the postnatal and adult pancreas. Further our 
results demonstrate that Tbx2 and Tbx3 are expressed in tumor-derived endocrine
and exocrine cell lines, respectively. These dynamic changes in the expression
pattern of these transcription factors lay the foundation for investigation of
potential roles in pancreas development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3200443
PMID: 21867776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Sep 9;412(4):513-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.08.010. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Alternative splicing of T-box transcription factor genes.

DeBenedittis P(1), Jiao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

T-box (TBX) transcription factors are an ancient gene family with critical roles 
in embryogenesis. Currently, TBX3, TBX5, and TBX20 are TBX genes defined to have 
multiple protein isoforms created by alternative splicing and characterized by
expression and functional studies. These proteins are important for development
as mutations lead to severe developmental disorders in humans and mice.
Cumulative studies suggest that alternative splicing of these genes can regulate 
TBX activities during multiple biological processes including cardiogenesis, limb
development, and cancer mechanisms. This mini-review focuses on how alternative
splicing adds complexity to transcriptional regulation of target genes controlled
by TBX transcription factors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3171624
PMID: 21856288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Gene. 2011 Oct 15;486(1-2):41-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.07.013. Epub 2011 Jul
20.

Basal transcription of the human TBX3 gene, a key developmental regulator which
is overexpressed in several cancers, requires functional NF-Y and Sp1 sites.

Smith J(1), Mowla S, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, South Africa.

TBX3 is a member of the T-box family of genes that encode developmentally
important transcription factors. Mutations resulting in decreased levels of
functional TBX3 lead to Ulnar-Mammary Syndrome and increased levels of TBX3 have 
been linked to several cancers. To understand the mechanisms regulating TBX3
expression we have previously cloned the 5'-flanking region of the human TBX3
gene and here we describe cis-elements required for its basal transcription.
Using site-directed mutagenesis, luciferase reporter assays and in vitro and in
vivo DNA binding experiments we identify a Sp1 element and two CCAAT boxes to be 
essential for basal TBX3 promoter activity. Our results are consistent with
reports that these sites are necessary for efficient basal transcription in genes
which lack TATA boxes or an Initiator which we show to be the case for TBX3.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21784138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Stem Cells. 2011 Aug;29(8):1196-205. doi: 10.1002/stem.673.

CC chemokine ligand 2 and leukemia inhibitory factor cooperatively promote
pluripotency in mouse induced pluripotent cells.

Hasegawa Y(1), Takahashi N, Forrest AR, Shin JW, Kinoshita Y, Suzuki H,
Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa, Japan.

The pluripotency of mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs) can be maintained by feeder cells, which secrete leukemia
inhibitory factor (LIF). We found that feeder cells provide a relatively low
concentration (25 unit/ml) of LIF, which is insufficient to maintain the
ESCs/iPSCs pluripotency in feeder free conditions. To identify additional factors
involved in the maintenance of pluripotency, we carried out a global transcript
expression profiling of mouse iPSCs cultured on feeder cells and in feeder-free
(LIF-treated) conditions. This identified 17 significantly differentially
expressed genes (adjusted p value <0.05) including seven chemokines overexpressed
in iPSCs grown on feeder cells. Ectopic expression of these chemokines in iPSCs
revealed that CC chemokine ligand 2 (Ccl2) induced the key transcription factor
genes for pluripotency, Klf4, Nanog, Sox2, and Tbx3. Furthermore, addition of
recombinant Ccl2 protein drastically increased the number of Nanog-green
fluorescent protein-positive iPSCs grown in low-LIF feeder free conditions. We
further revealed that pluripotency promotion by Ccl2 is mediated by activating
the Stat3-pathway followed by Klf4 upregulation. We demonstrated that
Ccl2-mediated increased pluripotency is independent of phosphoinositide 3-kinase 
and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways and that Tbx3 may be upregulated by
Klf4. Overall, Ccl2 cooperatively activates the Stat3-pathway with LIF in
feeder-free conditions to maintain pluripotency for ESCs/iPSCs.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21681859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2011 Aug;4(4):532-42. doi:
10.1161/CIRCEP.111.963421. Epub 2011 May 16.

Molecular analysis of patterning of conduction tissues in the developing human
heart.

Sizarov A(1), Devalla HD, Anderson RH, Passier R, Christoffels VM, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies in experimental animals have revealed some molecular
mechanisms underlying the differentiation of the myocardium making up the
conduction system. To date, lack of gene expression data for the developing human
conduction system has precluded valid extrapolations from experimental studies to
the human situation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed immunohistochemical analyses of the expression 
of key transcription factors, such as ISL1, TBX3, TBX18, and NKX2-5, ion channel 
HCN4, and connexins in the human embryonic heart. We supplemented our molecular
analyses with 3-dimensional reconstructions of myocardial TBX3 expression. TBX3
is expressed in the developing conduction system and in the right venous valve,
atrioventricular ring bundles, and retro-aortic nodal region. TBX3-positive
myocardium, with exception of the top of the ventricular septum, is devoid of
fast-conducting connexin40 and connexin43 and hence identifies slowly conducting 
pathways. In the early embryonic heart, we found wide expression of the pacemaker
channel HCN4 at the venous pole, including the atrial chambers. HCN4 expression
becomes confined during later developmental stages to the components of the
conduction system. Patterns of expression of transcription factors, known from
experimental studies to regulate the development of the sinus node and
atrioventricular conduction system, are similar in the human and mouse developing
hearts.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings point to the comparability of mechanisms governing the 
development of the cardiac conduction patterning in human and mouse, which
provide a molecular basis for understanding the functioning of the human
developing heart before formation of a discrete conduction system.

PMID: 21576278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Nat Genet. 2011 Jun;43(6):531-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.834. Epub 2011 May 15.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies identifies common variants
associated with blood pressure variation in east Asians.

Kato N(1), Takeuchi F, Tabara Y, Kelly TN, Go MJ, Sim X, Tay WT, Chen CH, Zhang
Y, Yamamoto K, Katsuya T, Yokota M, Kim YJ, Ong RT, Nabika T, Gu D, Chang LC,
Kokubo Y, Huang W, Ohnaka K, Yamori Y, Nakashima E, Jaquish CE, Lee JY, Seielstad
M, Isono M, Hixson JE, Chen YT, Miki T, Zhou X, Sugiyama T, Jeon JP, Liu JJ,
Takayanagi R, Kim SS, Aung T, Sung YJ, Zhang X, Wong TY, Han BG, Kobayashi S,
Ogihara T, Zhu D, Iwai N, Wu JY, Teo YY, Tai ES, Cho YS, He J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Diagnostics and Therapeutics, Research Institute, National 
Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. nokato@ri.ncgm.go.jp

We conducted a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies of systolic (SBP)
and diastolic (DBP) blood pressure in 19,608 subjects of east Asian ancestry from
the AGEN-BP consortium followed up with de novo genotyping (n = 10,518) and
further replication (n = 20,247) in east Asian samples. We identified genome-wide
significant (P < 5 × 10(-8)) associations with SBP or DBP, which included
variants at four new loci (ST7L-CAPZA1, FIGN-GRB14, ENPEP and NPR3) and a newly
discovered variant near TBX3. Among the five newly discovered variants, we
obtained significant replication in the independent samples for all of these loci
except NPR3. We also confirmed seven loci previously identified in populations of
European descent. Moreover, at 12q24.13 near ALDH2, we observed strong
association signals (P = 7.9 × 10(-31) and P = 1.3 × 10(-35) for SBP and DBP,
respectively) with ethnic specificity. These findings provide new insights into
blood pressure regulation and potential targets for intervention.

PMCID: PMC3158568
PMID: 21572416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011 Dec;68(23):3949-61. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0693-7. Epub 
2011 May 3.

Sox4 mediates Tbx3 transcriptional regulation of the gap junction protein Cx43.

Boogerd CJ(1), Wong LY, van den Boogaard M, Bakker ML, Tessadori F, Bakkers J, 't
Hoen PA, Moorman AF, Christoffels VM, Barnett P.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Centre, Academic Medical Centre, University of
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Tbx3, a T-box transcription factor, regulates key steps in development of the
heart and other organ systems. Here, we identify Sox4 as an interacting partner
of Tbx3. Pull-down and nuclear retention assays verify this interaction and in
situ hybridization reveals Tbx3 and Sox4 to co-localize extensively in the embryo
including the atrioventricular and outflow tract cushion mesenchyme and a small
area of interventricular myocardium. Tbx3, SOX4, and SOX2 ChIP data, identify a
region in intron 1 of Gja1 bound by all tree proteins and subsequent ChIP
experiments verify that this sequence is bound, in vivo, in the developing heart.
In a luciferase reporter assay, this element displays a synergistic antagonistic 
response to co-transfection of Tbx3 and Sox4 and in vivo, in zebrafish, drives
expression of a reporter in the heart, confirming its function as a cardiac
enhancer. Mechanistically, we postulate that Sox4 is a mediator of Tbx3
transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC3214269
PMID: 21538160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 22;6(4):e18661. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018661.

Comparative analysis of 3D expression patterns of transcription factor genes and 
digit fate maps in the developing chick wing.

Fisher M(1), Downie H, Welten MC, Delgado I, Bain A, Planzer T, Sherman A, Sang
H, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Dundee, Dundee,
Scotland, United Kingdom.

Hoxd13, Tbx2, Tbx3, Sall1 and Sall3 genes are candidates for encoding
antero-posterior positional values in the developing chick wing and specifying
digit identity. In order to build up a detailed profile of gene expression
patterns in cell lineages that give rise to each of the digits over time, we
compared 3 dimensional (3D) expression patterns of these genes during wing
development and related them to digit fate maps. 3D gene expression data at
stages 21, 24 and 27 spanning early bud to digital plate formation, captured from
in situ hybridisation whole mounts using Optical Projection Tomography (OPT) were
mapped to reference wing bud models. Grafts of wing bud tissue from GFP chicken
embryos were used to fate map regions of the wing bud giving rise to each digit; 
3D images of the grafts were captured using OPT and mapped on to the same models.
Computational analysis of the combined computerised data revealed that Tbx2 and
Tbx3 are expressed in digit 3 and 4 progenitors at all stages, consistent with
encoding stable antero-posterior positional values established in the early bud; 
Hoxd13 and Sall1 expression is more dynamic, being associated with posterior
digit 3 and 4 progenitors in the early bud but later becoming associated with
anterior digit 2 progenitors in the digital plate. Sox9 expression in digit
condensations lies within domains of digit progenitors defined by fate mapping;
digit 3 condensations express Hoxd13 and Sall1, digit 4 condensations Hoxd13,
Tbx3 and to a lesser extent Tbx2. Sall3 is only transiently expressed in digit 3 
progenitors at stage 24 together with Sall1 and Hoxd13; then becomes excluded
from the digital plate. These dynamic patterns of expression suggest that these
genes may play different roles in digit identity either together or in
combination at different stages including the digit condensation stage.

PMCID: PMC3081307
PMID: 21526123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Jul 15;91(2):212-22. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr112. Epub 2011 Apr 
14.

Mechanisms of T-box gene function in the developing heart.

Greulich F(1), Rudat C, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, OE5250, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

The multi-chambered mammalian heart arises from a simple tube by polar
elongation, myocardial differentiation and morphogenesis. Members of the large
family of T-box (Tbx) transcription factors have been identified as crucial
players that act in distinct subprogrammes during cardiac regionalization. Tbx1
and Tbx18 ensure elongation of the cardiac tube at the anterior and posterior
pole, respectively. Tbx1 acts in the pharyngeal mesoderm to maintain
proliferation of mesenchymal precursor cells for formation of a myocardialized
and septated outflow tract. Tbx18 is expressed in the sinus venosus region and is
required for myocardialization of the caval veins and the sinoatrial node. Tbx5
and Tbx20 function in the early heart tube and independently activate the chamber
myocardial gene programme, whereas Tbx2 and Tbx3 locally repress this programme
to favour valvuloseptal and conduction system development. Here, we summarize
that these T-box factors act in different molecular circuits and control target
gene expression using diverse molecular strategies including binding to distinct 
protein interaction partners.

PMID: 21498422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Exp Dermatol. 2011 May;20(5):435-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2011.01271.x.

Melanoblasts in culture as an in vitro system to determine molecular changes in
melanoma.

Bosserhoff AK(1), Ellmann L, Kuphal S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

Many consolidated findings have revealed that cancer formation resembles events
of embryonic development. In particular, the network of transcription factors and
adhesion molecules is very similar when comparing neural crest-derived
melanoblasts and melanoma cells. The main difference is found in the
manifestation of distinct genes in melanoma, whereas in neural crest cells gene
expression is tightly regulated to promote either a migratory or stationary
phenotype. We established a cell culture system to generate melanoblast-related
cells (MBrc) out of melanocytes as originally described by Cook et al. First, we 
confirmed the typical gene expression pattern of BRN-2, SOX10, PAX3 and EDNRB.
Furthermore, we identified enhanced migration and proliferation similar to that
of melanoma cells. Our intention of using this system was to classify the known
'melanoma-associated genes' into a subgroup of genes solely regulated by the
differentiation process and a second subgroup that is unaffected by
differentiation and is potentially important to the stabilization of a melanoma
phenotype. The expression of melanoma-associated genes (N-cadherin, MUC-18,
integrin ß3, a3, a5, av, SLUG, TBX3, HIF1-a, BMP-4 and bFGF) was enhanced in MBrc
which were de-differentiated out of melanocytes. E-cadherin, H-cadherin and
ß-catenin, prevalently found to be downregulated in melanoma, were diminished in 
MBrc. Remarkably, the transcription factor SNAIL was unaffected by
differentiation and could be one key molecule in early melanoma development that 
is of prevailing importance. In summary, we feel that the analysis of MBrc
generated in a reproducible system will give new insight into the role and
importance of melanoma-associated genes.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21496114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Cell Biol. 2011 Apr 18;193(2):319-32. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201009100. Epub 2011 Apr
11.

Tara up-regulates E-cadherin transcription by binding to the Trio RhoGEF and
inhibiting Rac signaling.

Yano T(1), Yamazaki Y, Adachi M, Okawa K, Fort P, Uji M, Tsukita S, Tsukita S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biological Science, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences and 
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Yamadaoka 2-2, Suita, Osaka
565-0871, Japan.

The spatiotemporal regulation of E-cadherin expression is important during body
plan development and carcinogenesis. We found that Tara (Trio-associated repeat
on actin) is enriched in cadherin-based adherens junctions (AJs), and its
knockdown in MDCK cells (Tara-KD cells) significantly decreases the expression of
E-cadherin. Tara-KD activates Rac1 through the Trio RhoGEF, which binds to
E-cadherin and subsequently increases the phosphorylation of p38 and Tbx3, a
transcriptional E-cadherin repressor. Accordingly, the decrease in E-cadherin
expression is abrogated by ITX3 and SB203580 (specific inhibitors of Trio RhoGEF 
and p38MAPK, respectively), and by dephosphomimetic Tbx3. Despite the decreased
E-cadherin expression, the Tara-KD cells do not undergo an epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and remain as an epithelial cell sheet, presumably due to the
concomitant up-regulation of cadherin-6. Tara-KD reduces the actin-belt density
in the circumferential ring, and the cells form flattened cysts, suggesting that 
Tara functions to modulate epithelial cell sheet formation and integrity by
up-regulating E-cadherin transcription.

PMCID: PMC3080255
PMID: 21482718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cytogenet. 2011 Apr 2;4:9. doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-4-9.

Chromosome 12q24.31-q24.33 deletion causes multiple dysmorphic features and
developmental delay: First mosaic patient and overview of the phenotype related
to 12q24qter defects.

Al-Zahrani J(1), Al-Dosari N, Abudheim N, Alshidi TA, Colak D, Al-Habit O,
Al-Odaib A, Sakati N, Meyer B, Ozand PT, Kaya N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre,
Riyadh, 11211, Saudi Arabia. nkaya@kfshrc.edu.sa.

BACKGROUND: Genomic imbalances of the 12q telomere are rare; only a few patients 
having 12q24.31-q24.33 deletions were reported. Interestingly none of these were 
mosaic. Although some attempts have been made to establish phenotype/genotype
interaction for the deletions in this region, no clear relationship has been
established to date.
RESULTS: We have clinically screened more than 100 patients with dysmorphic
features, mental retardation and normal karyotype using high density oligo
array-CGH (aCGH) and identified a ~9.2 Mb hemizygous interstitial deletion at the
12q telomere (Chromosome 12: 46,XY,del(12)(q24.31q24.33) in a severely
developmentally retarded patient having dysmorphic features such as low set ears,
microcephaly, undescended testicles, bent elbow, kyphoscoliosis, and micropenis. 
Parents were found to be not carriers. MLPA experiments confirmed the aCGH
result. Interphase FISH revealed mosaicism in cultured peripheral blood
lymphocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Since conventional G-Banding technique missed the abnormality; this 
work re-confirms that any child with unexplained developmental delay and systemic
involvement should be studied by aCGH techniques. The FISH technique, however,
would still be useful to further delineate the research work and identify such
rare mosaicism. Among the 52 deleted genes, P2RX2, ULK1, FZD10, RAN, NCOR2 STX2, 
TESC, FBXW8, and TBX3 are noteworthy since they may have a role in observed
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3083380
PMID: 21457577  [PubMed]


180. Cell Biochem Funct. 2011 Jun;29(4):348-50. doi: 10.1002/cbf.1753.

Reduced activity and cytoplasmic localization of Runx2 is observed in C3h10t1/2
cells overexpressing Tbx3.

Deepak V(1), Zhang Z, Meng L, Zeng X, Liu W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Cell Biology, Northeast Normal University,
Changchun, China.

Tbox3, a T-box containing transcription factor, has been reported to negatively
regulate osteoblastogenesis. Here, we studied the effects mediated by Tbx3 on the
master osteogenic transcription factor Runx2 in C3h10t1/2 cells. Dual-luciferase 
assay results showed that Tbx3 interferes in the Runx2-mediated activation of
osteopontin promoter by abrogating Runx2 activity. Immunofluorescence study
demonstrated that Runx2 was simultaneously localized in the nucleus and the
cytoplasm of Tbx3-overexpressing cells. The results obtained in this study
indicate that Tbx3 abrogates Runx2 activity and elevated expression levels of
Tbx3 in the cells can result in mislocalization of Runx2.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21455926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Circulation. 2011 Mar 15;123(10):1125-35. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.980607.

Formation of the building plan of the human heart: morphogenesis, growth, and
differentiation.

Sizarov A(1), Ya J, de Boer BA, Lamers WH, Christoffels VM, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam,
Netherlands.

PMID: 21403123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Jun 1;20(11):2273-84. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr092. Epub 2011 Mar 
4.

Association of genetic variation with systolic and diastolic blood pressure among
African Americans: the Candidate Gene Association Resource study.

Fox ER(1), Young JH, Li Y, Dreisbach AW, Keating BJ, Musani SK, Liu K, Morrison
AC, Ganesh S, Kutlar A, Ramachandran VS, Polak JF, Fabsitz RR, Dries DL, Farlow
DN, Redline S, Adeyemo A, Hirschorn JN, Sun YV, Wyatt SB, Penman AD, Palmas W,
Rotter JI, Townsend RR, Doumatey AP, Tayo BO, Mosley TH Jr, Lyon HN, Kang SJ,
Rotimi CN, Cooper RS, Franceschini N, Curb JD, Martin LW, Eaton CB, Kardia SL,
Taylor HA, Caulfield MJ, Ehret GB, Johnson T; International Consortium for Blood 
Pressure Genome-wide Association Studies (ICBP-GWAS), Chakravarti A, Zhu X, Levy 
D.

Collaborators: Munroe PB, Rice KM, Bochud M, Johnson AD, Chasman DI, Smith AV,
Tobin MD, Verwoert GC, Hwang SJ, Pihur V, Vollenweider P, O'Reilly PF, Amin N,
Bragg-Gresham JL, Teumer A, Glazer NL, Launer L, Zhao JH, Aulchenko Y, Heath S,
Sõber S, Parsa A, Luan J, Arora P, Dehghan A, Zhang F, Lucas G, Hicks AA, Jackson
AU, Peden JF, Tanaka T, Wild SH, Rudan I, Igl W, Milaneschi Y, Parker AN, Fava C,
Chambers JC, Kumari M, Go MJ, van der Harst P, Kao WH, Sjögren M, Vinay DG,
Alexander M, Tabara Y, Shaw-Hawkins S, Whincup PH, Liu Y, Shi G, Kuusisto J,
Seielstad M, Sim X, Nguyen KD, Lehtimäki T, Matullo G, Wu Y, Gaunt T,
Onland-Moret NC, Cooper MN, Platou CG, Org E, Hardy R, Dahgam S, Palmen J, Vitart
V, Braund P, Kuznetsova T, Uiterwaal CS, Campbell H, Ludwig B, Tomaszewski M,
Tzoulaki I, Palmer ND, CARDIoGRAM consortium, CKDGen consortium, KidneyGen
consortium, EchoGen consortium, CHARGE-HF consortium, Aspelund T, Garcia M, Chang
YP, O'Connell JR, Steinle NI, Grobbee DE, Arking DE, Hernandez D, Najjar S,
McArdle WL, Hadley D, Brown MJ, Connell JM, Hingorani AD, Day IN, Lawlor DA,
Beilby JP, Lawrence RW, Clarke R, Collins R, Hopewell JC, Ongen H, Bis JC,
Kähönen M, Viikari J, Adair LS, Lee NR, Chen MH, Olden M, Pattaro C, Hoffman
Bolton JA, Köttgen A, Bergmann S, Mooser V, Chaturvedi N, Frayling TM, Islam M,
Jafar TH, Erdmann J, Kulkarni SR, Bornstein SR, Grässler J, Groop L, Voight BF,
Kettunen J, Howard P, Taylor A, Guarrera S, Ricceri F, Emilsson V, Plump A,
Barroso I, Khaw KT, Weder AB, Hunt SC, Bergman RN, Collins FS, Bonnycastle LL,
Scott LJ, Stringham HM, Peltonen L, Perola M, Vartiainen E, Brand SM, Staessen
JA, Wang TJ, Burton PR, Soler Artigas M, Dong Y, Snieder H, Wang X, Zhu H, Lohman
KK, Rudock ME, Heckbert SR, Smith NL, Wiggins KL, Shriner D, Veldre G, Viigimaa
M, Kinra S, Prabhakaran D, Tripathy V, Langefeld CD, Rosengren A, Thelle DS,
Corsi AM, Singleton A, Forrester T, Hilton G, McKenzie CA, Salako T, Iwai N, Kita
Y, Ogihara T, Ohkubo T, Okamura T, Ueshima H, Umemura S, Eyheramendy S, Meitinger
T, Wichmann HE, Cho YS, Kim HL, Lee JY, Scott J, Sehmi J, Zhang W, Hedblad B,
Nilsson P, Smith GD, Wong A, Narisu N, Stancáková A, Raffel LJ, Yao J, Kathiresan
S, O'Donnell C, Schwartz SM, Ikram MA, Longstreth WT Jr, Seshadri S, Shrine NR,
Wain LV, Morken MA, Swift AJ, Laitinen J, Prokopenko I, Zitting P, Cooper JA,
Humphries S, Danesh J, Rasheed A, oel A, Hamsten A, Watkins H, Bakker SJ, van
Gilst WH, Janipalli CS, Mani KR, Yajnik CS, Hofman A, Mattace-Raso FU, Oostra BA,
Demirkan A, Isaacs A, Rivadeneira F, Lakatta EG, Orru M, Scuteri A, Ala-Korpela
M, Kangas AJ, Lyytikäinen LP, Soininen P, Tukiainen T, Würz P, Ong RT, Dörr M,
Kroemer HK, Völker U, Völzke H, Galan P, Hercberg S, Lathrop M, Zelenika D,
Deloukas P, Mangino M, Spector TD, Zhai G, Meschia JF, Nalls MA, Sharma P, Terzic
J, Kumar MJ, Denniff M, Zukowska-Szczechowska E, Wagenknecht LE, Fowkes FG,
Charchar FJ, Schwarz PE, Hayward C, Guo X, Bots ML, Brand E, Samani NJ, Polasek
O, Talmud PJ, Nyberg F, Kuh D, Laan M, Hveem K, Palmer LJ, van der Schouw YT,
Casas JP, Mohlke KL, Vineis P, Raitakari O, Wong TY, Tai ES, Laakso M, Rao DC,
Harris TB, Morris RW, Dominiczak AF, Kivimaki M, Marmot MG, Miki T, Saleheen D,
Chandak GR, Coresh J, Navis G, Salomaa V, Han BG, Kooner JS, Melander O, Ridker
PM, Bandinelli S, Gyllensten UB, Wright AF, Wilson JF, Ferrucci L, Farrall M,
Tuomilehto J, Pramstaller PP, Elosua R, Soranzo N, Sijbrands EJ, Altshuler D,
Loos RJ, Shuldiner AR, Gieger C, Meneton P, Uitterlinden AG, Wareham NJ, Gudnason
V, Rettig R, Uda M, Strachan DP, Witteman JC, Hartikainen AL, Beckmann JS,
Boerwinkle E, Boehnke M, Larson MG, Järvelin MR, Psaty BM, Abecasis GR, Elliott
P, van Duijn C, Newton-Cheh C.

The prevalence of hypertension in African Americans (AAs) is higher than in other
US groups; yet, few have performed genome-wide association studies (GWASs) in AA.
Among people of European descent, GWASs have identified genetic variants at 13
loci that are associated with blood pressure. It is unknown if these variants
confer susceptibility in people of African ancestry. Here, we examined
genome-wide and candidate gene associations with systolic blood pressure (SBP)
and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) using the Candidate Gene Association Resource 
(CARe) consortium consisting of 8591 AAs. Genotypes included genome-wide
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data utilizing the Affymetrix 6.0 array with
imputation to 2.5 million HapMap SNPs and candidate gene SNP data utilizing a 50K
cardiovascular gene-centric array (ITMAT-Broad-CARe [IBC] array). For Affymetrix 
data, the strongest signal for DBP was rs10474346 (P= 3.6 × 10(-8)) located near 
GPR98 and ARRDC3. For SBP, the strongest signal was rs2258119 in C21orf91 (P= 4.7
× 10(-8)). The top IBC association for SBP was rs2012318 (P= 6.4 × 10(-6)) near
SLC25A42 and for DBP was rs2523586 (P= 1.3 × 10(-6)) near HLA-B. None of the top 
variants replicated in additional AA (n = 11 882) or European-American (n = 69
899) cohorts. We replicated previously reported European-American blood pressure 
SNPs in our AA samples (SH2B3, P= 0.009; TBX3-TBX5, P= 0.03; and CSK-ULK3, P=
0.0004). These genetic loci represent the best evidence of genetic influences on 
SBP and DBP in AAs to date. More broadly, this work supports that notion that
blood pressure among AAs is a trait with genetic underpinnings but also with
significant complexity.

PMCID: PMC3090190
PMID: 21378095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Nov;20(11):1995-2007. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0494. Epub 2011 
Apr 6.

Mesenchymal stromal cells from neonatal tracheal aspirates demonstrate a pattern 
of lung-specific gene expression.

Bozyk PD(1), Popova AP, Bentley JK, Goldsmith AM, Linn MJ, Weiss DJ, Hershenson
MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-5688, USA.

We have previously isolated mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) from the tracheal
aspirates of premature neonates with respiratory distress. Although isolation of 
MSCs correlates with the development of bronchopulmonary dysplasia, the
physiologic role of these cells remains unclear. To address this, we further
characterized the cells, focusing on the issues of gene expression, origin, and
cytokine expression. Microarray comparison of early passage neonatal lung MSC
gene expression to cord blood MSCs and human fetal and neonatal lung fibroblast
lines demonstrated that the neonatal lung MSCs differentially expressed 971 gene 
probes compared with cord blood MSCs, including the transcription factors Tbx2,
Tbx3, Wnt5a, FoxF1, and Gli2, each of which has been associated with lung
development. Compared with lung fibroblasts, 710 gene probe transcripts were
differentially expressed by the lung MSCs, including IL-6 and IL-8/CXCL8.
Differential chemokine expression was confirmed by protein analysis. Further,
neonatal lung MSCs exhibited a pattern of Hox gene expression distinct from cord 
blood MSCs but similar to human fetal lung fibroblasts, consistent with a lung
origin. On the other hand, limiting dilution analysis showed that fetal lung
fibroblasts form colonies at a significantly lower rate than MSCs, and
fibroblasts failed to undergo differentiation along adipogenic, osteogenic, and
chondrogenic lineages. In conclusion, MSCs isolated from neonatal tracheal
aspirates demonstrate a pattern of lung-specific gene expression, are distinct
from lung fibroblasts, and secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines.

PMCID: PMC3202893
PMID: 21341990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2010 May;20(4):109-14. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2010.09.004.

Tbx20, Smads, and the atrioventricular canal.

Singh R(1), Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule, D-30625 Hannover,
Germany.

Specification of chamber and nonchamber myocardium in the forming vertebrate
heart is a crucial lineage decision on which most of the functional architecture 
of the mature organ is built. Members of the T-box (Tbx) gene family are decisive
players in this early myocardial dichotomy by either promoting (Tbx5, Tbx20) or
inhibiting (Tbx2, Tbx3) the chamber gene program in the early heart tube. Because
Tbx5 and Tbx20 are widely expressed in the linear heart tube, localized
expression of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in regions fated to become primary myocardium of the 
atrioventricular canal and outflow tract is crucial to localize the chambers.
Here, we will review recent findings that suggest an important role for Tbx20 and
Bmp2/Smad signaling in restricting Tbx2 activation to the atrioventricular canal 
and outflow tract. Surprisingly, Tbx20 does not act as a direct transcriptional
repressor of Tbx2 but sequesters receptor-activated Smad factors of the Bmp
signaling pathway to prevent precocious Tbx2 transcription.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21335279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2011 Apr;50(4):642-51. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2010.12.017. Epub
2011 Jan 21.

Molecular architecture of the human specialised atrioventricular conduction axis.

Greener ID(1), Monfredi O, Inada S, Chandler NJ, Tellez JO, Atkinson A, Taube MA,
Billeter R, Anderson RH, Efimov IR, Molenaar P, Sigg DC, Sharma V, Boyett MR,
Dobrzynski H.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Medicine, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of 
Manchester, UK.

The atrioventricular conduction axis, located in the septal component of the
atrioventricular junctions, is arguably the most complex structure in the heart. 
It fulfils a multitude of functions, including the introduction of a delay
between atrial and ventricular systole and backup pacemaking. Like any other
multifunctional tissue, complexity is a key feature of this specialised tissue in
the heart, and this complexity is both anatomical and electrophysiological, with 
the two being inextricably linked. We used quantitative PCR, histology and
immunohistochemistry to analyse the axis from six human subjects. mRNAs for ~50
ion and gap junction channels, Ca(2+)-handling proteins and markers were measured
in the atrial muscle (AM), a transitional area (TA), inferior nodal extension
(INE), compact node (CN), penetrating bundle (PB) and ventricular muscle (VM).
When compared to the AM, we found a lower expression of Na(v)1.5, K(ir)2.1, Cx43 
and ANP mRNAs in the CN for example, but a higher expression of HCN1, HCN4,
Ca(v)1.3, Ca(v)3.1, K(ir)3.4, Cx40 and Tbx3 mRNAs. Expression of some related
proteins was in agreement with the expression of the corresponding mRNAs. There
is a complex and heterogeneous pattern of expression of ion and gap junction
channels and Ca(2+)-handling proteins in the human atrioventricular conduction
axis that explains the function of this crucial pathway.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21256850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 15;351(2):254-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.005. Epub 2011 
Jan 20.

The microRNA-processing enzyme Dicer is dispensable for somite segmentation but
essential for limb bud positioning.

Zhang Z(1), O'Rourke JR, McManus MT, Lewandoski M, Harfe BD, Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA.

Dicer is an enzyme that processes microRNAs (miRNAs) to their mature forms. As
miRNAs were first discovered for their role in the control of developmental
timing, we investigated their potential requirement in mouse somitogenesis, an
event with precise temporal periodicity. To address the collective role of miRNAs
in mesoderm development including somite formation, we used T (Brachyury)-Cre
mouse line to inactivate Dicer in most cells of the mesoderm lineage. This Dicer 
mutant exhibits a reduced anterior-posterior axis. Somite number remains normal
in mutant embryos up until the death of the embryos more than two days after
Dicer inactivation. Consistent with this, the molecular machineries required for 
establishing segmentation, including clock and wave front, are not perturbed.
However, somite size is reduced and later-formed somites are caudalized,
coincident with increased cell death. Outside of the paraxial mesoderm and prior 
to apparent reduction of the axis in the mutant, the position of the hindlimb
bud, a lateral plate mesoderm-derived structure, is posteriorly shifted and the
timing of hindlimb bud initiation is delayed accordingly. We observed changes in 
the expression of genes critical for limb positioning, which include a shifted
and delayed downregulation of Hand2 and Tbx3, and shifted and delayed
upregulation of Gli3 in the prospective limb bud field. The 3' UTRs of both Hand2
and Tbx3 harbor target sites for a seed sequence-sharing family of miRNAs
mir-25/32/92/363/367. As an example of the family we show that mir-363, a miRNA
with elevated expression in the prospective limb bud field, is capable of
inhibiting Hand2/Tbx3 expression in vitro in a binding site-dependent manner.
Together, our findings provide the first demonstration that in mouse embryonic
mesoderm, while Dicer is dispensable for somite segmentation, it is essential for
proper limb bud positioning.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3541530
PMID: 21256124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Eur J Med Genet. 2011 May-Jun;54(3):301-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2010.12.010. Epub 
2011 Jan 1.

The face of Ulnar Mammary syndrome?

Joss S(1), Kini U, Fisher R, Mundlos S, Prescott K, Newbury-Ecob R, Tolmie J.

Author information: 
(1)Yorkshire Regional Genetics Centre, Ward 10, Chapel Allerton Hospital,
Chapeltown Road, Leeds LS7 9TF, England, UK. shelagh.joss@ggc.scot.nhs.uk

Ulnar Mammary syndrome (UMS) is an autosomal disorder caused by
haploinsufficiency of the TBX3 gene. There is marked intrafamilial variation in
expression of the syndrome. We present one three generation family in which the
proband has absence of the right ulna and third, fourth and fifth rays in her
right hand. Her mother and maternal grandmother have more subtle anomalies while 
all have a similar facial appearance with a broad nasal tip, a broad jaw, a
prominent chin and a tongue frenulum. They have a single base pair insertion (c. 
992dup) in TBX3. We compare faces from the handful of published UMS patients
which include photographs, this family and four other cases with TBX3 mutations. 
All have similarities in appearance which we suggest could alert clinicians to
the possibility of a TBX3 mutation if individuals present with more subtle
features of UMS such as postaxial polydactyly, isolated 5th finger anomalies,
delayed puberty in males, breast hypoplasia or short stature with or without
growth hormone deficiency.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21199695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Cell Cycle. 2011 Jan 1;10(1):45-51. Epub 2011 Jan 1.

PCL2 modulates gene regulatory networks controlling self-renewal and commitment
in embryonic stem cells.

Walker E(1), Manias JL, Chang WY, Stanford WL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Recent reports have better elucidated the components of the Polycomb Repressive
Complex 2 (PRC2) and its functional role in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and their
differentiated derivatives. The depletion of a newly described mammalian PRC2
associated protein, PCL2, leads to an increase in ESC self-renewal and a delay in
differentiation, a phenotype similar to knockouts of the core PRC2 members.
Genomic and cell biology data suggest that PCL2 is important in cell fate
decisions and may play a role in recruitment of PRC2 to target genes and histone 
methylation. Importantly, depletion of PCL2 in ESCs leads to a decrease in
3meH3K27 at the proximal promoter regions of pluripotency transcription factors
Tbx3, Klf4, Foxd3 and a concomitant increase in gene expression. These proteins
subsequently activate expression of Oct4, Nanog and Sox2 through a feed-forward
gene regulatory circuit, altering the core pluripotency network and driving cell 
fate decisions towards self-renewal. We propose a model whereby alteration of the
epigenetic state of Tbx3, Klf4, and Foxd3 results in the enforced expression of
the pluripotency network, preventing differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3048073
PMID: 21193838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 11;286(10):8425-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.202150. Epub 2010
Dec 28.

Dual functions of T-box 3 (Tbx3) in the control of self-renewal and
extraembryonic endoderm differentiation in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Lu R(1), Yang A, Jin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences,
CAS/Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) possess the capacity to proliferate indefinitely in
an undifferentiated state and to differentiate into various cell types in an
organism. However, the critical question of how self-renewal and differentiation 
are precisely regulated in ESCs is not entirely understood at present. Here, we
report the essential role of Tbx3, a pluripotency-related transcription factor of
the T-box gene family, for both the maintenance of self-renewal of mouse ESCs and
for their differentiation into extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn). We show that Tbx3 
is highly expressed in ExEn cells in addition to undifferentiated ESCs. Knockdown
of Tbx3 expression using tetracycline-regulated Tbx3 siRNA resulted in the
attenuation of ESC self-renewal ability and aberrant differentiation processes,
including reduced ExEn differentiation but enhanced ectoderm and trophectoderm
differentiation. Conversely, inducible forced expression of Tbx3 triggered ExEn
lineage commitment. Mechanistically, Tbx3 directly activated the expression of
Gata6, an essential regulator of ExEn. Interestingly, Tbx3 modulated H3K27me3
modification and the association of the PRC2 complex with the promoter region of 
Gata6. Taken together, the results of this study revealed a previously
unappreciated role of a pluripotency factor in ExEn differentiation.
Additionally, our data reveal that Tbx3 may function through direct binding and
epigenetic modification of histones on the Gata6 promoter to maintain the ExEn
differentiation potential of ESCs.

PMCID: PMC3048727
PMID: 21189255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Sci Transl Med. 2010 Dec 15;2(62):62ra92. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001513.

Genetic correction of PSA values using sequence variants associated with PSA
levels.

Gudmundsson J(1), Besenbacher S, Sulem P, Gudbjartsson DF, Olafsson I,
Arinbjarnarson S, Agnarsson BA, Benediktsdottir KR, Isaksson HJ, Kostic JP,
Gudjonsson SA, Stacey SN, Gylfason A, Sigurdsson A, Holm H, Bjornsdottir US,
Eyjolfsson GI, Navarrete S, Fuertes F, Garcia-Prats MD, Polo E, Checherita IA,
Jinga M, Badea P, Aben KK, Schalken JA, van Oort IM, Sweep FC, Helfand BT, Davis 
M, Donovan JL, Hamdy FC, Kristjansson K, Gulcher JR, Masson G, Kong A, Catalona
WJ, Mayordomo JI, Geirsson G, Einarsson GV, Barkardottir RB, Jonsson E, Jinga V, 
Mates D, Kiemeney LA, Neal DE, Thorsteinsdottir U, Rafnar T, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland. julius@decode.is

Comment in
    Sci Transl Med. 2010 Dec 15;2(62):62ps55.

Measuring serum levels of the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is the most common 
screening method for prostate cancer. However, PSA levels are affected by a
number of factors apart from neoplasia. Notably, around 40% of the variability of
PSA levels in the general population is accounted for by inherited factors,
suggesting that it may be possible to improve both sensitivity and specificity by
adjusting test results for genetic effects. To search for sequence variants that 
associate with PSA levels, we performed a genome-wide association study and
follow-up analysis using PSA information from 15,757 Icelandic and 454 British
men not diagnosed with prostate cancer. Overall, we detected a genome-wide
significant association between PSA levels and single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) at six loci: 5p15.33 (rs2736098), 10q11 (rs10993994), 10q26 (rs10788160), 
12q24 (rs11067228), 17q12 (rs4430796), and 19q13.33 [rs17632542 (KLK3: I179T)],
each with P(combined) <3 × 10(-10). Among 3834 men who underwent a biopsy of the 
prostate, the 10q26, 12q24, and 19q13.33 alleles that associate with high PSA
levels are associated with higher probability of a negative biopsy (odds ratio
between 1.15 and 1.27). Assessment of association between the six loci and
prostate cancer risk in 5325 cases and 41,417 controls from Iceland, the
Netherlands, Spain, Romania, and the United States showed that the SNPs at 10q26 
and 12q24 were exclusively associated with PSA levels, whereas the other four
loci also were associated with prostate cancer risk. We propose that a
personalized PSA cutoff value, based on genotype, should be used when deciding to
perform a prostate biopsy.

PMCID: PMC3564581
PMID: 21160077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Sci Transl Med. 2010 Dec 15;2(62):62ps55. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001861.

Personalized prostate cancer screening: improving PSA tests with genomic
information.

Witte JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Institute for Human Genetics,
and Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. jwitte@ucsf.edu

Comment on
    Sci Transl Med. 2010 Dec 15;2(62):62ra92.

The use of a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test to screen for prostate cancer
is controversial because of its modest predictive value and the potential
overdiagnosis and over-treatment of the disease. A research article in this issue
of Science Translational Medicine describes single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in or near six genes that are independently associated with serum PSA
concentrations and that help to explain interindividual PSA variation. Three of
these SNPs are also associated with prostate biopsy outcomes. These findings are 
an important step toward incorporating genetic markers into PSA screening, with
the ultimate goal of devising personalized PSA tests for use in the clinic.

PMID: 21160075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. BMC Genomics. 2010 Dec 14;11:701. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-701.

DNA methylation in glioblastoma: impact on gene expression and clinical outcome.

Etcheverry A(1), Aubry M, de Tayrac M, Vauleon E, Boniface R, Guenot F, Saikali
S, Hamlat A, Riffaud L, Menei P, Quillien V, Mosser J.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS/UMR6061, Institut de Génétique et Développement, Université de Rennes 1, 
Rennes, France.

BACKGROUND: Changes in promoter DNA methylation pattern of genes involved in key 
biological pathways have been reported in glioblastoma. Genome-wide assessments
of DNA methylation levels are now required to decipher the epigenetic events
involved in the aggressive phenotype of glioblastoma, and to guide new treatment 
strategies.
RESULTS: We performed a whole-genome integrative analysis of methylation and gene
expression profiles in 40 newly diagnosed glioblastoma patients. We also screened
for associations between the level of methylation of CpG sites and overall
survival in a cohort of 50 patients uniformly treated by surgery, radiotherapy
and chemotherapy with concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide (STUPP protocol). The
methylation analysis identified 616 CpG sites differentially methylated between
glioblastoma and control brain, a quarter of which was differentially expressed
in a concordant way. Thirteen of the genes with concordant CpG sites displayed an
inverse correlation between promoter methylation and expression level in
glioblastomas: B3GNT5, FABP7, ZNF217, BST2, OAS1, SLC13A5, GSTM5, ME1, UBXD3,
TSPYL5, FAAH, C7orf13, and C3orf14. Survival analysis identified six CpG sites
associated with overall survival. SOX10 promoter methylation status (two CpG
sites) stratified patients similarly to MGMT status, but with a higher Area Under
the Curve (0.78 vs. 0.71, p-value < 5e-04). The methylation status of the FNDC3B,
TBX3, DGKI, and FSD1 promoters identified patients with MGMT-methylated tumors
that did not respond to STUPP treatment (p-value < 1e-04).
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first genome-wide integrative analysis of
DNA methylation and gene expression profiles obtained from the same GBM cohort.
We also present a methylome-based survival analysis for one of the largest
uniformly treated GBM cohort ever studied, for more than 27,000 CpG sites. We
have identified genes whose expression may be tightly regulated by epigenetic
mechanisms and markers that may guide treatment decisions.

PMCID: PMC3018478
PMID: 21156036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Dec 14;107(50):21737-42. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1007863107. Epub 2010 Nov 22.

Estrogen expands breast cancer stem-like cells through paracrine FGF/Tbx3
signaling.

Fillmore CM(1), Gupta PB, Rudnick JA, Caballero S, Keller PJ, Lander ES,
Kuperwasser C.

Author information: 
(1)Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Many tumors contain heterogeneous populations of cells, only some of which
exhibit increased tumorigenicity and resistance to anticancer therapies. Evidence
suggests that these aggressive cancer cells, often termed "cancer stem cells" or 
"cancer stem-like cells" (CSCs), rely upon developmental signaling pathways that 
are important for survival and expansion of normal stem cells. Here we report
that, in analogy to embryonic mammary epithelial biology, estrogen signaling
expands the pool of functional breast CSCs through a paracrine FGF/FGFR/Tbx3
signaling pathway. Estrogen or FGF9 pretreatment induced CSC properties of breast
cancer cell lines and freshly isolated breast cancer cells, whereas cotreatment
of cells with tamoxifen or a small molecule inhibitor of FGFR signaling was
sufficient to prevent the estrogen-induced expansion of CSCs. Furthermore,
reduction of FGFR or Tbx3 gene expression was able to abrogate tumorsphere
formation, whereas ectopic Tbx3 expression increased tumor seeding potential by
100-fold. These findings demonstrate that breast CSCs are stimulated by estrogen 
through a signaling pathway that similarly controls normal mammary epithelial
stem cell biology.

PMCID: PMC3003123
PMID: 21098263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. BMC Genomics. 2010 Nov 6;11:619. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-619.

Digital gene expression tag profiling of bat digits provides robust candidates
contributing to wing formation.

Wang Z(1), Dong D, Ru B, Young RL, Han N, Guo T, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Ecology and Evolution, iAIR, East China Normal
University, Shanghai 200062, PR China.

BACKGROUND: As the only truly flying mammals, bats use their unique wing -
consisting of four elongated digits (digits II-V) connected by membranes - to
power their flight. In addition to the elongated digits II-V, the forelimb
contains one shorter digit (digit I) that is morphologically similar to the
hindlimb digits. Here, we capitalized on the morphological variation among the
bat forelimb digits to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying digit
elongation and wing formation. Using next generation sequencing technology, we
performed digital gene expression tag profiling (DGE-tag profiling) of developing
digits in a pooled sample of two Myotis ricketti and validated our sequencing
results using real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) of gene expression in the
developing digits of two Hipposideros armiger.
RESULTS: Among hundreds of genes exhibiting significant differences in expression
between the short and long digits, we highlight 14 genes most related to digit
elongation. These genes include two Tbx genes (Tbx3 and Tbx15), five BMP pathway 
genes (Bmp3, RGMB, Smad1, Smad4 and Nog), four Homeobox genes (Hoxd8, Hoxd9,
Hoxa1 and Satb1), and three other genes (Twist1, Tmeff2 and Enpp2) related to
digit malformations or cell proliferation. In addition, our results suggest that 
Tbx4 and Pitx2 contribute to the morphological similarity and five genes (Acta1, 
Tnnc2, Atp2a1, Hrc and Myoz1) contribute to the functional similarity between the
thumb and hindlimb digits.
CONCLUSIONS: Results of this study not only implicate many developmental genes as
robust candidates underlying digit elongation and wing formation in bats, but
also provide a better understanding of the genes involved in autopodial
development in general.

PMCID: PMC3017863
PMID: 21054883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Biochem J. 2011 Jan 1;433(1):145-53. doi: 10.1042/BJ20100886.

PMA-induced up-regulation of TBX3 is mediated by AP-1 and contributes to breast
cancer cell migration.

Mowla S(1), Pinnock R, Leaner VD, Goding CR, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa.

The T-box transcription factor TBX3 provides an important link between embryonic 
development and cancer. TBX3 mediates limb, mammary gland and heart development
and, in humans, mutations resulting in haplo-insufficiency of TBX3 lead to
ulnar-mammary syndrome. Importantly, the de-regulation of TBX3 gene expression
has been linked to several cancers, where it acts to suppress senescence and
promotes proliferation and tumour invasion. Despite the negative impact of
de-regulated TBX3 expression as seen by developmental defects and cancer,
surprisingly little is known about the regulation of the TBX3 gene. In the
present paper, we show that the phorbol ester PMA increases TBX3 protein and mRNA
levels in a protein kinase C-dependent manner via the AP-1 (activator protein 1) 
transcription factors c-Jun and JunB. Furthermore, these AP-1 factors are shown
to mediate the activation of the TBX3 gene by binding a non-consensus
PMA-response element in the TBX3 promoter in vitro and in vivo. We also
demonstrate that TBX3 contributes to the PMA-induced migration previously
observed for the MCF-7 breast epithelium cancer cell line. Our present results
reveal a previously unidentified pathway that up-regulates TBX3 expression and
provides additional evidence that increased levels of TBX3 contribute to
metastasis.

PMID: 20942798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Bioinformatics. 2010 Dec 1;26(23):2944-51. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq561.
Epub 2010 Sep 30.

Network-based comparison of temporal gene expression patterns.

Huang W(1), Cao X, Zhong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL, USA.

MOTIVATION: In the pursuits of mechanistic understanding of cell differentiation,
it is often necessary to compare multiple differentiation processes triggered by 
different external stimuli and internal perturbations. Available methods for
comparing temporal gene expression patterns are limited to a gene-by-gene
approach, which ignores co-expression information and thus is sensitive to
measurement noise.
METHODS: We present a method for co-expression network based comparison of
temporal expression patterns (NACEP). NACEP compares the temporal patterns of a
gene between two experimental conditions, taking into consideration all of the
possible co-expression modules that this gene may participate in. The NACEP
program is available at http://biocomp.bioen.uiuc.edu/nacep.
RESULTS: We applied NACEP to analyze retinoid acid (RA)-induced differentiation
of embryonic stem (ES) cells. The analysis suggests that RA may facilitate neural
differentiation by inducing the shh and insulin receptor pathways. NACEP was also
applied to compare the temporal responses of seven RNA inhibition (RNAi)
experiments. As proof of concept, we demonstrate that the difference in the
temporal responses to RNAi treatments can be used to derive interaction
relationships of transcription factors (TFs), and therefore infer regulatory
modules within a transcription network. In particular, the analysis suggested a
novel regulatory relationship between two pluripotency regulators, Esrrb and
Tbx3, which was supported by in vivo binding of Esrrb to the promoter of Tbx3.
AVAILABILITY: The NACEP program and the supplementary documents are available at 
http://biocomp.bioen.uiuc.edu/nacep.
CONTACT: szhong@illinois.edu
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMCID: PMC2982154
PMID: 20889495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Stem Cells. 2010 Oct;28(10):1794-804. doi: 10.1002/stem.502.

Canonical Wnt/ß-catenin regulation of liver receptor homolog-1 mediates
pluripotency gene expression.

Wagner RT(1), Xu X, Yi F, Merrill BJ, Cooney AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Delineating the signaling pathways that underlie ESC pluripotency is paramount
for development of ESC applications in both the research and clinical settings.
In culture pluripotency is maintained by leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)
stimulation of two separate signaling axes: Stat3/Klf4/Sox2 and PI3K/Tbx3/Nanog, 
which converge in the regulation of Oct4 expression. However, LIF signaling is
not required in vivo for self-renewal, thus alternate signaling axes likely
mediate these pathways. Additional factors that promote pluripotency gene
expression have been identified, including the direct regulation of Oct4 by liver
receptor homolog-1 (Lrh-1) and ß-catenin regulation of Nanog. Here, we present
genetic, molecular, and pharmacological studies identifying a signaling axis in
which ß-catenin promotes pluripotency gene expression in an Lrh-1-dependent
manner. Furthermore, Lrh-1 was identified as a novel ß-catenin target gene, and
Lrh-1 regulation is required for maintaining proper levels of Oct4, Nanog, and
Tbx3. Elucidation of this pathway provides an alternate mechanism by which the
primary pluripotency axis may be regulated in vivo and may pave the way for small
molecule applications to manipulate pluripotency or improve the efficiency of
somatic cell reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC2996860
PMID: 20734354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Clin Chem. 2010 Oct;56(10):1627-35. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2010.146290. Epub 2010 
Aug 20.

Quantification of fetal DNA by use of methylation-based DNA discrimination.

Nygren AO(1), Dean J, Jensen TJ, Kruse S, Kwong W, van den Boom D, Ehrich M.

Author information: 
(1)Sequenom Center for Molecular Medicine, San Diego, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Detection of circulating cell-free fetal nucleic acids in maternal
plasma has been used in noninvasive prenatal diagnostics. Most applications rely 
on the qualitative detection of fetal nucleic acids to determine the genetic
makeup of the fetus. This method leads to an analytic dilemma, because test
results from samples that do not contain fetal DNA or are contaminated with
maternal cellular DNA can be misleading. We developed a multiplex approach to
analyze regions that are hypermethylated in placenta relative to maternal blood
to evaluate the fetal portion of circulating cell-free DNA isolated from maternal
plasma.
METHODS: The assay used methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes to eliminate
the maternal (unmethylated) fraction of the DNA sample. The undigested fetal DNA 
fraction was then coamplified in the presence of a synthetic oligonucleotide to
permit competitive PCR. The amplification products were quantified by single-base
extension and MALDI-TOF MS analysis.
RESULTS: Using 2 independent markers, (sex determining region Y)-box 14 (SOX14)
and T-box 3 (TBX3), we measured a mean of 151 copies of fetal DNA/mL plasma and a
mean fetal fraction of 0.13 in samples obtained from pregnant women. We
investigated 242 DNA samples isolated from plasma from pregnant and nonpregnant
women and observed an analytical sensitivity and specificity for the assay of 99%
and 100%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: By investigating several regions in parallel, we reduced the
measurement variance and enabled quantification of circulating cell-free DNA. Our
results indicate that this multiplex methylation-based reaction detects and
quantifies the amount of fetal DNA in a sample isolated from maternal plasma.

PMID: 20729299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Integr Cancer Ther. 2011 Mar;10(1):85-91. doi: 10.1177/1534735410373921. Epub
2010 Aug 11.

Aqueous extracts of Fructus Ligustri Lucidi enhance the sensitivity of human
colorectal carcinoma DLD-1 cells to doxorubicin-induced apoptosis via Tbx3
suppression.

Zhang JF(1), He ML, Qi Dong, Xie WD, Chen YC, Lin MC, Leung PC, Zhang YO, Kung
HF.

Author information: 
(1)Tsinghua University, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Chemoresistance has imposed a great challenge for cancer therapy. Fructus
Ligustri Lucidi (FLL) is one of the commonest Chinese herbs that has been used
for thousand years. This study shows that the aqueous extract of FLL (AFLL)
enhanced the sensitivity of DLD-1 colon cancer cells to doxorubicin-induced
apoptosis. Furthermore, Tbx3 expression was found to be suppressed by AFLL when
the expression of tumor suppressor genes p14 and p53 were activated. Therefore,
reduction of Tbx3 rescued the dysregulated P14(ARF)-P53 signaling, which in turn 
contributed to the sensitivity of DLD-1 cells to doxorubicin-induced apoptosis.
As a conclusion, the findings suggest that FLL has a potential of being an
appealing agent for auxiliary chemotherapy in treatment of human colorectal
carcinoma.

© The Author(s) 2011

PMID: 20702496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Circ Res. 2010 Sep 17;107(6):728-36. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.222992. Epub
2010 Jul 29.

Developmental origin, growth, and three-dimensional architecture of the
atrioventricular conduction axis of the mouse heart.

Aanhaanen WT(1), Mommersteeg MT, Norden J, Wakker V, de Gier-de Vries C, Anderson
RH, Kispert A, Moorman AF, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

RATIONALE: The clinically important atrioventricular conduction axis is
structurally complex and heterogeneous, and its molecular composition and
developmental origin are uncertain.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the molecular composition and 3D architecture of the
atrioventricular conduction axis in the postnatal mouse heart and to define the
developmental origin of its component parts.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We generated an interactive 3D model of the atrioventricular
junctions in the mouse heart using the patterns of expression of Tbx3, Hcn4,
Cx40, Cx43, Cx45, and Nav1.5, which are important for conduction system function.
We found extensive figure-of-eight rings of nodal and transitional cells around
the mitral and tricuspid junctions and in the base of the atrial septum. The
rings included the compact node and nodal extensions. We then used genetic
lineage labeling tools (Tbx2(+/Cre), Mef2c-AHF-Cre, Tbx18(+/Cre)), along with
morphometric analyses, to assess the developmental origin of the specific
components of the axis. The majority of the atrial components, including the
atrioventricular rings and compact node, are derived from the embryonic
atrioventricular canal. The atrioventricular bundle, including the lower cells of
the atrioventricular node, in contrast, is derived from the ventricular
myocardium. No contributions to the conduction system myocardium were identified 
from the sinus venosus, the epicardium, or the dorsal mesenchymal protrusion.
CONCLUSIONS: The atrioventricular conduction axis comprises multiple domains with
distinctive molecular signatures. The atrial part proliferates from the embryonic
atrioventricular canal, along with myocytes derived from the developing atrial
septum. The atrioventricular bundle and lower nodal cells are derived from
ventricular myocardium.

PMID: 20671237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 3;107(31):13736-41. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1001399107. Epub 2010 Jul 14.

Sirtuin 1 regulation of developmental genes during differentiation of stem cells.

Calvanese V(1), Lara E, Suárez-Alvarez B, Abu Dawud R, Vázquez-Chantada M,
Martínez-Chantar ML, Embade N, López-Nieva P, Horrillo A, Hmadcha A, Soria B,
Piazzolla D, Herranz D, Serrano M, Mato JM, Andrews PW, López-Larrea C, Esteller 
M, Fraga MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

The longevity-promoting NAD+-dependent class III histone deacetylase Sirtuin 1
(SIRT1) is involved in stem cell function by controlling cell fate decision
and/or by regulating the p53-dependent expression of NANOG. We show that SIRT1 is
down-regulated precisely during human embryonic stem cell differentiation at both
mRNA and protein levels and that the decrease in Sirt1 mRNA is mediated by a
molecular pathway that involves the RNA-binding protein HuR and the arginine
methyltransferase coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1).
SIRT1 down-regulation leads to reactivation of key developmental genes such as
the neuroretinal morphogenesis effectors DLL4, TBX3, and PAX6, which are
epigenetically repressed by this histone deacetylase in pluripotent human
embryonic stem cells. Our results indicate that SIRT1 is regulated during stem
cell differentiation in the context of a yet-unknown epigenetic pathway that
controls specific developmental genes in embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC2922228
PMID: 20631301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Dec;1806(2):268-74. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2010.07.001. 
Epub 2010 Jul 17.

TBX2 and TBX3: the special value for anticancer drug targets.

Lu J(1), Li XP, Dong Q, Kung HF, He ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.

TBX2 and TBX3 are members of the T-box family of transcription factors, which are
implicated in embryonic development. Unlike most members of the T-box family,
TBX2 and TBX3 are the only mammalian T-box factors which function as
transcriptional repressors, mediated by the repression domain in the C-terminal. 
In addition to a role in development, recent evidence suggests that TBX2 and TBX3
are overexpressed in a number of cancers, including melanoma, breast, liver,
lung, pancreas, ovarian, and cervical cancers. However, there is little
information about the mechanisms for how these T-box genes contribute to
tumorigenesis. Upregulation of TBX2 and TBX3 suppresses the expression of
p14(ARF) and p21(CIP1) and promotes bypass of senescence through inactivation of 
p53 pathway. TBX2 functionally interacts with pRb, and pRb modulates TBX2
functional specificity. In addition, TBX2 is a player of Wnt signaling while TBX3
is a downstream target of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, and overexpression of
TBX2 and TBX3 represses the expression of E-cadherin, which is demonstrated to be
a prerequisite for epithelial tumor cell invasion. Moreover, TBX2 is shown to
interact with EGR1 to block multiple downstream tumor suppressors. Here, we
review the current knowledge on TBX2 and TBX3 in tumorigenesis and prospect their
special value for development of target-based anticancer drugs.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20624445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2010 May 20;1(2):12. doi: 10.1186/scrt12.

Tbx3: another important piece fitted into the pluripotent stem cell puzzle.

Pirity MK, Dinnyes A.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are novel tools for biomedical research,
with a promise for future regenerative medicine applications. Recently, Han and
colleagues reported in Nature that T box gene 3 (Tbx3) can improve the quality of
mouse iPSCs and increase their germline transmission efficacy. This observation
contributes greatly to the improvement of iPSC technology and might be a step
towards 'designer' reprogramming strategies by generating high quality iPSCs.
Further studies comparing pluripotency regulation in different species, including
that in human, will be necessary to verify the universal role of Tbx3 and the
medical relevance of the observation.

PMCID: PMC2905088
PMID: 20624271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Cell Cycle. 2010 Jul 15;9(14):2694-5.

The cell cycle and pluripotency: Is there a direct link?

Edel MJ, Izpisua Belmonte JC.

PMID: 20581443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Genes Cancer. 2010 Mar;1(3):272-82. doi: 10.1177/1947601910365160.

The Highly Homologous T-Box Transcription Factors, TBX2 and TBX3, Have Distinct
Roles in the Oncogenic Process.

Peres J(1), Davis E, Mowla S, Bennett DC, Li JA, Wansleben S, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa.

The T-box transcription factors TBX2 and TBX3 are overexpressed in several
cancers and are able to bypass senescence by repressing ARF and
p21(WAF1/CIP1/SDII). Although these studies suggest that they may both contribute
to the oncogenic process by repressing common targets, whether they have
redundant or distinct roles in cancers where they are both overexpressed remains 
to be elucidated. Importantly, when Tbx2 function is inhibited in melanoma cells 
lacking Tbx3, the cells senesce, but whether this is possible in melanoma cells
overexpressing both proteins is not known. An understanding of this issue may
have important implications for the design of an effective pro-senescence
therapy. In this study, the authors used a sh-RNA approach to knock down TBX2 and
TBX3 individually in 2 human melanoma cell lines that overexpress both these
factors and then examined their specific involvement in the oncogenic process.
They demonstrate, using in vitro and in vivo cell proliferation, as well as
colony- and tumor-forming ability and cell motility assays, that TBX2 and TBX3
have distinct roles in melanoma progression. In the tested lines, although TBX2
could promote proliferation and transformation and was required by primary
melanoma cells for immortality, TBX3 was required for tumor formation and cell
migration. These findings were reproducible in a human breast cancer cell line,
which confirms that TBX2 and TBX3, although highly homologous, do not have
redundant roles in the transformation process of cancers where they are both
overexpressed. These results have important implications for the development of
new cancer treatments and in particular for melanoma, which is a highly
aggressive and intractable cancer.

PMCID: PMC3092191
PMID: 21779450  [PubMed]


206. Curr Opin Oncol. 2010 May;22(3):163-8. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0b013e328337fe8f.

The biology behind prognostic factors of cutaneous melanoma.

Spatz A(1), Batist G, Eggermont AM.

Author information: 
(1)Segal Cancer Centre/Jewish General Hospital, Departments of Pathology &
Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cutaneous melanoma still represents a paradox among all solid 
tumors. It is the cancer for which the best prognostic markers ever identified in
solid tumors are available, yet there is very little understanding of their
biological significance. This review focuses on recent biological data that shed 
light on the clinico-biological correlations that support the 2010 AJCC melanoma 
staging system.
RECENT FINDINGS: E-cadherin is a keratinocyte-melanoma adhesion molecule whose
loss is required for the acquisition of an invasive phenotype. Recent data showed
that this loss is mediated by the transcription factor Tbx3 which is also
involved in suppressing melanocytes senescence. CCN3 is present in melanoma cells
close to the epidermal-dermal interface, but not in melanoma cells that have
invaded deep into the dermis. It has been recently demonstrated that CCN3
decreases the transcription and activation of matrix metalloproteinases and
suppresses the invasion of melanoma cells. These results suggest that the absence
of CCN3 in advanced melanoma cells contributes to their invasive phenotype and
that ulceration modifies the microenvironment allowing CCN3-depleted melanoma
cells to invade.
SUMMARY: A major challenge is to replace outcome clustering based on artificial
biomarker breakpoints by a continuous multidimensional prognostic model. Major
improvement will come from shared computerized tools allowing to generate
continuous likelihood scores for diagnosis, prognosis and response prediction.
This will lead to the development of platforms which can be used by scientists
from different fields to integrate and share high-quality data in the
precompetitive setting and generate new probabilistic causal models.

PMID: 20177382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Nature. 2010 Feb 25;463(7284):1096-100. doi: 10.1038/nature08735. Epub 2010 Feb
7.

Tbx3 improves the germ-line competency of induced pluripotent stem cells.

Han J(1), Yuan P, Yang H, Zhang J, Soh BS, Li P, Lim SL, Cao S, Tay J, Orlov YL, 
Lufkin T, Ng HH, Tam WL, Lim B.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 138672,
Singapore.

Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells can be obtained by the introduction of
defined factors into somatic cells. The combination of Oct4 (also known as
Pou5f1), Sox2 and Klf4 (which we term OSK) constitutes the minimal requirement
for generating iPS cells from mouse embryonic fibroblasts. These cells are
thought to resemble embryonic stem cells (ESCs) on the basis of global gene
expression analyses; however, few studies have tested the ability and efficiency 
of iPS cells to contribute to chimaerism, colonization of germ tissues, and most 
importantly, germ-line transmission and live birth from iPS cells produced by
tetraploid complementation. Using genomic analyses of ESC genes that have roles
in pluripotency and fusion-mediated somatic cell reprogramming, here we show that
the transcription factor Tbx3 significantly improves the quality of iPS cells.
iPS cells generated with OSK and Tbx3 (OSKT) are superior in both germ-cell
contribution to the gonads and germ-line transmission frequency. However, global 
gene expression profiling could not distinguish between OSK and OSKT iPS cells.
Genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing analysis of Tbx3-binding
sites in ESCs suggests that Tbx3 regulates pluripotency-associated and
reprogramming factors, in addition to sharing many common downstream regulatory
targets with Oct4, Sox2, Nanog and Smad1. This study underscores the intrinsic
qualitative differences between iPS cells generated by different methods, and
highlights the need to rigorously characterize iPS cells beyond in vitro studies.

PMCID: PMC2901797
PMID: 20139965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Nat Genet. 2010 Feb;42(2):153-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.517. Epub 2010 Jan 10.

Genome-wide association study of PR interval.

Pfeufer A(1), van Noord C, Marciante KD, Arking DE, Larson MG, Smith AV, Tarasov 
KV, Müller M, Sotoodehnia N, Sinner MF, Verwoert GC, Li M, Kao WH, Köttgen A,
Coresh J, Bis JC, Psaty BM, Rice K, Rotter JI, Rivadeneira F, Hofman A, Kors JA, 
Stricker BH, Uitterlinden AG, van Duijn CM, Beckmann BM, Sauter W, Gieger C,
Lubitz SA, Newton-Cheh C, Wang TJ, Magnani JW, Schnabel RB, Chung MK, Barnard J, 
Smith JD, Van Wagoner DR, Vasan RS, Aspelund T, Eiriksdottir G, Harris TB, Launer
LJ, Najjar SS, Lakatta E, Schlessinger D, Uda M, Abecasis GR, Müller-Myhsok B,
Ehret GB, Boerwinkle E, Chakravarti A, Soliman EZ, Lunetta KL, Perz S, Wichmann
HE, Meitinger T, Levy D, Gudnason V, Ellinor PT, Sanna S, Kääb S, Witteman JC,
Alonso A, Benjamin EJ, Heckbert SR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar der Technischen
Universität München, Munich, Germany. arne.pfeufer@web.de

The electrocardiographic PR interval (or PQ interval) reflects atrial and
atrioventricular nodal conduction, disturbances of which increase risk of atrial 
fibrillation. We report a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies for PR
interval from seven population-based European studies in the CHARGE Consortium:
AGES, ARIC, CHS, FHS, KORA, Rotterdam Study, and SardiNIA (N = 28,517). We
identified nine loci associated with PR interval at P < 5 x 10(-8). At the 3p22.2
locus, we observed two independent associations in voltage-gated sodium channel
genes, SCN10A and SCN5A. Six of the loci were near cardiac developmental genes,
including CAV1-CAV2, NKX2-5 (CSX1), SOX5, WNT11, MEIS1, and TBX5-TBX3, providing 
pathophysiologically interesting candidate genes. Five of the loci, SCN5A,
SCN10A, NKX2-5, CAV1-CAV2, and SOX5, were also associated with atrial
fibrillation (N = 5,741 cases, P < 0.0056). This suggests a role for common
variation in ion channel and developmental genes in atrial and atrioventricular
conduction as well as in susceptibility to atrial fibrillation.

PMCID: PMC2850197
PMID: 20062060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Mol Genet Genomics. 2010 Feb;283(2):147-56. doi: 10.1007/s00438-009-0505-z. Epub 
2009 Dec 24.

Null mutations in Drosophila Optomotor-blind affect T-domain residues conserved
in all Tbx proteins.

Sen A(1), Gadomski C, Balles J, Abassi Y, Dorner C, Pflugfelder GO.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität, Becherweg 32, 55128,
Mainz, Germany.

The T-box transcription factors TBX2 and TBX3 are overexpressed in many human
cancers raising the need for a thorough understanding of the cellular function of
these proteins. In Drosophila, there is one corresponding ortholog,
Optomotor-blind (Omb). Currently, only two missense mutations are known for the
two human proteins. Making use of the developmental defects caused by
inactivation of omb, we have isolated and molecularly characterized four new omb 
mutations, three of them are missense mutations of amino acids fully conserved in
all Tbx proteins. We interpret the functional defects in the framework of the
known structure of the human TBX3 protein and provide evidence for loss of Omb
DNA-binding activity in all three newly identified missense mutations.

PMID: 20033428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Dec;149A(12):2809-12. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33096.

Ulnar Mammary syndrome and TBX3: expanding the phenotype.

Linden H(1), Williams R, King J, Blair E, Kini U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, The Churchill Hospital, Oxford, UK.

We present a patient with features of Ulnar Mammary syndrome (UMS) consisting of 
bilateral ulnar defects, inverted nipples, short stature with associated growth
hormone deficiency, and cryptorchidism. Our patient also had a hypoplastic
anterior pituitary and an ectopic posterior pituitary gland, ventricular septal
defect (VSD), and cardiac conduction defects consistent with
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome. Although TBX3 is known to be expressed in
both the developing heart and the pituitary gland, conduction defects and
anatomical pituitary abnormalities have not been previously described in UMS.
This may, in part, be due to the fact that these features are not actively sought
in individuals with UMS. Because these new findings have important clinical
implications, we suggest that clinicians caring for individuals with UMS offer
brain imaging, growth hormone testing, and cardiac arrhythmia screening. The
diagnosis of UMS was confirmed on mutation analysis of TBX3. The mother of the
propositus was also found to carry the same mutation, although she did not show
the classical features of UMS. Therefore, our report also supports the variable
expressivity of UMS within the same family.

PMID: 19938096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Stem Cells. 2010 Feb;28(2):191-200. doi: 10.1002/stem.265.

Heparan sulfation-dependent fibroblast growth factor signaling maintains
embryonic stem cells primed for differentiation in a heterogeneous state.

Lanner F(1), Lee KL, Sohl M, Holmborn K, Yang H, Wilbertz J, Poellinger L,
Rossant J, Farnebo F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. Lanner@Sickkids.ca

Embryonic stem (ES) cells continuously decide whether to maintain pluripotency or
differentiate. While exogenous leukemia inhibitory factor and BMP4 perpetuate a
pluripotent state, less is known about the factors initiating differentiation. We
show that heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycans are critical coreceptors for signals
inducing ES cell differentiation. Genetic targeting of NDST1 and NDST2, two
enzymes required for N-sulfation of proteoglycans, blocked differentiation. This 
phenotype was rescued by HS presented in trans or by soluble heparin. NaClO(3)
(-), which reduces sulfation of proteoglycans, potently blocked differentiation
of wild-type cells. Mechanistically, N-sulfation was identified to be critical
for functional autocrine fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF4) signaling. Microarray 
analysis identified the pluripotency maintaining transcription factors Nanog,
KLF2/4/8, Tbx3, and Tcf3 to be negatively regulated, whereas markers of
differentiation such as Gbx2, Dnmt3b, FGF5, and Brachyury were induced by
sulfation-dependent FGF receptor (FGFR) signaling. We show that several of these 
genes are heterogeneously expressed in ES cells, and that targeting of heparan
sulfation or FGFR-signaling facilitated a homogenous Nanog/KLF4/Tbx3 positive ES 
cell state. This finding suggests that the recently discovered heterogeneous
state of ES cells is regulated by HS-dependent FGFR signaling. Similarly,
culturing blastocysts with NaClO(3) (-) eliminated GATA6-positive primitive
endoderm progenitors generating a homogenous Nanog-positive inner cell mass.
Functionally, reduction of sulfation robustly improved de novo ES cell derivation
efficiency. We conclude that N-sulfated HS is required for FGF4 signaling to
maintain ES cells primed for differentiation in a heterogeneous state. Inhibiting
this pathway facilitates a more naïve ground state.

PMID: 19937756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Genes Dev. 2009 Nov 15;23(22):2625-38. doi: 10.1101/gad.1815709.

Satb1 and Satb2 regulate embryonic stem cell differentiation and Nanog
expression.

Savarese F(1), Dávila A, Nechanitzky R, De La Rosa-Velazquez I, Pereira CF,
Engelke R, Takahashi K, Jenuwein T, Kohwi-Shigematsu T, Fisher AG, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Immunology, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Satb1 and the closely related Satb2 proteins regulate gene expression and
higher-order chromatin structure of multigene clusters in vivo. In examining the 
role of Satb proteins in murine embryonic stem (ES) cells, we find that
Satb1(-/-) cells display an impaired differentiation potential and augmented
expression of the pluripotency determinants Nanog, Klf4, and Tbx3. Metastable
states of self-renewal and differentiation competence have been attributed to
heterogeneity of ES cells in the expression of Nanog. Satb1(-/-) cultures have a 
higher proportion of Nanog(high) cells, and an increased potential to reprogram
human B lymphocytes in cell fusion experiments. Moreover, Satb1-deficient ES
cells show an increased expression of Satb2, and we find that forced Satb2
expression in wild-type ES cells antagonizes differentiation-associated silencing
of Nanog and enhances the induction of NANOG in cell fusions with human B
lymphocytes. An antagonistic function of Satb1 and Satb2 is also supported by the
almost normal differentiation potential of Satb1(-/-)Satb2(-/-) ES cells. Taken
together with the finding that both Satb1 and Satb2 bind the Nanog locus in vivo,
our data suggest that the balance of Satb1 and Satb2 contributes to the
plasticity of Nanog expression and ES cell pluripotency.

PMCID: PMC2779756
PMID: 19933152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2009 Oct;50(10):1524-30.

[Transcription factor network governing cellular pluripotency].

[Article in Japanese]

Niwa H.

PMID: 19915362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2010 Feb;33(2):159-67. doi:
10.1111/j.1540-8159.2009.02606.x. Epub 2009 Nov 2.

Transcriptional profiling of septal wall of the right ventricular outflow tract
in patients with idiopathic ventricular arrhythmias.

Hasdemir C(1), Aydin HH, Celik HA, Simsek E, Payzin S, Kayikcioglu M, Aydin M,
Kultursay H, Can LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Ege University School of Medicine, Bornova, Izmir,
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Frequent, monomorphic premature ventricular contractions (PVC) and/or
ventricular tachycardia (VT) in patients with structurally normal heart usually
arise from the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT). The underlying
arrhythmogenic substrate for the genesis of RVOT tachycardias is largely unknown.
The aim of this study was to investigate the genome-wide transcriptional
profiling of the septal wall of the RVOT in patients with RVOT tachycardia and
control subjects.
METHODS: Transcriptional profiling with Affymetrix 3' IVT microarray analysis
(Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA) was performed on the endomyocardial biopsy
samples obtained from the septal wall of the RVOT from three unrelated patients
with RVOT tachycardia and three control subjects. All study subjects had normal
right and left ventricular size and function. Microarray results were validated
by real time polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
RESULTS: There were 32 statistically significant up-regulated and 60
down-regulated genes in five biological networks in patient population compared
with control subjects. Among those genes, there were eight down-regulated
[ATP1A2, CACNA1C, Protein Phosphatase 2, Regulatory Subunit B, Gamma
Isoform[PPP2R2C], PLCD3, GNAO1, Solute Carrier Family 6 (Transporter,
Norepinephrine), Member 2(SLC6A2), CAMK2B, PIK3R2] and two up-regulated (CAMKK2
and ITPR3) genes related to myocardial intracellular calcium regulation. In
addition, there were five down-regulated [T-box 3(TBX3), Bone Morphogenetic
Protein 2(BMP2), Bone Morphogenetic Protein Receptor, Type IB(BMPR1B), MYH6,
Ankyrin Repeat Domain 23 and 39(ANKRD23-39)] and one up-regulated gene (RGS1)
related to cardiovascular functions.
CONCLUSION: The expression of genes responsible for the regulation of myocardial 
intracellular calcium and the development of RVOT are significantly
down-regulated in the septal wall of the RVOT in patients with RVOT tachycardia
compared with control subjects.

PMID: 19889179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2010 Jan 29;17(1):87-98. doi: 10.1677/ERC-09-0065. Print
2010 Mar.

Novel gene rearrangements in transformed breast cells identified by
high-resolution breakpoint analysis of chromosomal aberrations.

Unger K(1), Wienberg J, Riches A, Hieber L, Walch A, Brown A, O'Brien PC, Briscoe
C, Gray L, Rodriguez E, Jackl G, Knijnenburg J, Tallini G, Ferguson-Smith M,
Zitzelsberger H.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health
(GmbH), Department of Radiation Cytogenetics, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, D-85764
Neuherberg, Germany.

Chromosomal copy number alterations and chromosomal rearrangements are frequent
mutations in human cancer. Unlike copy number alterations, little is known about 
the role and occurrence of chromosomal rearrangements in breast cancer. This may 
be due to the fact that chromosome-based breakpoint analysis is widely restricted
to cultured cells. In order to identify gene rearrangements in breast cancer, we 
studied the chromosomal breakpoints in radiation-transformed epithelial breast
cell lines using a high-resolution array-based approach using 1 Mb bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) arrays. The breakpoints were further narrowed down by
fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) with clones from the 32 k BAC library. 
The analysis of the cell lines B42-11 and B42-16 revealed rearrangements of
chromosomes 7, 8, 10 and 12. We identified the genes Has2, Grid1, Ret, Cpm, Tbx3,
Tbx5, Tuba1a, Wnt1 and Arf3 within the breakpoint regions. Quantitative RT-PCR
showed a deregulated expression of all of these candidate genes except for Tbx5
and Tbx3. This is the first study demonstrating gene rearrangements and their
deregulated mRNA expression in radiation-transformed breast cells. Since the gene
rearrangements occurred in the transformed and tumourigenic cell lines only, it
is likely that these were generated in conjunction with malignant transformation 
of the epithelial breast cells and therefore might reflect early molecular events
in breast carcinogenesis. Initial studies indicate that these gene alterations
are also found in sporadic breast cancers.

PMID: 19858224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Oct 15;10 Suppl 12:S8. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-S12-S8.

Identification of functionally related genes using data mining and data
integration: a breast cancer case study.

Mosca E(1), Bertoli G, Piscitelli E, Vilardo L, Reinbold RA, Zucchi I, Milanesi
L.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Tecnologie Biomediche, Consiglio Nazionale Ricerche, Via Fratelli
Cervi 93, Segrate (MI), Italy. ettore.mosca@itb.cnr.it

BACKGROUND: The identification of the organisation and dynamics of molecular
pathways is crucial for the understanding of cell function. In order to
reconstruct the molecular pathways in which a gene of interest is involved in
regulating a cell, it is important to identify the set of genes to which it
interacts with to determine cell function. In this context, the mining and the
integration of a large amount of publicly available data, regarding the
transcriptome and the proteome states of a cell, are a useful resource to
complement biological research.
RESULTS: We describe an approach for the identification of genes that interact
with each other to regulate cell function. The strategy relies on the analysis of
gene expression profile similarity, considering large datasets of expression
data. During the similarity evaluation, the methodology determines the most
significant subset of samples in which the evaluated genes are highly correlated.
Hence, the strategy enables the exclusion of samples that are not relevant for
each gene pair analysed. This feature is important when considering a large set
of samples characterised by heterogeneous experimental conditions where different
pools of biological processes can be active across the samples. The putative
partners of the studied gene are then further characterised, analysing the
distribution of the Gene Ontology terms and integrating the protein-protein
interaction (PPI) data. The strategy was applied for the analysis of the
functional relationships of a gene of known function, Pyruvate Kinase, and for
the prediction of functional partners of the human transcription factor TBX3. In 
both cases the analysis was done on a dataset composed by breast primary tumour
expression data derived from the literature. Integration and analysis of PPI data
confirmed the prediction of the methodology, since the genes identified to be
functionally related were associated to proteins close in the PPI network. Two
genes among the predicted putative partners of TBX3 (GLI3 and GATA3) were
confirmed by in vivo binding assays (crosslinking immunoprecipitation, X-ChIP) in
which the putative DNA enhancer sequence sites of GATA3 and GLI3 were found to be
bound by the Tbx3 protein.
CONCLUSION: The presented strategy is demonstrated to be an effective approach to
identify genes that establish functional relationships. The methodology
identifies and characterises genes with a similar expression profile, through
data mining and integrating data from publicly available resources, to contribute
to a better understanding of gene regulation and cell function. The prediction of
the TBX3 target genes GLI3 and GATA3 was experimentally confirmed.

PMCID: PMC2762073
PMID: 19828084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. BMC Dev Biol. 2009 Oct 22;9:54. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-9-54.

Smad4-dependent pathways control basement membrane deposition and endodermal cell
migration at early stages of mouse development.

Costello I(1), Biondi CA, Taylor JM, Bikoff EK, Robertson EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
Ita.Costello@path.ox.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Smad4 mutant embryos arrest shortly after implantation and display a 
characteristic shortened proximodistal axis, a significantly reduced epiblast, as
well as a thickened visceral endoderm layer. Conditional rescue experiments
demonstrate that bypassing the primary requirement for Smad4 in the
extra-embryonic endoderm allows the epiblast to gastrulate. Smad4-independent
TGF-beta signals are thus sufficient to promote mesoderm formation and
patterning. To further analyse essential Smad4 activities contributed by the
extra-embryonic tissues, and characterise Smad4 dependent pathways in the early
embryo, here we performed transcriptional profiling of Smad4 null embryonic stem 
(ES) cells and day 4 embryoid bodies (EBs).
RESULTS: Transcripts from wild-type versus Smad4 null ES cells and day 4 EBs were
analysed using Illumina arrays. In addition to several known TGF-beta/BMP target 
genes, we identified numerous Smad4-dependent transcripts that are mis-expressed 
in the mutants. As expected, mesodermal cell markers were dramatically
down-regulated. We also observed an increase in non-canonical potency markers
(Pramel7, Tbx3, Zscan4), germ cell markers (Aire, Tuba3a, Dnmt3l) as well as
early endoderm markers (Dpp4, H19, Dcn). Additionally, expression of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) remodelling enzymes Mmp14 and Mmp9 was decreased in
Smad4 mutant ES and EB populations. These changes, in combination with increased 
levels of laminin alpha1, cause excessive basement membrane deposition.
Similarly, in the context of the Smad4 null E6.5 embryos we observed an expanded 
basement membrane (BM) associated with the thickened endoderm layer.
CONCLUSION: Smad4 functional loss results in a dramatic shift in gene expression 
patterns and in the endodermal cell lineage causes an excess deposition of, or an
inability to breakdown and remodel, the underlying BM layer. These structural
abnormalities probably disrupt reciprocal signalling between the epiblast and
overlying visceral endoderm required for gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC2773778
PMID: 19849841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Int J Cardiol. 2011 Feb 17;147(1):95-111. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2009.08.021. Epub
2009 Sep 22.

Differentiation induction of mouse embryonic stem cells into sinus node-like
cells by suramin.

Wiese C(1), Nikolova T, Zahanich I, Sulzbacher S, Fuchs J, Yamanaka S, Graf E,
Ravens U, Boheler KR, Wobus AM.

Author information: 
(1)In Vitro Differentiation Group, Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop
Plant Research IPK, Corrensstrasse 3, D-06466 Gatersleben, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Embryonic stem (ES) cells differentiate into cardiac phenotypes
representing early pacemaker-, atrial-, ventricular-, and sinus node-like cells, 
however, ES-derived specification into sinus nodal cells is not yet known. By
using the naphthylamine derivative of urea, suramin, we were able to follow the
process of cardiac specialization into sinus node-like cells.
METHODS: Differentiating mouse ES cells were treated with suramin (500 µM) from
day 5 to 7 of embryoid body formation, and cells were analysed for their
differentiation potential via morphological analysis, flow cytometry, RT-PCR,
immunohistochemistry and patch clamp analysis.
RESULTS: Application of suramin resulted in an increased number of cardiac cells,
but inhibition of neuronal, skeletal muscle and definitive endoderm
differentiation. Immediately after suramin treatment, a decreased mesendoderm
differentiation was found. Brachyury, FGF10, Wnt8 and Wnt3a transcript levels
were significantly down-regulated, followed by a decrease in mesoderm- and
cardiac progenitor-specific markers BMP2, GATA4/5, Wnt11, Isl1, Nkx2.5 and Tbx5
immediately after removal of the substance. With continued differentiation, a
significant up-regulation of Brachyury, FGF10 and GATA5 transcript levels was
observed, whereas Nkx2.5, Isl1, Tbx5, BMP2 and Wnt11 levels were normalized to
control levels. At advanced differentiation stages, sinus node-specific HCN4,
Tbx2 and Tbx3 transcript levels were significantly up-regulated.
Immunofluorescence and patch-clamp analysis confirmed the increased number of
sinus node-like cells, and electrophysiological analysis revealed a lower number 
of atrial- and ventricular-like cardiomyocytes following suramin treatment.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the interference of suramin with the cardiac
differentiation process modified mesoderm- and cardiac-specific gene expression
resulting in enhanced formation of sinus node-like cells.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4751033
PMID: 19775764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Dev Biol. 2009 Dec 15;336(2):145-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.09.020. Epub 2009 
Sep 19.

Expression and requirement of T-box transcription factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 during
secondary palate development in the mouse.

Zirzow S(1), Lüdtke TH, Brons JF, Petry M, Christoffels VM, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, OE5250, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

Formation of the mammalian secondary palate is a highly regulated and complex
process. Impairment of the underlying cellular and molecular programs often
results in cleft palate, a common birth defect in mammals. Here we report that
Tbx2 and Tbx3, two closely related genes encoding T-box transcription factors,
are expressed in the mesenchyme of the mouse palatal structures during
development. Mice homozygous mutant for Tbx2 and mice double heterozygous for
Tbx2 and Tbx3 exhibit a cleft palate phenotype arguing for an important
contribution of Tbx2 and Tbx3 to palatogenesis. In Tbx2-deficient embryos, the
bilateral primordial palatal shelves form but are smaller and retarded in the
outgrowth process. They do not make contact but retain the potential to fuse.
Development of other craniofacial structures appears normal, suggesting that
impaired palate formation in Tbx2-mutant mice is caused by a primary defect in
the palatal shelf mesenchyme. This is further supported by increased cell
proliferation and apoptosis accompanied by increased expression of Bmp4 and
CyclinD1 in Tbx2-deficient palatal shelves. Hence, Tbx2 and Tbx3 function
overlappingly to control growth of the palatal shelf mesenchyme.

PMID: 19769959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Brain Res. 2009 Dec 11;1302:233-9. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.08.101. Epub 2009
Sep 16.

T-box 3 is expressed in the adult mouse hypothalamus and medulla.

Eriksson KS(1), Mignot E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Narcolepsy, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA 94304-5742, USA.

Using microarray analysis, in situ hybridization and immunocytochemistry, we
found that the transcription factor TBX3 is produced in three discrete neuronal
populations of the adult mouse brain, the arcuate nucleus (including in NPY but
not dopaminergic neurons), the histaminergic tuberomammillary nucleus and in
cholinergic neurons of the solitary tract nucleus. The immunoreactive protein had
a nuclear location in these neurons, consistent with its function as a
transcription factor. Although the function of tbx3 in these neurons is unknown, 
a review of the literature strongly suggests that these neuronal populations may 
be abnormal in Ulnar-Mammary syndrome patients with tbx3 mutations, explaining
previously overlooked phenotypes in this syndrome, such as obesity, sexual
dysfunction and possibly sleep abnormalities.

PMCID: PMC2805014
PMID: 19765559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Ann Surg. 2009 Dec;250(6):983-90. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e3181b248bb.

Candidate genes associated with malignant pheochromocytomas by genome-wide
expression profiling.

Suh I(1), Shibru D, Eisenhofer G, Pacak K, Duh QY, Clark OH, Kebebew E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143-1674,
USA.

OBJECTIVE: To improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in
malignant pheochromocytoma by examining differences in the gene expression
profile between benign and malignant tumors.
BACKGROUND: The molecular events involved in the malignant transformation of
pheochromocytoma are poorly understood. There are also no reliable and uniformly 
accepted histopathologic criteria to distinguish benign from malignant
pheochromocytoma.
METHODS: We performed genome-wide expression profiling of 58 pheochromocytomas
(29 benign and sporadic, 16 benign and hereditary, 13 malignant) with technical
and biologic replication.
RESULTS: Unsupervised cluster analysis showed 3 main clusters of tumors that did 
not have complete concordance with the clinical and pathologic groupings of
pheochromocytomas. Supervised cluster analysis showed almost completely separate 
clustering between benign and malignant tumors. The differentially expressed
genes with known function belonged to 8 biologic process categories; signal
transduction, transcription, protein transport, protein synthesis, smooth muscle 
contraction, ion transport, chemotaxis, and electron transport. Gene set
enrichment analysis revealed significant correlation between the microarray
profiles of malignant pheochromocytomas and several known molecular pathways
associated with carcinogenesis and dedifferentiation. Ten differentially
expressed genes had high diagnostic accuracy, and 5 of these genes (CFC1, FAM62B,
HOMER1, LRRN3, TBX3, ADAMTS) in combination had an area under the receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve of 0.96 for distinguishing benign versus
malignant tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Differentially expressed genes between benign and malignant
pheochromocytomas distinguish between these tumors with high diagnostic accuracy.
Our findings provide new insight into the genes and molecular pathways that may
be involved in malignant pheochromocytomas.

PMID: 19661783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Ann Anat. 2009 Dec;191(6):505-17. doi: 10.1016/j.aanat.2009.06.004. Epub 2009 Jul
2.

Protein interactions at the heart of cardiac chamber formation.

Boogerd CJ(1), Moorman AF, Barnett P.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 15, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The vertebrate heart is a muscular pump that contracts in a rhythmic fashion to
propel the blood through the body. During evolution, the morphologically complex 
four-chambered heart of birds and mammals has evolved from a single-layered tube 
with peristaltic contractility. The heart of Drosophila, referred to as the
dorsal vessel, is a blind sac composed of myogenic cells that contract
rhythmically. The fish heart is composed of a single atrial chamber connected to 
a single ventricular chamber. The evolutionary development of fast-contracting
chambers allowed the heart to build up high blood pressures. In amphibians two
atrial chambers exist, separated by a septum, connecting to a single ventricle.
The division of a common atrium and ventricle into right and left-sided chambers 
represents an evolutionary milestone in the development of the four-chambered
heart and is necessary for separation of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood. In
amphibians and reptiles, pulmonary and systemic circulations are incompletely
separated allowing adaptable blood flows to both circulations. In contrast, the
hearts of birds and mammals, in which septa completely separate the pulmonary and
systemic circulations, both circulations have similar flows, but blood pressures 
can be regulated separately. In this review we focus, in a morphologically
integrated fashion, on the molecular interactions that govern the intricate
cardiac design.

2009 Elsevier GmbH.

PMID: 19647421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Exp Physiol. 2009 Oct;94(10):1035-49. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2009.046920. Epub
2009 Jul 10.

'And the beat goes on.' The cardiac conduction system: the wiring system of the
heart.

Boyett MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Manchester, Core
Technology Facility, 46 Grafton Street, Manchester M13 9NT, UK.
mark.boyett@manchester.ac.uk

The cardiac conduction system (CCS), consisting of the sino-atrial node,
atrioventricular node and His-Purkinje system, is responsible for the initiation 
and co-ordination of the heart beat. In the last decade, our understanding of the
CCS has been transformed. Immunohistochemistry, used in conjunction with
anatomical techniques, has transformed our understanding of its anatomy;
arguably, we now understand the position of the sino-atrial node (not the same as
in medical textbooks), and our new understanding of the atrioventricular node
anatomy means that we can compute its physiological and pathophysiological
behaviour. Ion channel expression in the CCS has been shown to be fundamentally
different from that in the working myocardium. Dysfunction of the CCS has
previously been attributed to fibrosis, but it is now clear that remodelling of
ion channels plays an important role in dysfunction during ageing, heart failure 
and atrial fibrillation. Differences in ion channel expression may even be
responsible for the bradycardia in the athlete and differences in heart rate
among different species (such as humans and mice). Recent work has highlighted
less well-known components of the CCS, including tricuspid, mitral and aortic
rings and even a third (retro-aortic) node. These additional tissues do not
participate in the initiation and co-ordination of the heart beat and instead
they are likely to be the source of various life-threatening arrhythmias. During 
embryological development, all parts of the CCS have been shown to develop from
the primary myocardium of the linear heart tube, partly under the influence of
the transcription factor, Tbx3.

PMID: 19592411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Nature. 2009 Jul 2;460(7251):118-22. doi: 10.1038/nature08113.

A parallel circuit of LIF signalling pathways maintains pluripotency of mouse ES 
cells.

Niwa H(1), Ogawa K, Shimosato D, Adachi K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 6500047, Japan.
niwa@cdb.riken.jp

The cytokine leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) integrates signals into mouse
embryonic stem (ES) cells to maintain pluripotency. Although the Jak-Stat3
pathway is essential and sufficient to mediate LIF signals, it is still unclear
how these signals are linked to the core circuitry of pluripotency-associated
transcription factors, consisting of Oct3/4 (also called Pou5f1), Sox2 and Nanog.
Here we show that two LIF signalling pathways are each connected to the core
circuitry via different transcription factors. In mouse ES cells, Klf4 is mainly 
activated by the Jak-Stat3 pathway and preferentially activates Sox2, whereas
Tbx3 is preferentially regulated by the phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase-Akt and 
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways and predominantly stimulates Nanog. In 
the absence of LIF, artificial expression of Klf4 or Tbx3 is sufficient to
maintain pluripotency while maintaining the expression of Oct3/4. Notably,
overexpression of Nanog supports LIF-independent self-renewal of mouse ES cells
in the absence of Klf4 and Tbx3 activity. Therefore, Klf4 and Tbx3 are involved
in mediating LIF signalling to the core circuitry but are not directly associated
with the maintenance of pluripotency, because ES cells keep pluripotency without 
their expression in the particular context.

PMID: 19571885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Circ Res. 2009 Jul 2;105(1):61-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.192443. Epub 2009
Jun 4.

Gene expression profiling of the forming atrioventricular node using a novel
tbx3-based node-specific transgenic reporter.

Horsthuis T(1), Buermans HP, Brons JF, Verkerk AO, Bakker ML, Wakker V, Clout DE,
Moorman AF, 't Hoen PA, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The atrioventricular (AV) node is a recurrent source of potentially
life-threatening arrhythmias. Nevertheless, limited data are available on its
developmental control or molecular phenotype. We used a novel AV nodal
myocardium-specific reporter mouse to gain insight into the gene programs
determining the formation and phenotype of the developing AV node. In this
reporter, green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression was driven by a 160-kbp
bacterial artificial chromosome with Tbx3 and flanking sequences. GFP was
selectively active in the AV canal of embryos and AV node of adults, whereas the 
Tbx3-positive AV bundle and sinus node were devoid of GFP, demonstrating that
distinct regulatory sequences and pathways control expression in the components
of the conduction system. Fluorescent AV nodal and complementary Nppa-positive
chamber myocardial cell populations of embryonic day 10.5 embryos and of
embryonic day 17.5 fetuses were purified using fluorescence-activated cell
sorting, and their expression profiles were assessed by genome-wide microarray
analysis, providing valuable information concerning their molecular identities.
We constructed a comprehensive list of sodium, calcium, and potassium channel
genes specific for developing nodal or chamber myocardium. Furthermore, the data 
revealed that the AV node and the chamber (working) myocardium phenotypes diverge
during development but that the functional gene classes characterizing both
subtypes are maintained. One of the repertoires identified in the AV
node-specific gene profiles consists of multiple neurotrophic factors and
semaphorins, not yet appreciated to play a role in nodal development, revealing
shared characteristics between nodal and nervous system development.

PMID: 19498200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Nat Genet. 2009 Jun;41(6):677-87. doi: 10.1038/ng.384. Epub 2009 May 10.

Genome-wide association study of blood pressure and hypertension.

Levy D(1), Ehret GB, Rice K, Verwoert GC, Launer LJ, Dehghan A, Glazer NL,
Morrison AC, Johnson AD, Aspelund T, Aulchenko Y, Lumley T, Köttgen A, Vasan RS, 
Rivadeneira F, Eiriksdottir G, Guo X, Arking DE, Mitchell GF, Mattace-Raso FU,
Smith AV, Taylor K, Scharpf RB, Hwang SJ, Sijbrands EJ, Bis J, Harris TB, Ganesh 
SK, O'Donnell CJ, Hofman A, Rotter JI, Coresh J, Benjamin EJ, Uitterlinden AG,
Heiss G, Fox CS, Witteman JC, Boerwinkle E, Wang TJ, Gudnason V, Larson MG,
Chakravarti A, Psaty BM, van Duijn CM.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Framingham Heart Study,
Framingham, Massachusetts, USA. levyd@nhlbi.nih.gov

Blood pressure is a major cardiovascular disease risk factor. To date, few
variants associated with interindividual blood pressure variation have been
identified and replicated. Here we report results of a genome-wide association
study of systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP) blood pressure and hypertension in
the CHARGE Consortium (n = 29,136), identifying 13 SNPs for SBP, 20 for DBP and
10 for hypertension at P < 4 × 10(-7). The top ten loci for SBP and DBP were
incorporated into a risk score; mean BP and prevalence of hypertension increased 
in relation to the number of risk alleles carried. When ten CHARGE SNPs for each 
trait were included in a joint meta-analysis with the Global BPgen Consortium (n 
= 34,433), four CHARGE loci attained genome-wide significance (P < 5 × 10(-8))
for SBP (ATP2B1, CYP17A1, PLEKHA7, SH2B3), six for DBP (ATP2B1, CACNB2, CSK-ULK3,
SH2B3, TBX3-TBX5, ULK4) and one for hypertension (ATP2B1). Identifying genes
associated with blood pressure advances our understanding of blood pressure
regulation and highlights potential drug targets for the prevention or treatment 
of hypertension.

PMCID: PMC2998712
PMID: 19430479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2009 Apr;29(4):765-7.

[Tbx3 upregulation may be one of the malignant biomarkers of breast cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen ZH(1), Lv GM, Ji TH.

Author information: 
(1)Fuzhou General Hospital of Nanjing Command, Fuzhou 350025, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the role of abnormal Tbx3 expression in the pathogenesis of
breast cancer.
METHOD: The total RNA of 4 breast cancer cell lines and 5 normal breast samples
was extracted by routine Trizol method. After reverse transcription of the total 
RNA into cDNA, Tbx3 mRNA expression was detected in these samples by real-time
PCR. Immunohistochemistry was used to examine the differences in Tbx3 protein
expression between 60 breast cancer samples and 34 normal breast tissue samples.
RESULTS: Compared to normal breast tissue samples, the breast cancer cell lines
showed markedly increased Tbx3 mRNA expression. The results of
immunohistochemistry demonstrated a significant upregulation of Tbx3 protein
expression in the 60 breast cancer tissues in comparison with the normal breast
tissues, as was consistent with Tbx3 mRNA expressions in these tissue samples.
CONCLUSIONS: The mRNA and protein expressions of Tbx3 are markedly upregulated in
breast cancer cell lines and tissue samples, suggesting that Tbx3 may serve as
one of the malignant biomarkers in the pathogenesis of breast cancer.

PMID: 19403417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Stem Cells. 2009 Apr;27(4):764-75. doi: 10.1002/stem.3.

Characterization of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent transcriptome in
murine embryonic stem cells: identification of novel regulators of pluripotency.

Storm MP(1), Kumpfmueller B, Thompson B, Kolde R, Vilo J, Hummel O, Schulz H,
Welham MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, Centre for Regenerative Medicine,
University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.

Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-dependent signaling has been implicated in the
regulation of embryonic stem (ES) cell fate. To gain further insight into the
mechanisms regulated by PI3Ks in murine ES cells, we have performed expression
profiling using Affymetrix GeneChips to characterize the transcriptional changes 
that arise as a result of inhibition of PI3K-dependent signaling. Using filtering
of greater than 1.5-fold change in expression and an analysis of variance
significance level of p < .05, we have defined a dataset comprising 646 probe
sets that detect changes in transcript expression (469 down and 177 up) on
inhibition of PI3Ks. Changes in expression of selected genes have been validated 
by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Gene ontology
analyses reveal significant over-representation of transcriptional regulators
within our dataset. In addition, several known regulators of ES cell
pluripotency, for example, Nanog, Esrrb, Tbx3, and Tcl-1, are among the
downregulated genes. To evaluate the functional involvement of selected genes in 
regulation of ES cell self-renewal, we have used short interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown. These studies identify genes not previously associated with control of
ES cell fate that are involved in regulating ES cell pluripotency, including the 
protein tyrosine phosphatase Shp-1 and the Zscan4 family of zinc finger proteins.
Further gain-of-function analyses demonstrate the importance of Zscan4c in
regulation of ES cell pluripotency.

PMID: 19350676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 Jul;47(1):66-75. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.03.014. Epub 
2009 Mar 31.

Estrogen receptor alpha supports cardiomyocytes indirectly through post-infarct
cardiac c-kit+ cells.

Brinckmann M(1), Kaschina E, Altarche-Xifró W, Curato C, Timm M, Grzesiak A, Dong
J, Kappert K, Kintscher U, Unger T, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Research (CCR) and Institute of Pharmacology,
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Hessische Str. 3-4, 10115 Berlin, Germany.

Despite previous studies demonstrating a cardioprotective role of estradiol via
its estrogen receptor (ER)alpha, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here
we aimed to define ERalpha-involved mechanisms against cardiac injury. Seven days
after myocardial infarction in male rats, cardiac ERalpha was upregulated in
post-infarct cardiac c-kit+ cells accumulating in periinfarct myocardium as shown
by Western blotting and immunofluorescence staining. Further, we isolated
post-infarct cardiac c-kit+ cell population by modified magnetic activated cell
sorting (MACS) and fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS), and confirmed
predominant ERalpha expression in this post-infarct cardiac c-kit+ cell
population by real-time PCR. These post-infarct cardiac c-kit+ cells,
characterized by upregulated transcription factors implicated in cardiogenic
differentiation (GATA-4, Notch-2) and genes required for self-renewal (Tbx3,
Akt), maintained a stable phenotype in vitro for more than 3 months. ERalpha
stimulation supported proliferation but prevented differentiation of
undifferentiated myoblast cells. When adult myocytes isolated from infarcted rat 
hearts were co-cultured with post-infarct cardiac c-kit+ cells, ERalpha
stimulation inhibited apoptosis and enhanced survival of these myocytes. These
findings suggest that cardiac ERalpha supports survival of cardiomyocytes through
post-infarct cardiac c-kit+ cells, which may contribute to cardioprotection
against cardiac injury.

PMID: 19341743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Pathol. 2009 Jun;218(2):201-9. doi: 10.1002/path.2524.

Gene expression profiling provides insights into the pathways involved in solid
pseudopapillary neoplasm of the pancreas.

Cavard C(1), Audebourg A, Letourneur F, Audard V, Beuvon F, Cagnard N, Radenen B,
Varlet P, Vacher-Lavenu MC, Perret C, Terris B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France.

Solid-pseudopapillary neoplasms (SPNs) are rare human pancreatic neoplasms
usually associated with a good prognosis. In contrast to other pancreatic
tumours, aberrant activation of the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway appears to be a
constant feature in SPN. Aside from activation of the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway,
little is known about biological pathways deregulated in SPN. We carried out
transcriptome profiling of SPN to gain insights into the pathogenesis of these
tumours. As expected, the over-expression of AXIN2, TBX3, SP5 and NOTUM
demonstrated activation of the beta-catenin pathway. Members of the Notch pathway
(HEY1, HEY2, NOTCH2) were also up-regulated, relative to their expression in
ductal adenocarcinomas (DAC) or pancreatic endocrine tumours (PET). Other genes, 
such as EDN3, HAND2, netrin-G2 and the receptor netrin-G1 ligand, involved in
neural crest differentiation, were also identified as altered. Increased levels
of SOX10 and TuJ-1 proteins were also indicative of neural-like differentiation. 
In conclusion, SPN display a complex expression profile, distinct from that
observed in PET and DAC and involving both the beta-catenin and Notch pathways,
together with expression of neural differentiation markers.

PMID: 19235837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2009 Jan;29(1):87-9.

[Expression of TBX3 mRNA and its role in the pathogenesis and metastasis of
breast cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen ZH(1), Lü GM, Ji TH.

Author information: 
(1)Fuzhou General Hospital of Nanjing Command, Fuzhou 350025, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the role of TBX3 gene in the pathogenesis of breast cancer.
METHODS: The total RNA of 51 fresh breast cancer tissues and the corresponding
adjacent tissues were extracted and reverse transcribed into cDNA to detect the
expression of TBX3 mRNA by real-time PCR. The correlation between TBX3 mRNA
expression and the clinicopathologic parameters in relation to breast cancer
metastasis was analyzed.
RESULT: Compared to that in the adjacent tissues, the expression of TBX3 mRNA was
markedly increased in breast cancer tissues. TBX3 mRNA expression was
significantly higher in metastatic breast cancer than in non-metastatic tumors.
CONCLUSION: Increased expression of TBX3 mRNA suggests the involvement of TBX3 in
the pathogenesis and metastasis of breast cancer.

PMID: 19218121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Circ Res. 2009 Feb 13;104(3):285-7. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.193680.

Setting the pace: Tbx3 and Tbx18 in cardiac conduction system development.

McNally EM, Svensson EC.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2009 Feb 13;104(3):388-97.

PMCID: PMC2725993
PMID: 19213963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Dev Biol. 2009 Mar 15;327(2):497-507. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.12.038. Epub 2009
Jan 8.

Involvement of an inner nuclear membrane protein, Nemp1, in Xenopus neural
development through an interaction with the chromatin protein BAF.

Mamada H(1), Takahashi N, Taira M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

To clarify the molecular mechanisms of neural development in vertebrates, we
analyzed a novel gene, termed nemp1 (nuclear envelope integral membrane protein
1), which is expressed in the Xenopus anterior neuroectoderm at the neurula
stage. Nemp1 has a putative signal peptide and five transmembrane domains, but
does not have any other known domains. We show that Nemp1 is localized to the
inner nuclear membrane (INM) with its evolutionarily conserved C-terminal region 
facing the nucleoplasm. Both overexpression and knockdown of Nemp1 in Xenopus
embryos reduced the expression of early eye marker genes, rax, tbx3, and pax6,
and later resulted mainly in severe eye defects at the tailbud stage. In
contrast, the expression of a forebrain/midbrain marker, otx2, and a pan-neural
marker, sox2, was largely unaffected. Deletion analysis of Nemp1 showed that
nuclear envelope-localization of the C-terminal region is necessary for its
eye-reducing activity. Furthermore, nemp1 is coexpressed with baf
(barrier-to-autointegration factor) in the eye anlagen, and that Nemp1 interacts 
with BAF through the BAF-binding site in the C-terminal region and this site is
required for Nemp1 activity. These data suggest that Nemp1 is involved in the
expression of eye marker genes by functioning at the INM at least partly through 
BAF.

PMID: 19167377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Dev Biol. 2009 Mar 15;327(2):376-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.12.028. Epub 2009 
Jan 3.

Shox2 is essential for the differentiation of cardiac pacemaker cells by
repressing Nkx2-5.

Espinoza-Lewis RA(1), Yu L, He F, Liu H, Tang R, Shi J, Sun X, Martin JF, Wang D,
Yang J, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA
70118, USA.

The pacemaker is composed of specialized cardiomyocytes located within the
sinoatrial node (SAN), and is responsible for originating and regulating the
heart beat. Recent advances towards understanding the SAN development have been
made on the genetic control and gene interaction within this structure. Here we
report that the Shox2 homeodomain transcription factor is restrictedly expressed 
in the sinus venosus region including the SAN and the sinus valves during
embryonic heart development. Shox2 null mutation results in embryonic lethality
due to cardiovascular defects, including an abnormal low heart beat rate
(bradycardia) and severely hypoplastic SAN and sinus valves attributed to a
significantly decreased level of cell proliferation. Genetically, the lack of
Tbx3 and Hcn4 expression, along with ectopic activation of Nppa, Cx40, and Nkx2-5
in the Shox2(-/-) SAN region, indicates a failure in SAN differentiation.
Furthermore, Shox2 overexpression in Xenopus embryos results in extensive
repression of Nkx2-5 in the developing heart, leading to a reduced cardiac field 
and aberrant heart formation. Reporter gene expression assays provide additional 
evidence for the repression of Nkx2-5 promoter activity by Shox2. Taken together 
our results demonstrate that Shox2 plays an essential role in the SAN and
pacemaker development by controlling a genetic cascade through the repression of 
Nkx2-5.

PMCID: PMC2694185
PMID: 19166829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Hepatology. 2009 Mar;49(3):969-78. doi: 10.1002/hep.22700.

Tbx3 promotes liver bud expansion during mouse development by suppression of
cholangiocyte differentiation.

Lüdtke TH(1), Christoffels VM, Petry M, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover,
Germany.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2010 Mar;52(3):450-1.

After specification of the hepatic endoderm, mammalian liver organogenesis
progresses through a series of morphological stages that culminate in the
migration of hepatocytes into the underlying mesenchyme to populate the hepatic
lobes. Here, we show that in the mouse the transcriptional repressor Tbx3, a
member of the T-box protein family, is required for the transition from a hepatic
diverticulum with a pseudo-stratified epithelium to a cell-emergent liver bud. In
Tbx3-deficient embryos, proliferation in the hepatic epithelium is severely
reduced, hepatoblasts fail to delaminate, and cholangiocyte rather than
hepatocyte differentiation occurs. Molecular analyses suggest that the primary
function of Tbx3 is to maintain expression of hepatocyte transcription factors,
including hepatic nuclear factor 4a (Hnf4a) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP), alpha (Cebpa), and to repress expression of cholangiocyte transcription 
factors such as Onecut1 (Hnf6) and Hnf1b.CONCLUSION: Tbx3 controls liver bud
expansion by suppressing cholangiocyte and favoring hepatocyte differentiation in
the liver bud.

PMID: 19140222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Feb 15;106(3):482-90. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22035.

T-box 3 negatively regulates osteoblast differentiation by inhibiting expression 
of osterix and runx2.

Govoni KE(1), Linares GR, Chen ST, Pourteymoor S, Mohan S.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Disease Center, Jerry L. Pettis VA Medical Center, Loma Linda,
CA 92357, USA.

T-box (Tbx)3, a known transcriptional repressor, is a member of a family of
transcription factors, which contain a highly homologous DNA binding domain known
as the Tbx domain. Based on the knowledge that mutation of the Tbx3 gene results 
in limb malformation, Tbx3 regulates osteoblast proliferation and its expression 
increases during osteoblast differentiation, we predicted that Tbx3 is an
important regulator of osteoblast cell functions. In this study, we evaluated the
consequence of transgenic overexpression of Tbx3 on osteoblast differentiation.
Retroviral overexpression increased Tbx3 expression >100-fold at the mRNA and
protein level. Overexpression of Tbx3 blocked mineralized nodule formation (28
+/- 8 vs. 7 +/- 1%) in MC3T3-E1 cells. In support of these data, alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) activity was reduced 33-70% (P < 0.05) in both MC3T3-E1 cells
and primary calvaria osteoblasts overexpressing Tbx3. In contrast, Tbx3
overexpression did not alter ALP activity in bone marrow stromal cells. Tbx3
overexpression blocked the increase in expression of key osteoblast marker genes,
ALP, bone sialoprotein, and osteocalcin that occurs during normal osteoblast
differentiation, but had little or no effect on expression of proliferation genes
p53 and Myc. In addition, Tbx3 overexpression abolished increased osterix and
runx2 expression observed during normal osteoblast differentiation, but the
change in Msx1 and Msx2 expression over time was similar between control and Tbx3
overexpressing cells. Interestingly, osterix and runx2, but not Msx1 and Msx2,
contain Tbx binding site in the regulatory region. Based on these data and our
previous findings, we conclude that Tbx3 promotes proliferation and suppresses
differentiation of osteoblasts and may be involved in regulating expression of
key transcription factors involved in osteoblast differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2915761
PMID: 19115250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Circ Res. 2009 Feb 13;104(3):388-97. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.187062. Epub
2008 Dec 18.

Formation of the sinus node head and differentiation of sinus node myocardium are
independently regulated by Tbx18 and Tbx3.

Wiese C(1), Grieskamp T, Airik R, Mommersteeg MT, Gardiwal A, de Gier-de Vries C,
Schuster-Gossler K, Moorman AF, Kispert A, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Heart Failure Research, Academic Medical Centre, Meibergdreef 15,
1105AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2009 Feb 13;104(3):285-7.

The sinus node (or sinoatrial node [SAN]), the pacemaker of the heart, is a
functionally and structurally heterogeneous tissue, which consists of a large
"head" within the right caval vein myocardium and a "tail" along the terminal
crest. Here, we investigated its cellular origin and mechanism of formation.
Using genetic lineage analysis and explant assays, we identified T-box
transcription factor Tbx18-expressing mesenchymal progenitors in the inflow tract
region that differentiate into pacemaker myocardium to form the SAN. We found
that the head and tail represent separate regulatory domains expressing
distinctive gene programs. Tbx18 is required to establish the large head
structure, as seen by the existence of a very small but still functional tail
piece in Tbx18-deficient fetuses. In contrast, Tbx3-deficient embryos formed a
morphologically normal SAN, which, however, aberrantly expressed Cx40 and other
atrial genes, demonstrating that Tbx3 controls differentiation of SAN head and
tail cardiomyocytes but also demonstrating that Tbx3 is not required for the
formation of the SAN structure. Our data establish a functional order for Tbx18
and Tbx3 in SAN formation, in which Tbx18 controls the formation of the SAN head 
from mesenchymal precursors, on which Tbx3 subsequently imposes the pacemaker
gene program.

PMID: 19096026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Neurogenet. 2009;23(1-2):15-33. doi: 10.1080/01677060802471619. Epub 2008 Dec
1.

omb and circumstance.

Pflugfelder GO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Genetik, Universtät Mainz, Germany. pflugfel@uni-mainz.de

Since its isolation in a behavioral screen in 1971, work on the gene,
optomotor-blind (omb, FlyBase: bifid, bi), has proceeded in many laboratories.
The Drosophila T-box transcription factor, Omb, is active in several
developmental processes, in particular in those of wing, eye, and abdominal
tergites and optic lobes. The orthologous genes, TBX2 and TBX3, are found
overexpressed or amplified in an increasing number of human cancers, emphasizing 
the importance of Tbx genes also in postdevelopmental processes. This review
summarizes recent findings pertaining to omb and orthologous genes.

PMID: 19052953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 1;68(19):7872-81. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0301.

Tbx3 represses E-cadherin expression and enhances melanoma invasiveness.

Rodriguez M(1), Aladowicz E, Lanfrancone L, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Signalling and Development Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The
Chart, Oxted, Surrey, United Kingdom.

The T-box transcription factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 are overexpressed in many cancers
and in melanoma promote proliferation by actively suppressing senescence. Whether
they also contribute to tumor progression via other mechanisms is not known.
Here, we identify a novel role for these factors, providing evidence that Tbx3,
and potentially Tbx2, directly repress the expression of E-cadherin, a
keratinocyte-melanoma adhesion molecule whose loss is required for the
acquisition of an invasive phenotype. Overexpression of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in melanoma
cells down-regulates endogenous E-cadherin expression, whereas depletion of Tbx3,
but not Tbx2, increases E-cadherin mRNA and protein levels and decreases melanoma
invasiveness in vitro. Consistent with these observations, in melanoma tissue,
Tbx3 and E-cadherin expression are inversely correlated. Depletion of Tbx3 also
leads to substantial up-regulation of Tbx2. The results suggest that Tbx2 and
Tbx3 may play a dual role during the radial to vertical growth phase transition
by both inhibiting senescence via repression of p21(CIP1) expression, and
enhancing melanoma invasiveness by decreasing E-cadherin levels.

PMID: 18829543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Dev Genes Evol. 2008 Dec;218(11-12):613-28. doi: 10.1007/s00427-008-0249-5. Epub 
2008 Sep 25.

Conservation of linkage and evolution of developmental function within the
Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily of T-box genes: implications for the origin of vertebrate
limbs.

Horton AC(1), Mahadevan NR, Minguillon C, Osoegawa K, Rokhsar DS, Ruvinsky I, de 
Jong PJ, Logan MP, Gibson-Brown JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, 1 Brookings Drive, 
St. Louis, MO 63130, USA.

T-box genes encode a family of DNA-binding transcription factors implicated in
numerous developmental processes in all metazoans. The Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily genes
are especially interesting because of their key roles in the evolution of
vertebrate appendages, eyes, and the heart, and, like the Hox genes, the
longevity of their chromosomal linkage. A BAC library derived from the single
male amphioxus (Branchiostoma floridae) used to sequence the amphioxus genome was
screened for AmphiTbx2/3 and AmphiTbx4/5, yielding two independent clones
containing both genes. Using comparative expression, genomic linkage, and
phylogenetic analyses, we have reconstructed the evolutionary histories of these 
members of the T-box gene family. We find that the Tbx2-Tbx4 and Tbx3-Tbx5 gene
pairs have maintained tight linkage in most animal lineages since their birth by 
tandem duplication, long before the divergence of protostomes and deuterostomes
(e.g., arthropods and vertebrates) at least 600 million years ago, and possibly
before the divergence of poriferans and cnidarians (e.g., sponges and jellyfish).
Interestingly, we find that the gene linkage detected in all vertebrate genomes
has been maintained in the primitively appendage-lacking, basal chordate,
amphioxus. Although all four genes have been involved in the evolution of
developmental programs regulating paired fin and (later) limb outgrowth and
patterning, and most are also implicated in eye and heart development, linkage
maintenance--often considered due to regulatory constraints imposed by limb, eye,
and/or heart associated gene expression--is undoubtedly a consequence of other,
much more ancient functional constraints.

PMID: 18815807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2008;120(13-14):435-9. doi: 10.1007/s00508-008-0995-4.

Genetic analyses in a variant of Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome (MURCS
association).

Hofstetter G(1), Concin N, Marth C, Rinne T, Erdel M, Janecke A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Innsbruck Medical University,
Innsbruck, Austria. gerda.hofstetter@i-med.ac.at

Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome is characterized by the congenital
absence of uterus and upper part of the vagina as a result of Mullerian duct
agenesis. The combination of MRKH syndrome with renal anomalies and
cervicothoracic dysplasia is known as MURCS association (Mullerian aplasia, Renal
anomalies, and Cervicothoracic Somite dysplasia). The etiology remains poorly
understood. We delineate this disease by reporting on a 16-year-old patient
showing the cardinal features of MURCS association accompanied by a persistent
left superior vena cava and atrial septal defect, orofacial clefting, and mild
reduction deformities of the left hand. Fluorescence in situ hybridization did
not show major deletions or duplications of the DiGeorge/VCFS (velocardiofacial
syndrome) region at chromosome 22q11.1 as well as the TBX5/TBX3 region at
12q24.1. In addition, sequencing of the TP63L (p63) gene, residing at 3q27,
remained normal in the presented patient. Thus, we provide further evidence for
the genetic heterogeneity of MURCS association.

PMID: 18726671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Circ Res. 2008 Sep 26;103(7):743-50. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.172858. Epub
2008 Aug 21.

Tbx3 is required for outflow tract development.

Mesbah K(1), Harrelson Z, Théveniau-Ruissy M, Papaioannou VE, Kelly RG.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Institute of Marseilles-Luminy, France.

Conotruncal and ventricular septal congenital heart anomalies result from defects
in formation and division of the embryonic outflow tract. Cardiac remodeling
during outflow tract and ventricular septation converts the tubular embryonic
heart into a parallel circulatory system with an independent left ventricular
outlet and right ventricular inlet. Tbx3 encodes a T-box-containing transcription
factor expressed in the developing conduction system of the heart. Mutations in
TBX3 cause ulnar-mammary syndrome. Here we show that mice lacking Tbx3 develop
severe outflow tract defects, including connection of both the aorta and
pulmonary trunk with the right ventricle, in addition to aortic arch artery
anomalies and abnormal communication between the right atrium and left ventricle.
Alignment defects are preceded by a delay in caudal displacement of the arterial 
pole of the heart during aortic arch artery formation. Embryonic
anterior-posterior patterning and cardiac chamber development are unaffected in
Tbx3 mutant embryos. However, the contribution of second heart field derived
progenitor cells to the arterial pole of the heart is impaired. Tbx3 is expressed
in pharyngeal epithelia and neural crest cells in the pharyngeal region,
suggesting an indirect role in second heart field deployment. Loss of Tbx3
affects multiple signaling pathways regulating second heart field proliferation
and outflow tract morphogenesis, including fibroblast growth factor signaling,
leading to a failure of normal heart tube extension and consequent
atrioventricular and ventriculoarterial alignment defects.

PMCID: PMC3006184
PMID: 18723448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Circ Res. 2008 Jun 6;102(11):1295-7. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.178061.

Teed off: cardiac conduction system development requires T-box transcription
factors.

Yutzey KE.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2008 Jun 6;102(11):1340-9.

PMCID: PMC2737385
PMID: 18535264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Gene Expr Patterns. 2008 Jul;8(6):411-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2008.04.006. Epub
2008 Apr 29.

Expression of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in the developing hypothalamic-pituitary axis.

Pontecorvi M(1), Goding CR, Richardson WD, Kessaris N.

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology,
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
m.pontecorvi@mcri.ac.uk

TBX2 and TBX3 are transcription factors that belong to the T-box family, members 
of which play important roles during mammalian embryogenesis. Mutations in T-box 
genes have been linked to several human genetic disorders and increasing evidence
suggests that Tbx2 and Tbx3 may play a key role in cancer. The primary functions 
of Tbx2 and Tbx3 remain poorly defined, mainly because of their widespread
expression in several tissues and their multiple potential roles in
morphogenesis, organogenesis and cell-fate commitment. Here, we describe in
detail the expression of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in the developing hypothalamic-pituitary
axis. Localized transcripts can be detected during the early stages of pituitary 
commitment. Expression of Tbx2 is restricted to the infundibular region of the
ventral diencephalon (VD) at all ages examined, whereas Tbx3 can be detected in
both the VD and Rathke's pouch, the precursor of the anterior pituitary. Outside 
the developing hypophyseal organ novel sites of Tbx3 and Tbx2 expression include 
migrating branchiomotor (BM) and visceromotor (VM) neurons in the hindbrain,
neuroepithelial cells of the developing tongue (Tbx3) as well as the developing
blood vessel network (Tbx2).

PMID: 18534921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Stem Cells. 2008 Aug;26(8):1951-60. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0229. Epub 2008
May 15.

Tcf3 functions as a steady-state limiter of transcriptional programs of mouse
embryonic stem cell self-renewal.

Yi F(1), Pereira L, Merrill BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 900 South Ashland Avenue, Molecular Biology Research Building, Chicago, 
Illinois 60607, USA.

Elucidating the underlying transcriptional control of pluripotent cells is
necessary for the development of new methods of inducing and maintaining
pluripotent cells in vitro. Three transcription factors, Nanog, Oct4, and Sox2,
have been reported to form a feedforward circuit promoting pluripotent cell
self-renewal in embryonic stem cells (ESC). Previously, we found that a
transcriptional repressor activity of Tcf3, a DNA-binding effector of Wnt
signaling, reduced Nanog promoter activity and Nanog levels in mouse embryonic
stem cells (mESC). The objective of this study was to determine the scope of Tcf3
effects on gene expression and self-renewal beyond the regulation of Nanog
levels. We show that Tcf3 acts broadly on a genome-wide scale to reduce the
levels of several promoters of self-renewal (Nanog, Tcl1, Tbx3, Esrrb) while not 
affecting other ESC genes (Oct4, Sox2, Fgf4). Comparing effects of Tcf3 ablation 
with Oct4 or Nanog knockdown revealed that Tcf3 counteracted effects of both
Nanog and Oct4. Interestingly, the effects of Tcf3 were more strongly correlated 
with Oct4 than with Nanog, despite the normal levels of Oct4 in TCF3-/- mESC. The
deranged gene expression allowed TCF3-/- mESC self-renewal even in the absence of
leukemia inhibitory factor and delayed differentiation in embryoid bodies. These 
findings identify Tcf3 as a cell-intrinsic inhibitor of pluripotent cell
self-renewal that functions by limiting steady-state levels of self-renewal
factors. Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest is found at the end of
this article.

PMCID: PMC2743928
PMID: 18483421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Circ Res. 2008 Jun 6;102(11):1340-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.169565. Epub
2008 May 8.

Transcription factor Tbx3 is required for the specification of the
atrioventricular conduction system.

Bakker ML(1), Boukens BJ, Mommersteeg MT, Brons JF, Wakker V, Moorman AF,
Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 Jun 6;102(11):1295-7.

The cardiac conduction system consists of distinctive heart muscle cells that
initiate and propagate the electric impulse required for coordinated contraction.
The conduction system expresses the transcriptional repressor Tbx3, which is
required for vertebrate development and controls the formation of the sinus node.
In humans, mutations in Tbx3 cause ulnar-mammary syndrome. Here, we investigated 
the role of Tbx3 in the molecular specification of the atrioventricular
conduction system. Expression analysis revealed early delineation of the
atrioventricular bundle and proximal bundle branches by Tbx3 expression in human,
mouse, and chicken. Tbx3-deficient mice, which die between embryonic day 12.5 and
15.5, ectopically expressed genes for connexin (Cx)43, atrial natriuretic factor 
(Nppa), Tbx18, and Tbx20 in the atrioventricular bundle and proximal bundle
branches. Cx40 was precociously upregulated in the atrioventricular bundle of
Tbx3 mutants. Moreover, the atrioventricular bundle and branches failed to exit
the cell cycle in Tbx3 mutant embryos. Finally, Tbx3-deficient embryos developed 
outflow tract malformations and ventricular septal defects. These data reveal
that Tbx3 is required for the molecular specification of the atrioventricular
bundle and bundle branches and for the development of the ventricular septum and 
outflow tract. Our data suggest a mechanism in which Tbx3 represses
differentiation into ventricular working myocardium, thereby imposing the
conduction system phenotype on cells within its expression domain.

PMID: 18467625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Circ Res. 2008 Jun 6;102(11):1433-42. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.168294. Epub
2008 May 1.

A gain-of-function TBX5 mutation is associated with atypical Holt-Oram syndrome
and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.

Postma AV(1), van de Meerakker JB, Mathijssen IB, Barnett P, Christoffels VM,
Ilgun A, Lam J, Wilde AA, Lekanne Deprez RH, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, L2-108-1, Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef
15, 1105 AZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. a.v.postma@amc.uva.nl

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 Sep 26;103(7):e96.
    Circ Res. 2008 Jun 6;102(11):1304-6.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a heart/hand syndrome clinically characterized by
upper limb and cardiac malformations. Mutations in T-box transcription factor 5
(TBX5) underlie this syndrome. Here, we describe a large atypical HOS family in
which affected patients have mild skeletal deformations and paroxysmal atrial
fibrillation, but few have congenital heart disease. Sequencing of TBX5 revealed 
a novel mutation, c.373G>A, resulting in the missense mutation p.Gly125Arg, in
all investigated affected family members, cosegregating with the disease. We
demonstrate that the mutation results in normal Nkx2-5 interaction, is correctly 
targeted to the nucleus, has significantly enhanced DNA binding and activation of
both the Nppa(Anf) and Cx40 promoter, and significantly augments expression of
Nppa, Cx40, Kcnj2, and Tbx3 in comparison with wild-type TBX5. Thus, contrary to 
previously published HOS mutations, the p.G125R TBX5 mutation results in a
gain-of-function. We speculate that the gain-of-function mechanism underlies the 
mild skeletal phenotype and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and suggest a possible
role of TBX5 in the development of (paroxysmal) atrial fibrillation based on a
gain-of-function either through a direct stimulation of target genes via TBX5 or 
indirectly via TBX5 stimulated TBX3. These findings may warrant a renewed look at
the phenotypes of families and individuals hitherto not classified as HOS or as
atypical but presenting with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, because these may
possibly be the result of additional TBX5 gain-of-function mutations.

PMID: 18451335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2008 Jun;21(3):379-87. doi:
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2008.00461.x. Epub 2008 Apr 26.

TBX3 and its splice variant TBX3 + exon 2a are functionally similar.

Hoogaars WM(1), Barnett P, Rodriguez M, Clout DE, Moorman AF, Goding CR,
Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Heart Failure Research, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Tbx3, a member of the conserved family of T-box developmental transcription
factors, is a transcriptional repressor required during cardiogenesis for the
formation and specification of the sinoatrial node, the pacemaker of the heart.
Both the TBX3 and the highly related TBX2 genes are also associated with several 
cancers, most likely as a consequence of their powerful anti-senescence
properties mediated via suppression p14(Arf) and p21(CIP) expression. In
melanoma, the TBX2 gene is frequently amplified and inhibition of Tbx2 function
leads to senescence and up-regulation of p21(CIP), a Tbx2 target gene. Tbx3 + 2a 
is a splice variant containing an extra 20 amino acids encoded by exon 2a
inserted into the highly conserved T-box DNA-binding domain. We find here that
Tbx3 + 2a is evolutionary conserved and that similar insertions are largely
absent from the T-box domains of other T-box factors. Tbx3 + 2a has been reported
to lack DNA-binding ability and act as a functional antagonist of Tbx3. By
contrast, we now demonstrate that both Tbx3 and Tbx3 + 2a bind the consensus
T-element, the p21(CIP1) promoter, and the Nppa cardiac target gene. Both
isoforms also function as repressors of p21(CIP1) and Nppa promoter activity and 
interact with homeobox factor Nkx2-5. When ectopically expressed in the embryonic
heart of mice, Tbx3 and Tbx3 + 2a both suppressed chamber formation and repressed
expression of cardiac chamber markers Nppa and Cx40. The results suggest that in 
the assays used, Tbx3 and Tbx3 + 2a are functionally equivalent and that like
Tbx2, Tbx3 may also function as an anti-senescence factor in melanoma.

PMID: 18444963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Development. 2008 May;135(9):1589-95. doi: 10.1242/dev.016634. Epub 2008 Mar 20.

Tbx3 controls the fate of hepatic progenitor cells in liver development by
suppressing p19ARF expression.

Suzuki A(1), Sekiya S, Büscher D, Izpisúa Belmonte JC, Taniguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organogenesis and Regeneration, Post-Genome Science Center,
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. suzukicks@bioreg.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Although the T-box family of transcription factors function in many different
tissues, their role in liver development is unknown. Here we show that Tbx3, the 
T-box gene that is mutated in human ulnar-mammary syndrome, is specifically
expressed in multipotent hepatic progenitor cells, ;hepatoblasts', isolated from 
the developing mouse liver. Tbx3-deficient hepatoblasts presented severe defects 
in proliferation as well as uncontrollable hepatobiliary lineage segregation,
including the promotion of cholangiocyte (biliary epithelial cell)
differentiation, which thereby caused abnormal liver development. Deletion of
Tbx3 resulted in the increased expression of the tumor suppressor p19(ARF)
(Cdkn2a), which in turn induced a growth arrest in hepatoblasts and activated a
program of cholangiocyte differentiation. Thus, Tbx3 plays a crucial role in
controlling hepatoblast proliferation and cell-fate determination by suppressing 
p19(ARF) expression and thereby promoting liver organogenesis.

PMID: 18356246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Cardiovasc Res. 2008 Jun 1;78(3):485-93. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn049. Epub 2008 Feb
19.

Msx1 and Msx2 are functional interacting partners of T-box factors in the
regulation of Connexin43.

Boogerd KJ(1), Wong LY, Christoffels VM, Klarenbeek M, Ruijter JM, Moorman AF,
Barnett P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Heart Failure Research Centre, Academic 
Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105AZ Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

AIMS: T-box factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 play key roles in the development of the
cardiac conduction system, atrioventricular canal, and outflow tract of the
heart. They regulate the gap-junction-encoding gene Connexin43 (Cx43) and other
genes critical for heart development and function. Discovering protein partners
of Tbx2 and Tbx3 will shed light on the mechanisms by which these factors
regulate these gene programs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Employing an yeast 2-hybrid screen and subsequent in vitro
pull-down experiments we demonstrate that muscle segment homeobox genes Msx1 and 
Msx2 are able to bind the cardiac T-box proteins Tbx2, Tbx3, and Tbx5. This
interaction, as that of the related Nkx2.5 protein, is supported by the T-box and
homeodomain alone. Overlapping spatiotemporal expression patterns of Msx1 and
Msx2 together with the T-box genes during cardiac development in mouse and
chicken underscore the biological significance of this interaction. We
demonstrate that Msx proteins together with Tbx2 and Tbx3 suppress Cx43 promoter 
activity and down regulate Cx43 gene activity in a rat heart-derived cell line.
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis we demonstrate that Msx1 can bind
the Cx43 promoter at a conserved binding site located in close proximity to a
previously defined T-box binding site, and that the activity of Msx proteins on
this promoter appears dependent in the presence of Tbx3.
CONCLUSION: Msx1 and Msx2 can function in concert with the T-box proteins to
suppress Cx43 and other working myocardial genes.

PMID: 18285513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Cancer Res. 2008 Feb 1;68(3):693-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5012.

TBX3 is overexpressed in breast cancer and represses p14 ARF by interacting with 
histone deacetylases.

Yarosh W(1), Barrientos T, Esmailpour T, Lin L, Carpenter PM, Osann K,
Anton-Culver H, Huang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, University of
California, Irvine, California 92697, USA.

TBX3 is a transcription factor of the T-box gene family. Mutations in the TBX3
gene can cause hypoplastic or absent mammary glands. Previous studies have shown 
that TBX3 might be associated with breast cancer. Here, we show that TBX3 is
overexpressed in malignant cells of primary breast cancer tissues by
immunohistochemistry. TBX3 interacts with histone deacetylases (HDAC) 1, 2, 3,
and 5. TBX3 interacts with HDAC1, 2, and 3 via two distinct binding sites.
However, deletion of the repression domain (amino acids 566-624) of TBX3
completely abolishes its interaction with HDAC5. Endogenous TBX3 and HDACs
interaction and colocalization are found in a breast cancer cell line by
coimmunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence, respectively. The functional
significance of the interaction between TBX3 and HDAC is also tested in a
p14(ARF)-luciferase reporter system. Results indicate that TBX3 represses
expression of p14(ARF) tumor suppressor and that a HDAC inhibitor is able to
reverse the TBX3 repressive function in a dosage-dependent manner. This study
suggests that TBX3 may function by recruiting HDACs to the T-box binding site in 
the promoter region. TBX3 repression to its targets is dependent on HDAC
activity. TBX3 may serve as a biomarker for breast cancer and have significant
applications in both breast cancer diagnosis and treatment.

PMID: 18245468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;28(5):1553-64. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

An evolutionarily conserved nuclear export signal facilitates cytoplasmic
localization of the Tbx5 transcription factor.

Kulisz A(1), Simon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
CMRC, 2300 Children's Plaza, Box #204, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

During cardiac development, the T-box transcription factor Tbx5 displays dynamic 
changes in localization from strictly nuclear to both nuclear and cytoplasmic to 
exclusively cytoplasmic along the actin cytoskeleton in cells coexpressing its
binding protein LMP4. Although nuclear localization signals (NLSs) have been
described, the mechanism by which Tbx5 exits the nucleus remained elusive. Here, 
we describe for Tbx5 a nuclear export signal (NES) that is recognized by the CRM1
export protein. Site-directed mutagenesis of a critical amino acid(s) within this
sequence determined the functionality of this NES. Confocal localization studies 
and luciferase transcriptional reporter assays with NES mutant Tbx5 forms
demonstrated retention in the nucleus, regardless of the presence of LMP4.
Coimmunoprecipitation and pharmacological interference studies demonstrated a
direct interaction between Tbx5 and CRM1, revealing that Tbx5 is using the CRM1
pathway for nuclear export. In addition to Tbx5, we identified NESs in all T-box 
proteins and demonstrated interaction of the family members Tbx3 and Brachyury
with the CRM1 exporter, suggesting general significance. This first demonstration
of evolutionarily conserved NESs in all T-box proteins in conjunction with NLSs
indicates a primordial function of T-box proteins to dynamically shuttle between 
nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments of the cell.

PMCID: PMC2258776
PMID: 18160705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 25;283(4):2223-30. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

UV-mediated regulation of the anti-senescence factor Tbx2.

Abrahams A(1), Mowla S, Parker MI, Goding CR, Prince S.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Observatory 7925, Cape Town, South Africa.

Several lines of evidence have implicated members of the developmentally
important T-box gene family in cell cycle regulation and in cancer. Importantly, 
the highly related T-box factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 can suppress senescence through
repressing the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p19(ARF) and
p21(WAF1/CIP1/SDII). Furthermore, Tbx2 is up-regulated in several cancers,
including melanomas where it was shown to function as an anti-senescence factor, 
suggesting that this may be one of the mechanisms by which T-box proteins
contribute to the oncogenic process. However, very little is known about whether 
Tbx2 is regulated by p21-mediated stress-induced senescence signaling pathways.
In this study, using the MCF-7 breast cancer cell line known to overexpress Tbx2,
we show that in response to stress induced by ultraviolet irradiation the Tbx2
protein is specifically phosphorylated by the p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase. Using site-directed mutagenesis and in vitro kinase assays, we have
identified serine residues 336, 623, and 675 in the Tbx2 protein as the p38
target sites and show that these sites are phosphorylated in vivo. Importantly,
we show by Western blotting, immunofluorescence, and reporter assays that this
phosphorylation leads to increased Tbx2 protein levels, predominant nuclear
localization of the protein, and an increase in the ability of Tbx2 to repress
the p21(WAF1/CIP1/SDII) promoter. These results show for the first time that the 
ability of Tbx2 to repress the p21 gene is enhanced in response to a
stress-induced senescence pathway, which leads to a better understanding of the
regulation of the anti-senescence function of Tbx2.

PMID: 18025091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. BMC Genomics. 2007 Oct 18;8:376.

Intrinsic androgen-dependent gene expression patterns revealed by comparison of
genital fibroblasts from normal males and individuals with complete and partial
androgen insensitivity syndrome.

Holterhus PM(1), Deppe U, Werner R, Richter-Unruh A, Bebermeier JH, Wünsch L,
Krege S, Schweikert HU, Demeter J, Riepe F, Hiort O, Brooks JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University-Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel,
Schwanenweg 20, Kiel, Germany. holterhus@pediatrics.uni-kiel.de

BACKGROUND: To better understand the molecular programs of normal and abnormal
genital development, clear-cut definition of androgen-dependent gene expression
patterns, without the influence of genotype (46, XX vs. 46, XY), is warranted.
Previously, we have identified global gene expression profiles in genital-derived
fibroblasts that differ between 46, XY males and 46, XY females with complete
androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) due to inactivating mutations of the
androgen receptor (AR). While these differences could be due to cell autonomous
changes in gene expression induced by androgen programming, recent work suggests 
they could also be influenced by the location from which the fibroblasts were
harvested (topology). To minimize the influence of topology, we compared gene
expression patterns of fibroblasts derived from identical urogenital anlagen: the
scrotum in normally virilized 46, XY males and the labia majora from completely
feminized 46, XY individuals with CAIS.
RESULTS: 612 transcripts representing 440 unique genes differed significantly in 
expression levels between scrotum and CAIS labia majora, suggesting the effects
of androgen programming. While some genes coincided with those we had identified 
previously (TBX3, IGFBP5, EGFR, CSPG2), a significant number did not, implying
that topology had influenced gene expression in our previous experiments.
Supervised clustering of gene expression data derived from a large set of
fibroblast cultures from individuals with partial AIS revealed that the new,
topology controlled data set better classified the specimens.
CONCLUSION: Inactivating mutations of the AR, in themselves, appear to induce
lasting changes in gene expression in cultured fibroblasts, independent of
topology and genotype. Genes identified are likely to be relevant candidates to
decipher androgen-dependent normal and abnormal genital development.

PMCID: PMC2212662
PMID: 17945006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Aug;81(2):280-91. Epub 2007 Jun 15.

Mutations in cardiac T-box factor gene TBX20 are associated with diverse cardiac 
pathologies, including defects of septation and valvulogenesis and
cardiomyopathy.

Kirk EP(1), Sunde M, Costa MW, Rankin SA, Wolstein O, Castro ML, Butler TL, Hyun 
C, Guo G, Otway R, Mackay JP, Waddell LB, Cole AD, Hayward C, Keogh A, Macdonald 
P, Griffiths L, Fatkin D, Sholler GF, Zorn AM, Feneley MP, Winlaw DS, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, 2010, 
Australia.

The T-box family transcription factor gene TBX20 acts in a conserved regulatory
network, guiding heart formation and patterning in diverse species. Mouse Tbx20
is expressed in cardiac progenitor cells, differentiating cardiomyocytes, and
developing valvular tissue, and its deletion or RNA interference-mediated
knockdown is catastrophic for heart development. TBX20 interacts physically,
functionally, and genetically with other cardiac transcription factors, including
NKX2-5, GATA4, and TBX5, mutations of which cause congenital heart disease (CHD).
Here, we report nonsense (Q195X) and missense (I152M) germline mutations within
the T-box DNA-binding domain of human TBX20 that were associated with a family
history of CHD and a complex spectrum of developmental anomalies, including
defects in septation, chamber growth, and valvulogenesis. Biophysical
characterization of wild-type and mutant proteins indicated how the missense
mutation disrupts the structure and function of the TBX20 T-box. Dilated
cardiomyopathy was a feature of the TBX20 mutant phenotype in humans and mice,
suggesting that mutations in developmental transcription factors can provide a
sensitized template for adult-onset heart disease. Our findings are the first to 
link TBX20 mutations to human pathology. They provide insights into how mutation 
of different genes in an interactive regulatory circuit lead to diverse clinical 
phenotypes, with implications for diagnosis, genetic screening, and patient
follow-up.

PMCID: PMC1950799
PMID: 17668378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Pigment Cell Res. 2007 Aug;20(4):279-87.

T-box factors: targeting to chromatin and interaction with the histone H3
N-terminal tail.

Demay F(1), Bilican B, Rodriguez M, Carreira S, Pontecorvi M, Ling Y, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Signalling and Development Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The
Chart, Oxted, Surrey, UK.

T-box transcription factors play a crucial role in development where they are
implicated in patterning and cell fate decisions. Tbx2 and Tbx3 have also been
implicated in several cancers including melanoma, and can act as antisenescence
factors through their ability to repress p19(ARF) and p21(CIP1) expression.
Although several target genes for T-box factors have been identified, it is
unknown whether this family of proteins can bind chromatin, a property that would
facilitate the epigenetic reprogramming that occurs in both development and
cancer progression. Here, we show that Tbx2 has the potential to recognize
mitotic chromatin in a DNA-dependent fashion, can interact specifically with the 
histone H3 N-terminal tail, a property shared with Tbx4, Tbx5 and Tbx6, and can
also recognize nucleosomal DNA, with binding to nucleosomes being antagonized by 
the presence of the histone tails. Strikingly, in vivo Tbx2 co-localization with 
pericentric heterochromatin appears to be regulated and ectopic expression of
Tbx2 leads to severe mitotic defects. Taken together our results suggest that
Tbx2, and most likely other members of the T-box family, are able to target
chromatin and may indicate a role for the T-box factors in epigenetic
reprogramming events.

PMID: 17630961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 29;104(22):9313-8. Epub 2007 May 22.

Beta-catenin directly regulates Islet1 expression in cardiovascular progenitors
and is required for multiple aspects of cardiogenesis.

Lin L(1), Cui L, Zhou W, Dufort D, Zhang X, Cai CL, Bu L, Yang L, Martin J,
Kemler R, Rosenfeld MG, Chen J, Evans SM.

Author information: 
(1)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
California at San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Recent studies have demonstrated that the LIM homeodomain transcription factor
Islet1 (Isl1) marks pluripotent cardiovascular progenitor cells and is required
for proliferation, survival, and migration of recently defined second heart field
progenitors. Factors that are upstream of Isl1 in cardiovascular progenitors have
not yet been defined. Here we demonstrate that beta-catenin is required for Isl1 
expression in cardiac progenitors, directly regulating the Isl1 promoter.
Ablation of beta-catenin in Isl1-expressing progenitors disrupts multiple aspects
of cardiogenesis, resulting in embryonic lethality at E13. beta-Catenin is also
required upstream of a number of genes required for pharyngeal arch, outflow
tract, and/or atrial septal morphogenesis, including Tbx2, Tbx3, Wnt11, Shh, and 
Pitx2. Our findings demonstrate that beta-catenin signaling regulates
proliferation and survival of cardiac progenitors.

PMCID: PMC1890491
PMID: 17519333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Genes Dev. 2007 May 1;21(9):1098-112.

Tbx3 controls the sinoatrial node gene program and imposes pacemaker function on 
the atria.

Hoogaars WM(1), Engel A, Brons JF, Verkerk AO, de Lange FJ, Wong LY, Bakker ML,
Clout DE, Wakker V, Barnett P, Ravesloot JH, Moorman AF, Verheijck EE,
Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The sinoatrial node initiates the heartbeat and controls the rate and rhythm of
contraction, thus serving as the pacemaker of the heart. Despite the crucial role
of the sinoatrial node in heart function, the mechanisms that underlie its
specification and formation are not known. Tbx3, a transcriptional repressor
required for development of vertebrates, is expressed in the developing
conduction system. Here we show that Tbx3 expression delineates the sinoatrial
node region, which runs a gene expression program that is distinct from that of
the bordering atrial cells. We found lineage segregation of Tbx3-negative atrial 
and Tbx3-positive sinoatrial node precursor cells as soon as cardiac cells turn
on the atrial gene expression program. Tbx3 deficiency resulted in expansion of
expression of the atrial gene program into the sinoatrial node domain, and
partial loss of sinoatrial node-specific gene expression. Ectopic expression of
Tbx3 in mice revealed that Tbx3 represses the atrial phenotype and imposes the
pacemaker phenotype on the atria. The mice displayed arrhythmias and developed
functional ectopic pacemakers. These data identify a Tbx3-dependent pathway for
the specification and formation of the sinoatrial node, and show that Tbx3
regulates the pacemaker gene expression program and phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1855235
PMID: 17473172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. PLoS One. 2007 Apr 25;2(4):e398.

Tbx2 and Tbx3 regulate the dynamics of cell proliferation during heart
remodeling.

Ribeiro I(1), Kawakami Y, Büscher D, Raya A, Rodríguez-León J, Morita M,
Rodríguez Esteban C, Izpisúa Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The heart forms from a linear tube that is subject to complex
remodeling during embryonic development. Hallmarks of this remodeling are the
looping of the heart tube and the regionalization into chamber and non-chamber
myocardium. Cardiomyocytes in the future chamber myocardium acquire different
cellular and physiological characteristics through activation of a
chamber-specific genetic program, which is in part mediated by T-box genes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDING: We characterize two new zebrafish T-box
transcription factors, tbx3b and tbx2a, and analyze their role during the
development of the atrioventricular canal. Loss- and gain-of-function analyses
demonstrate that tbx3b and tbx2a are necessary to repress the chamber-genetic
program in the non-chamber myocardium. We also show that tbx3b and tbx2a are
required to control cell proliferation in the atrioventricular canal and that
misregulation of cell proliferation in the heart tube influences looping.
Furthermore, we characterize the heart phenotype of a novel Tbx3 mutation in mice
and show that both the control of cell proliferation and the repression of
chamber-specific genetic program in the non-chamber myocardium are conserved
roles of Tbx3 in this species.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together, our results uncover an evolutionarily
conserved role of Tbx2/3 transcription factors during remodeling of the heart
myocardium and highlight the importance of controlling cell proliferation as a
driving force of morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1851989
PMID: 17460765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cell. 2007 Apr 20;129(2):345-57.

Zfx controls the self-renewal of embryonic and hematopoietic stem cells.

Galan-Caridad JM(1), Harel S, Arenzana TL, Hou ZE, Doetsch FK, Mirny LA, Reizis
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 Apr 20;129(2):239-41.

Stem cells (SC) exhibit a unique capacity for self-renewal in an undifferentiated
state. It is unclear whether the self-renewal of pluripotent embryonic SC (ESC)
and of tissue-specific adult SC such as hematopoietic SC (HSC) is controlled by
common mechanisms. The deletion of transcription factor Zfx impaired the
self-renewal but not the differentiation capacity of murine ESC; conversely, Zfx 
overexpression facilitated ESC self-renewal by opposing differentiation.
Furthermore, Zfx deletion abolished the maintenance of adult HSC but did not
affect erythromyeloid progenitors or fetal HSC. Zfx-deficient ESC and HSC showed 
increased apoptosis and SC-specific upregulation of stress-inducible genes. Zfx
directly activated common target genes in ESC and HSC, as well as ESC-specific
target genes including ESC self-renewal regulators Tbx3 and Tcl1. These studies
identify Zfx as a shared transcriptional regulator of ESC and HSC, suggesting a
common genetic basis of self-renewal in embryonic and adult SC.

PMCID: PMC1899089
PMID: 17448993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 1;304(1):9-21. Epub 2006 Dec 9.

Characterization of a novel ectodermal signaling center regulating Tbx2 and Shh
in the vertebrate limb.

Nissim S(1), Allard P, Bandyopadhyay A, Harfe BD, Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Normal patterning of the developing limb requires a tight restriction of Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) mRNA to the posterior margin of the limb bud. While several
positive and negative regulatory factors have been identified which serve to
position the Shh expression domain in the distal posterior limb, these factors
cannot in themselves explain the tight restriction of Shh to the posterior
margin, nor can they explain the similarly tight restriction of Shh to the
anterior margin when the regulatory factors are disrupted or misexpressed. We
suggest that the transcription factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 are excellent candidates for
positively-acting factors responsible for limiting Shh expression to the margins 
of the limb bud. These closely related factors are indeed expressed at the
anterior and posterior limb margins over a wide range of limb bud stages.
Moreover, previous reports indicate that in addition, misexpression of Tbx2
beyond the limb margin is sufficient to anteriorly expand Shh, and conversely,
antagonizing Tbx2 function leads to loss of Shh. In contrast to this idea,
previous models have placed Tbx2 expression downstream of Shh and Bone
Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) signaling. We find, however, that Tbx2 expression is 
neither affected by blocking Shh signaling with cyclopamine nor by genetic
removal of several BMP activities in the limb bud. To understand the true source 
of the positional information responsible for limiting Tbx2, Tbx3 and Shh
expression to the marginal mesenchyme of the limb bud, we undertook a series of
grafting and extirpation experiments, which led to the identification of the
dorsal-ventral (DV) border ectoderm exclusive of the apical ectodermal ridge
(AER) as a new signaling center in the limb bud. We find that maintenance of Tbx2
expression in the limb mesoderm requires proximity to the non-AER D-V border.
Using chick-quail graft chimeras, we find that a graft of the non-AER D-V border 
ectoderm to a location on the surface of the middle of the limb bud is sufficient
to induce ectopic expression of Tbx2 in underlying mesoderm. These data
demonstrate that the non-AER D-V border ectoderm is necessary and sufficient for 
Tbx2 expression at the anterior and posterior limb margins. Similarly, we find
that a graft of the non-AER D-V border can expand the domain of Shh anteriorly
when grafted just anterior to the ZPA. It is notable that Tbx2 expression does
not extend distally to the mesoderm underlying the AER. Moreover, we find that
grafts of the AER to more proximal locations result in downregulation of Tbx2
expression, suggesting that the AER produces a negatively-acting signal opposing 
the activity of the non-AER DV border ectoderm. Indeed, implantation of beads
soaked in fibroblast growth factor 8 (Fgf8), expressed in the AER, downregulates 
Tbx2 expression. The data presented here identify the non-AER border of
dorsal-ventral ectoderm as a new signaling center in limb development that
localizes the ZPA to the limb margin. This finding explains the tight restriction
of Shh expression to the posterior margin throughout limb outgrowth as well as
the tight restriction of Shh expression to the anterior margin in many mutants
exhibiting preaxial polydactyly.

PMCID: PMC1868507
PMID: 17300775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Differentiation. 2007 Jun;75(5):393-403. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

Early molecular effects of ethanol during vertebrate embryogenesis.

Yelin R(1), Kot H, Yelin D, Fainsod A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is the combination of developmental,
morphological, and neurological defects that result from exposing human embryos
to ethanol (EtOH). Numerous embryonic structures are affected, leading to a
complex viable phenotype affecting among others, the anterior/posterior axis,
head, and eye formation. Recent studies have provided evidence suggesting that
EtOH teratogenesis is mediated in part through a reduction in retinoic acid (RA) 
levels, targeting mainly the embryonic organizer (Spemann's organizer) and its
subsequent functions. EtOH-treated Xenopus embryos were subjected to an analysis 
of gene expression patterns. Analysis of organizer-specific genes revealed a
transient delay in the invagination of gsc- and chordin-positive cells that
eventually reach their normal rostro-caudal position. Dorsal midline genes show
defects along the rostro-caudal axis, lacking either their rostral (Xbra and
Xnot2) or caudal (FoxA4b and Shh) expression domains. Head-specific markers like 
Otx2, en2, and Shh show abnormal expression patterns. Otx2 exhibits a reduction
in expression levels, while en2 becomes restricted along the dorsal/ventral axis.
During neurula stages, Shh becomes up-regulated in the rostral region and it is
expressed in an abnormal pattern. These results and histological analysis suggest
the existence of malformations in the brain region including a lack of the normal
fore brain ventricle. An increase in the size of both the prechordal plate and
the notochord was observed, while the spinal cord is narrower. The reduction in
head and eye size was accompanied by changes in the eye markers, Pax6 and Tbx3.
Our results provide evidence for the early molecular changes induced by EtOH
exposure during embryogenesis, and may explain some of the structural changes
that are part of the EtOH teratogenic phenotype also in FASD individuals.

PMID: 17286601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 1;67(3):901-10.

Tbx3 is a downstream target of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway and a critical
mediator of beta-catenin survival functions in liver cancer.

Renard CA(1), Labalette C, Armengol C, Cougot D, Wei Y, Cairo S, Pineau P,
Neuveut C, de Reyniès A, Dejean A, Perret C, Buendia MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale U579, Institut
Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75724 Paris, France.

Tbx3 encodes a transcriptional repressor that is important for diverse patterning
events during development, and Tbx3 mutation in humans causes the ulnar-mammary
syndrome. Here, we describe the identification of Tbx3 in array-based search for 
genes downstream Wnt/beta-catenin that are implicated in liver tumorigenesis.
Overexpression of Tbx3 is closely associated with the mutational status of
beta-catenin in murine liver tumors induced by Myc as well as in human
hepatocellular carcinomas and hepatoblastomas. Moreover, Tbx3 transcription is
activated by ectopic expression of beta-catenin in mouse liver and in human tumor
cell lines. Evidence that Tbx3 transcription is directly regulated by
beta-catenin is provided by chromatin immunoprecipitation and reporter assays.
Although HepG2 cells stably transfected with Tbx3 display moderately enhanced
growth rate, the dominant negative mutant Tbx3-Y149S drastically inhibits
hepatoma cell growth in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, small interfering RNAs
(siRNA) directed against Tbx3 inhibit anchorage-independent growth of liver and
colon carcinoma cells. We further show that inhibition of Tbx3 expression by
specific siRNAs blocks beta-catenin-mediated cell survival and renders cells
sensitive to doxorubicin-induced apoptosis. Conversely, ectopic expression of
Tbx3 inhibits apoptosis induced by beta-catenin depletion. Marked overexpression 
of Tbx3 in a subset of hepatoblastomas is associated with chemotherapy-resistant 
phenotype and unfavorable patient outcome. These results reveal an unsuspected
role of Tbx3 as a mediator of beta-catenin activities on cell proliferation and
survival and as an important player in liver tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17283120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Cell Tissue Res. 2007 May;328(2):301-16. Epub 2007 Jan 30.

TBX3, the gene mutated in ulnar-mammary syndrome, promotes growth of mammary
epithelial cells via repression of p19ARF, independently of p53.

Platonova N(1), Scotti M, Babich P, Bertoli G, Mento E, Meneghini V, Egeo A,
Zucchi I, Merlo GR.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute/CNR-ITB, Via F lli Cervi 93 Segrate, Milano,
Italy.

TBX3, the gene mutated in ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS), is involved in the
production of a transcription factor of the T-box family, known to inhibit
transcription from the p14ARF (p19ARF in mouse) promoter in fibroblasts and to
contribute to cell immortalization. One of the main features of the UMS phenotype
is the severe hypoplasia of the breast, associated with haploinsufficiency of the
TBX3 gene product. In mice homozygous for the targeted disruption of Tbx3, the
mammary glands (MGs) are nearly absent from early stages of embryogenesis,
whereas in heterozygous adults, the MGs show reduced ductal branching. All these 
data strongly suggest a specific role of TBX3 in promoting the growth of mammary 
epithelial cells (MECs), although direct evidence of this is lacking. Here, we
provide data showing the growth-promoting function of Tbx3 in several models of
MECs, in association with its ability to repress the ARF promoter. However, no
effect of Tbx3 on cell differentiation or apoptosis has been observed. The growth
promoting function also entails the down-regulation of p21 ( CIP1/WAF ) and an
increase in cyclin D1 but is independent of p53 and Mdm2 cell-cycle regulatory
proteins, as p53-null MECs show similar growth responses associated with the up- 
or down-regulation of Tbx3. This is the first direct evidence that the level of
Tbx3 expression positively controls the proliferation of MECs via pathways
alternative to Mdm2-p53.

PMID: 17265068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Circ Res. 2007 Feb 16;100(3):354-62. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

Molecular pathway for the localized formation of the sinoatrial node.

Mommersteeg MT(1), Hoogaars WM, Prall OW, de Gier-de Vries C, Wiese C, Clout DE, 
Papaioannou VE, Brown NA, Harvey RP, Moorman AF, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Heart Failure Research, Academic Medical Centre, Meibergdreef 15,
1105 AZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The sinoatrial node, which resides at the junction of the right atrium and the
superior caval vein, contains specialized myocardial cells that initiate the
heart beat. Despite this fundamental role in heart function, the embryonic origin
and mechanisms of localized formation of the sinoatrial node have not been
defined. Here we show that subsequent to the formation of the Nkx2-5-positive
heart tube, cells bordering the inflow tract of the heart tube give rise to the
Nkx2-5-negative myocardial cells of the sinoatrial node and the sinus horns.
Using genetic models, we show that as the myocardium of the heart tube matures,
Nkx2-5 suppresses pacemaker channel gene Hcn4 and T-box transcription factor gene
Tbx3, thereby enforcing a progressive confinement of their expression to the
forming Nkx2-5-negative sinoatrial node and sinus horns. Thus, Nkx2-5 is
essential for establishing a gene expression border between the atrium and
sinoatrial node. Tbx3 was found to suppress chamber differentiation, providing an
additional mechanism by which the Tbx3-positive sinoatrial node is shielded from 
differentiating into atrial myocardium. Pitx2c-deficient fetuses form sinoatrial 
nodes with indistinguishable molecular signatures at both the right and left
sinuatrial junction, indicating that Pitx2c functions within the left/right
pathway to suppress a default program for sinuatrial node formation on the left. 
Our molecular pathway provides a mechanism for how pacemaker activity becomes
progressively relegated to the most recently added components of the venous pole 
of the heart and, ultimately, to the junction of the right atrium and superior
caval vein.

PMID: 17234970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 1;304(1):156-81. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

A molecular analysis of neurogenic placode and cranial sensory ganglion
development in the shark, Scyliorhinus canicula.

O'Neill P(1), McCole RB, Baker CV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, Anatomy Building,
Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3DY, UK.

Erratum in
    Dev Biol. 2009 Aug;332(1):186-8.

In order to gain insight into the evolution of the genetic control of the
development of cranial neurogenic placodes and cranial sensory ganglia in
vertebrates, we cloned and analysed the spatiotemporal expression pattern of six 
transcription factor genes in a chondrichthyan, the shark Scyliorhinus canicula
(lesser-spotted dogfish/catshark). As in other vertebrates, NeuroD is expressed
in all cranial sensory ganglia. We show that Pax3 is expressed in the profundal
placode and ganglion, strongly supporting homology between the separate profundal
ganglion of elasmobranchs and basal actinopterygians and the ophthalmic
trigeminal placode-derived neurons of the fused amniote trigeminal ganglion. We
show that Pax2 is a conserved pan-gnathostome marker for epibranchial and otic
placodes, and confirm that Phox2b is a conserved pan-gnathostome marker for
epibranchial placode-derived neurons. We identify Eya4 as a novel marker for the 
lateral line system throughout its development, expressed in lateral line
placodes, sensory ridges and migrating primordia, neuromasts and
electroreceptors. We also identify Tbx3 as a specific marker for lateral line
ganglia in shark embryos. We use the spatiotemporal expression pattern of these
genes to characterise the development of neurogenic placodes and cranial sensory 
ganglia in the dogfish, with a focus on the epibranchial and lateral line
placodes. Our findings demonstrate the evolutionary conservation across all
gnathostomes of at least some of the transcription factor networks underlying
neurogenic placode development.

PMID: 17234174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. BMC Dev Biol. 2006 Dec 15;6:62.

The level of BMP4 signaling is critical for the regulation of distinct T-box gene
expression domains and growth along the dorso-ventral axis of the optic cup.

Behesti H(1), Holt JK, Sowden JC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College
London, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, UK. h.behesti@ich.ucl.ac.uk
<h.behesti@ich.ucl.ac.uk>

BACKGROUND: Polarised gene expression is thought to lead to the graded
distribution of signaling molecules providing a patterning mechanism across the
embryonic eye. Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (Bmp4) is expressed in the dorsal
optic vesicle as it transforms into the optic cup. Bmp4 deletions in human and
mouse result in failure of eye development, but little attempt has been made to
investigate mammalian targets of BMP4 signaling. In chick, retroviral gene
overexpression studies indicate that Bmp4 activates the dorsally expressed Tbx5
gene, which represses ventrally expressed cVax. It is not known whether the Tbx5 
related genes, Tbx2 and Tbx3, are BMP4 targets in the mammalian retina and
whether BMP4 acts at a distance from its site of expression. Although it is
established that Drosophila Dpp (homologue of vertebrate Bmp4) acts as a
morphogen, there is little evidence that BMP4 gradients are interpreted to create
domains of BMP4 target gene expression in the mouse.
RESULTS: Our data show that the level of BMP4 signaling is critical for the
regulation of distinct Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx5 and Vax2 gene expression domains along
the dorso-ventral axis of the mouse optic cup. BMP4 signaling gradients were
manipulated in whole mouse embryo cultures during optic cup development, by
implantation of beads soaked in BMP4, or the BMP antagonist Noggin, to provide a 
local signaling source. Tbx2, Tbx3 and Tbx5, showed a differential response to
alterations in the level of BMP4 along the entire dorso-ventral axis of the optic
cup, suggesting that BMP4 acts across a distance. Increased levels of BMP4 caused
expansion of Tbx2 and Tbx3, but not Tbx5, into the ventral retina and repression 
of the ventral marker Vax2. Conversely, Noggin abolished Tbx5 expression but only
shifted Tbx2 expression dorsally. Increased levels of BMP4 signaling caused
decreased proliferation, reduced retinal volume and altered the shape of the
optic cup.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest the existence of a dorsal-high, ventral-low BMP4
signaling gradient across which distinct domains of Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx5 and Vax2
transcription factor gene expression are set up. Furthermore we show that the
correct level of BMP4 signaling is critical for normal growth of the mammalian
embryonic eye.

PMCID: PMC1764729
PMID: 17173667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Dev Dyn. 2006 Dec;235(12):3316-26.

Characterization of Xenopus digits and regenerated limbs of the froglet.

Satoh A(1), Endo T, Abe M, Yakushiji N, Ohgo S, Tamura K, Ide H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School of Life
Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Xenopus has 4 and 5 digits in a forelimb and hindlimb, respectively. It is
thought that their limbs and digits develop in Xenopus by mechanisms that are
almost conserved from amphibians to higher vertebrates. This is supported by some
molecular evidence. The 5'hoxd genes are convenient marker genes for
characterizing digits in the chick and mouse. The anteriormost digit is
characterized by being hoxd13-positive and hoxd12 (hoxd11)-negative in the chick 
and mouse. In this study, we revealed that the anteriormost digit of the Xenopus 
forelimb is hoxd13-positive and hoxd11-positive, that is, a more posterior
character than digit I. The order of formation of digit cartilages also suggested
that Xenopus forelimb digit identity is II to V, not I to IV. We have also been
interested in the relationship between digit identity and shh. The anteriormost
digit develops in a shh-independent way. A limb treated with cyclopamine (a shh
inhibitor) has a gene expression pattern (hoxd11-negative) similar to that in
shh-deficient mice, suggesting that a hindlimb treated with cyclopamine has a
digit I character. However, a Xenopus froglet regenerate (spike), which lacks shh
expression during its regeneration process, does not have such an expression
pattern, being hoxd11-positive. We investigated hoxd11 transcriptions in
blastemas that formed in the anteriormost and posteriormost digits, and we found 
that the blastemas have different hoxd11 expression levels. These findings
suggest that the froglet limb blastema does not have a mere digit I character in 
spite of shh defectiveness and that the froglet limb blastema recognizes its
positional differences along the anterior-posterior axis.

Copyright (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17075873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Nov 7;103(45):16788-93. Epub 2006 Oct 27.

Molecular interactions between Tbx3 and Bmp4 and a model for dorsoventral
positioning of mammary gland development.

Cho KW(1), Kim JY, Song SJ, Farrell E, Eblaghie MC, Kim HJ, Tickle C, Jung HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division in Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Department of Oral Biology,
Research Center for Orofacial Hard Tissue Regeneration, Brain Korea21 Project,
College of Dentistry, Yonsei Center of Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul
120-752, Korea.

The formation of the dorsoventral (DV) boundary is central to establishing the
body plan in embryonic development. Although there is some information about how 
limbs are positioned along the DV axis and how DV skin color pattern is
determined, the way in which mammary glands are positioned is unknown. Here we
focus on Bmp4 and Tbx3, a gene associated with ulnar-mammary syndrome, and
compare their expression along the DV axis in relation to mammary gland
initiation in mouse embryos. Tbx3 is expressed in the mammary gland-forming
region with Tbx15, a gene involved in a DV coat color being expressed more
dorsally and Bmp4 being expressed more ventrally. When Tbx3 was overexpressed,
formation of mammary gland epithelium was extended along the DV axis. In
contrast, overexpression of Bmp4 inhibited both Tbx3 and Tbx15 expression. In
addition, when BMP signaling was inhibited by NOGGIN, Lef1 expression was lost.
Thus, we propose that mutual interactions between Bmp4 and Tbx3 determine the
presumptive DV boundary and formation of mammary glands in early mouse
embryogenesis. 1,19-Dioctadecyl-3,3,39,39-tetramethyl indocarbocyanine
perchloride labeling experiments showed that cells associated with mammary glands
originate more dorsally and then move ventrally. This finding, together with
previous findings, suggests that the same DV boundary may not only position limbs
and determine coat color but also position mammary glands. Furthermore, Bmp
signaling appears to be a fundamental feature of DV patterning.

PMCID: PMC1636533
PMID: 17071745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. BMC Genomics. 2006 Oct 20;7:268.

Gene expressions and copy numbers associated with metastatic phenotypes of
uterine cervical cancer.

Lyng H(1), Brøvig RS, Svendsrud DH, Holm R, Kaalhus O, Knutstad K, Oksefjell H,
Sundfør K, Kristensen GB, Stokke T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Biology, Health Enterprise
Rikshospitalet--Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway. heidi.lyng@rr-research.no

BACKGROUND: A better understanding of the development of metastatic disease and
the identification of molecular markers for cancer spread would be useful for the
design of improved treatment strategies. This study was conducted to identify
gene expressions associated with metastatic phenotypes of locally advanced
cervical carcinomas and investigate whether gains or losses of these genes could 
play a role in regulation of the transcripts. Gene expressions and copy number
changes were determined in primary tumors from 29 patients with and 19 without
diagnosed lymph node metastases by use of cDNA and genomic microarray techniques,
respectively.
RESULTS: Thirty-one genes that differed in expression between the node positive
and negative tumors were identified. Expressions of eight of these genes (MRPL11,
CKS2, PDK2, MRPS23, MSN, TBX3, KLF3, LSM3) correlated with progression free
survival in univariate analysis and were therefore more strongly associated with 
metastatic phenotypes than the others. Immunohistochemistry data of CKS2 and MSN 
showed similar relationships to survival. The prognostic genes clustered into two
groups, suggesting two major metastatic phenotypes. One group was associated with
rapid proliferation, oxidative phosphorylation, invasiveness, and tumor size
(MRPS23, MRPL11, CKS2, LSM3, TBX3, MSN) and another with hypoxia tolerance,
anaerobic metabolism, and high lactate content (PDK2, KLF3). Multivariate
analysis identified tumor volume and PDK2 expression as independent prognostic
variables. Gene copy number changes of the differentially expressed genes were
not frequent, but correlated with the expression level for seven genes, including
MRPS23, MSN, and LSM3.
CONCLUSION: Gene expressions associated with known metastatic phenotypes of
cervical cancers were identified. Our findings may indicate molecular mechanisms 
underlying development of these phenotypes and be useful as markers of cancer
spread. Gains or losses of the genes may be involved in development of the
metastatic phenotypes in some cases, but other mechanisms for transcriptional
regulation are probably important in the majority of tumors.

PMCID: PMC1626467
PMID: 17054779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Proteomics. 2006 Sep;6 Suppl 2:65-8.

Proteomics success story. Towards early detection of breast and ovarian cancer:
plasma proteomics as a tool to find novel markers.

Souchelnytskyi S(1), Lomnytska M, Dubrovska A, Hellman U, Volodko N.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Uppsala, Sweden.
serhiy.souchelnytskyi@licr.uu.se

PMID: 17031801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cell Tissue Res. 2007 Feb;327(2):285-92. Epub 2006 Oct 7.

Modulation of cell proliferation during palatogenesis by the interplay between
Tbx3 and Bmp4.

Lee JM(1), Kim JY, Cho KW, Lee MJ, Cho SW, Zhang Y, Byun SK, Yi CK, Jung HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division in Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Department of Oral Biology,
College of Dentistry, Yonsei University, 134 Shinchon-Dong, Seodaemoon-Gu, Seoul,
South Korea.

During secondary palate development, two shelves are elevated to a horizontal
position above the tongue through a process involving many cellular mechanisms,
including proliferation. In particular, the expression patterns of Tbx3 and Bmp4,
which are colocalized at embryonic day 13.5 (E13.5) and have unique expression
patterns in specific regions at E14.5, have been investigated in early mouse
palatogenesis. Tbx3 expression is reported to be associated with Bmp4 signaling
during the process of organogenesis in other areas, such as limb development.
However, the function of Tbx3 and the relationship between Tbx3 and Bmp4 in
palate development have not been determined. We have examined the gene expression
pattern and cell proliferation in order to understand the mutual interactions and
function of Tbx3 and Bmp4. An electroporation method was used to investigate the 
altered pattern of these genes after their over-expression in organ cultures.
NOGGIN protein-soaked beads were also implanted into the cultured palate to
determine the function of Bmp4 in palatogenesis. After electroporation and NOGGIN
bead implantation, the number of PCNA-positive cells was counted. The results
showed that Tbx3 and Bmp4 strongly up- and down-regulated each other in order to 
control the proliferation of the palatal shelf. Thus, Tbx3 expression is induced 
by Bmp4 in the mesenchyme of the anterior palatal shelves, whereas mesenchymal
expression of Tbx3 down-regulates Bmp4 expression in the mesenchyme of the
palate. The harmonization between Tbx3 and Bmp4 therefore controls cell
proliferation to regulate secondary palate development.

PMID: 17028893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Cell Biochem. 2007 Feb;296(1-2):129-36. Epub 2006 Sep 6.

Tbx3, a transcriptional factor, involves in proliferation and osteogenic
differentiation of human adipose stromal cells.

Lee HS(1), Cho HH, Kim HK, Bae YC, Baik HS, Jung JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Pusan National University, Suh-Gu, Pusan 609-735, 
Korea.

Tbx3 is a transcription factor, the mutation of which causes ulnar mammary
syndrome (UMS) characterized by abnormality and hypoplasia of the mammary gland, 
teeth, limbs, hair and genitalia. Tbx3 has been reported to be related to
apoptosis and proliferation of rat bladder carcinoma cell and to regulate
proliferation and differentiation of mouse osteoblast cells. Human adipose tissue
stromal cells (hADSC) have been defined as multipotential adult stem cells,
capable of differentiating into a variety of cell types such as osteoblasts,
chondrocytes, adipocytes, muscle cells, and neural cells. To determine the
functional roles of Tbx3 expression in hADSC, we used lentivirus siRNA vector.
Expression of Tbx3 was downregulated during culture expansion. Downregulation of 
Tbx3 in hADSC by transduction of siTbx3 lentivirus decreased proliferation and
osteogenic differentiation of hADSC. Expression of Tbx3 and the ratio of Tbx3 +
2a to Tbx3 increased during osteogenic differentiation. This report shows that
Tbx3 plays an important role on osteogenic differentiation and proliferation of
human mesenchymal stem cell derived from adipose tissue.

PMID: 16955224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. PLoS Genet. 2006 Aug 25;2(8):e112.

Signalling pathways implicated in early mammary gland morphogenesis and breast
cancer.

Howard B(1), Ashworth A.

Author information: 
(1)University College London, United Kingdom. beatrice.howard@icr.ac.uk

Specification of mammary epithelial cell fate occurs during embryogenesis as
cells aggregate to form the mammary anlage. Within the embryonic mammary bud, a
population of epithelial cells exists that will subsequently proliferate to form 
a ductal tree filling the stromal compartment, and which can produce milk upon
terminal differentiation after birth. Subsequently, these structures can be
remodelled and returned to a basal state after weaning before regenerating in
future pregnancies. The plasticity of the mammary epithelial cell, and its
responsiveness to hormone receptors, facilitates this amazing biological feat,
but aberrant signalling may also result in unintended consequences in the form of
frequent malignancies. Reflecting this intimate connection, a considerable number
of signalling pathways have been implicated in both mammary gland morphogenesis
and carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1557774
PMID: 16933995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Eur J Hum Genet. 2006 Dec;14(12):1274-9. Epub 2006 Aug 9.

Ulnar-mammary syndrome with dysmorphic facies and mental retardation caused by a 
novel 1.28 Mb deletion encompassing the TBX3 gene.

Klopocki E(1), Neumann LM, Tönnies H, Ropers HH, Mundlos S, Ullmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus
Virchow Klinikum, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany.
eva.klopocki@charite.de

Ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS) is a rare autosomal-dominant disorder caused by
mutations in TBX3. The condition is characterized by hypoplasia or aplasia of
upper limbs on the ulnar side, mammary glands and nipples, and of apocrine glands
in both sexes (MIM #181450). We report on a girl presenting with an UMS like
phenotype, a dysmorphic facies, and mental retardation. Mutation analysis of TBX3
and G-banded chromosome analysis from lymphocytes were performed. We used
microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) to investigate the
patient's genomic DNA for submicroscopic aberrations. No mutation of the TBX3
gene was detected in our patient and chromosome analysis revealed a normal female
karyotype (46,XX). Hybridization of a whole-genome tiling path array consisting
of more than 36 000 BAC clones revealed an interstitial 1.28 Mb deletion within
chromosomal band 12q24.21. The deleted region encompasses one known gene, TBX3.
The deletion and haploinsufficiency of TBX3 was confirmed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization using BAC clones representing the deletion on the BAC array. To our
knowledge, this is the first description of TBX3 haploinsufficiency caused by a
genomic deletion in a patient with UMS. We suggest that the UMS phenotype in
conjunction with the characteristic facial changes and mental retardation
observed in our patient is owing to the deletion of TBX3 and the involvement of
neighbouring genes.

PMID: 16896345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Sep 1;140A(17):1880-6.

Contiguous hemizygous deletion of TBX5, TBX3, and RBM19 resulting in a combined
phenotype of Holt-Oram and ulnar-mammary syndromes.

Borozdin W(1), Bravo-Ferrer Acosta AM, Seemanova E, Leipoldt M, Bamshad MJ, Unger
S, Kohlhase J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Universität Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.

PMID: 16892408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Jul 1;140(13):1407-13.

T-genes and limb bud development.

King M(1), Arnold JS, Shanske A, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Women's Health, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The T-box family of transcriptional factors is ancient and highly conserved among
most species of animals. Haploinsufficiency of multiple T-box proteins results in
severe human congenital malformation syndromes, involving craniofacial,
cardiovascular, and skeletal structures. These genes have major roles in
embryogenesis, including the development of the limbs. Formation of the limbs
begins with a limb bud and its morphogenesis requires complex
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. Recent studies have shown that T, Tbx2,
Tbx3, Tbx4, Tbx5, Tbx15, and Tbx18 are all expressed in the limb buds, and many
have developmental functions. The study of these genes is clinically relevant as 
mutations in several of them cause human congenital malformation syndromes.
Furthermore, understanding the function and biology of these genes is important
in understanding normal embryogenesis.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16688725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Development. 2006 Apr;133(8):1575-85.

Isl1Cre reveals a common Bmp pathway in heart and limb development.

Yang L(1), Cai CL, Lin L, Qyang Y, Chung C, Monteiro RM, Mummery CL, Fishman GI, 
Cogen A, Evans S.

Author information: 
(1)Skaggs School of Pharmacy, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

A number of human congenital disorders present with both heart and limb defects, 
consistent with common genetic pathways. We have recently shown that the LIM
homeodomain transcription factor islet 1 (Isl1) marks a subset of cardiac
progenitors. Here, we perform lineage studies with an Isl1Cre mouse line to
demonstrate that Isl1 also marks a subset of limb progenitors. In both cardiac
and limb progenitors, Isl1 expression is downregulated as progenitors migrate in 
to form either heart or limb. To investigate common heart-limb pathways in
Isl1-expressing progenitors, we ablated the Type I Bmp receptor, Bmpr1a utilizing
Isl1Cre/+. Analysis of consequent heart and limb phenotypes has revealed novel
requirements for Bmp signaling. Additionally, we find that Bmp signaling in
Isl1-expressing progenitors is required for expression of T-box transcription
factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 in heart and limb. Tbx3 is required for heart and limb
formation, and is mutated in ulnar-mammary syndrome. We provide evidence that the
Tbx3 promoter is directly regulated by Bmp Smads in vivo.

PMID: 16556916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Eur J Med Genet. 2006 Mar-Apr;49(2):151-8. Epub 2005 Jun 22.

Novel TBX3 mutation data in families with ulnar-mammary syndrome indicate a
genotype-phenotype relationship: mutations that do not disrupt the T-domain are
associated with less severe limb defects.

Meneghini V(1), Odent S, Platonova N, Egeo A, Merlo GR.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute CNR-ITB, Via Fratelli Cervi 93, 20090 Segrate,
Milano, Italy.

We describe a family affected by Ulnar-Mammary syndrome (UMS) in which typical
UMS traits (hypoplasia of the breast and axillary hair, upper limbs and genital
defects) are present together with cardiac malformations and pulmonary stenosis. 
Sequence analysis of TBX3 shows a new heterozygous mutation that causes a
frame-shift (Nt.1586-1587-insC) in exon 6, resulting in a truncated ORF. Recently
the expression of Tbx3 has been described also in the septal region of the
embryonic murine heart. This observation may establish a link between the
congenital heart defects and the TBX3 mutation in this family. Combining the TBX3
mutation data in the literature with this novel mutation we find an association
between mutations that disrupt the DNA-binding domain and a higher frequency of
severe upper limb malformations and teeth defects. A possible explanation is that
mutant TBX3 proteins that retain the T-domain, if translated, might be minimally 
active in promoting/repressing transcription of target genes in the limbs and in 
other embryonic tissues.

PMID: 16530712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Jul;291(1):E128-36. Epub 2006 Feb 7.

Whole genome microarray analysis of growth hormone-induced gene expression in
bone: T-box3, a novel transcription factor, regulates osteoblast proliferation.

Govoni KE(1), Lee SK, Chadwick RB, Yu H, Kasukawa Y, Baylink DJ, Mohan S.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Disease Center (151 Jerry L. Pettis Memorial Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, 11201 Benton St., Loma Linda, CA 92357, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) is important in the development and maintenance of bone;
however, the IGF-dependent and -independent molecular pathways involved remain to
be established. We used microarray analysis to evaluate GH signaling pathways in 
4-wk-old GH-deficient mice following a single injection of GH (4 mg/kg body wt)
or PBS (n = 6/group) at 6 or 24 h after treatment. Six thousand one hundred sixty
genes were differentially expressed at P </= 0.05, and 17% of these genes were
identified at both time points. Several of the genes differentially expressed
were expressed sequence tags, and the remaining genes fell into 49 Gene Ontology 
categories. For subsequent studies, we focused on T-box (Tbx)3, a novel
transcription factor, which increased more than twofold at both time points.
Real-time RT-PCR analysis determined that pretreatment with IGF-binding protein-4
did not block GH-induced Tbx3 expression in vitro. Pretreatment with TNF-alpha
blocked GH-induced Tbx3 expression. Tbx3 expression increased during osteoblast
differentiation and following BMP-7 and Wnt3a treatment (P </= 0.05). Blocking
Tbx3 expression by small interfering RNA decreased cell number and
[(3)H]Thymidine incorporation (P < 0.01). In conclusion, 1) GH caused acute
changes in several novel genes, suggesting that many GH-induced signaling
pathways and target genes remain to be discovered; 2) because Tbx3 expression is 
regulated in osteoblasts and blockage of Tbx3 expression decreased cell number
and DNA synthesis, we propose that Tbx3 is an important determinant of osteoblast
cell number.

PMCID: PMC3000614
PMID: 16464905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Cancer Sci. 2006 Jan;97(1):64-71.

Chemical genomic screening for methylation-silenced genes in gastric cancer cell 
lines using 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment and oligonucleotide microarray.

Yamashita S(1), Tsujino Y, Moriguchi K, Tatematsu M, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Tsukiji 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

To identify novel methylation-silenced genes in gastric cancers, we carried out a
chemical genomic screening, a genome-wide search for genes upregulated by
treatment with a demethylating agent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC). After
5-aza-dC treatment of a gastric cancer cell line (AGS) 579 genes were upregulated
16-fold or more, using an oligonucleotide microarray with 39,000 genes. From
these genes, we selected 44 known genes on autosomes whose silencing in gastric
cancer has not been reported. Thirty-two of these had CpG islands (CGI) in their 
putative promoter regions, and all of the CGI were methylated in AGS, giving an
estimated number of 421+/-75 (95% confidence interval) methylation-silenced
genes. Additionally, we analyzed the methylation status of 16 potential
tumor-related genes with promoter CGI that were upregulated four-fold or more,
and 14 of these were methylated in AGS. Methylation status of the 32 randomly
selected and 16 potential tumor-related genes was analyzed in 10 primary gastric 
cancers, and 42 genes (ABHD9, ADFP, ALDH1A3, ANXA5, AREG, BDNF, BMP7, CAV1, CDH2,
CLDN3, CTSL, EEF1A2, F2R, FADS1, FSD1, FST, FYN, GPR54, GREM1, IGFBP3, IGFBP7,
IRS2, KISS1, MARK1, MLF1, MSX1, MTSS1, NT5E, PAX6, PLAGL1, PLAU, PPIC, RBP4,
RORA, SCRN1, TBX3, TFAP2C, TNFSF9, ULBP2, WIF1, ZNF177 and ZNF559) were
methylated in at least one primary gastric cancer. A metastasis suppressor gene, 
MTSS1, was located in a genomic region with frequent loss of heterozygosity
(8q22), and was expressed abundantly in the normal gastric mucosa, suggesting its
role in gastric carcinogenesis. (Cancer Sci 2006; 97: 64 -71).

(Cancer Sci 2006; 97: 64 -71).

PMID: 16367923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Dev Dyn. 2005 Dec;234(4):922-33.

Tbx3, the ulnar-mammary syndrome gene, and Tbx2 interact in mammary gland
development through a p19Arf/p53-independent pathway.

Jerome-Majewska LA(1), Jenkins GP, Ernstoff E, Zindy F, Sherr CJ, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The closely related T-box genes Tbx2 and Tbx3 are both expressed in the
developing mammary glands of mouse embryos and both have been implicated in
mammary carcinogenesis. Tbx3 is essential for induction of the mammary placodes
in mice. In humans, mutations in TBX3 are responsible for ulnar-mammary syndrome.
Here, we show a haploinsufficiency effect of Tbx3 on maintenance of the mammary
placodes and on the extent of branching of the ductal tree in mice. Loss or
heterozygosity for Tbx2, on the other hand, has no effect on either induction or 
maintenance of the placodes, although a small effect was seen on branching
morphogenesis in adult heterozygotes. However, the deficiency in maintenance of
the mammary placodes in Tbx2, Tbx3 double heterozygous mice is more marked than
in Tbx3 single heterozygotes, indicating a genetic interaction between the two
genes. In spite of a large body of evidence implicating these genes in cell cycle
control through the p19(Arf)/p53 pathways, we find no evidence for involvement of
these pathways either in embryonic lethality of homozygous mutants or in the
mammary gland phenotype of Tbx3 heterozygous mice.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16222716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Int J Cancer. 2006 Jan 15;118(2):412-21.

Increased expression of cSHMT, Tbx3 and utrophin in plasma of ovarian and breast 
cancer patients.

Lomnytska M(1), Dubrovska A, Hellman U, Volodko N, Souchelnytskyi S.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Plasma samples of ovarian and breast cancer patients were used to search for
markers of cancer using 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis and matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry. Truncated forms of 
cytosolic serine hydroxymethyl transferase (cSHMT), T-box transcription factor 3 
(Tbx3) and utrophin were aberrantly expressed in samples from cancer patients as 
compared to samples from noncancerous cases. Aberrant expression of proteins was 
validated by immunoblotting of plasma samples with specific antibodies to cSHMT, 
Tbx3 and utrophin. A cohort of 79 breast and 39 ovarian cancer patients and 31
individuals with noncancerous conditions was studied. We observed increased
expression of truncated cSHMT, Tbx3 and utrophin in plasma samples obtained from 
patients at early stages of disease. Our data suggest that cSHMT, Tbx3 and
utrophin can be used as components of multiparameter monitoring of ovarian and
breast cancer (supplementary material for this article can be found on the
International Journal of Cancer website at
http://www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/0020-7136/suppmat/index.html).

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16049973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Development. 2005 Apr;132(8):1961-70.

Tbx3 can alter limb position along the rostrocaudal axis of the developing
embryo.

Rallis C(1), Del Buono J, Logan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The limbs of the vertebrate embryo form at precise locations along the body and
these positions are fixed across different species. The mechanisms that control
this process are not understood. Ectopic expression of Tbx3, a transcriptional
repressor that belongs to the Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily of T-box transcriptional
regulators, in the forelimb results in a rostral shift in the position of the
limb along the main body axis. By contrast, a transcriptional activator form of
Tbx3 shifts the limb to more caudal locations. We also show that dHand and Gli3, 
genes previously implicated in anteroposterior pre-patterning of the limb-forming
region, are also involved in refining the position of the limbs. Our data suggest
a new role for Tbx3 in positioning the limb along the main body axis through a
genetic interplay between dHand and Gli3.

PMID: 15790970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Cancer Res. 2005 Mar 15;65(6):2260-8.

Tbx2 is overexpressed and plays an important role in maintaining proliferation
and suppression of senescence in melanomas.

Vance KW(1), Carreira S, Brosch G, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Signaling and Development Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, Surrey, 
United Kingdom.

The INK4a and ARF genes found at the CDKN2A locus are key effectors of cellular
senescence that is believed to act as a powerful anticancer mechanism.
Accordingly, mutations in these genes are present in a wide variety of
spontaneous human cancers and CDKN2A germ line mutations are found in familial
melanoma. The TBX2 gene encoding a key developmental transcription factor is
amplified in pancreatic cancer cell lines and preferentially amplified and
overexpressed in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutated breast tumors. Overexpression of Tbx2
and the related factor Tbx3, which is also overexpressed in breast cancer and
melanomas, can suppress senescence in defined experimental systems through
repression of ARF expression. However, it is not known how Tbx2 mediates its
repressive effect nor whether endogenous Tbx2 or Tbx3 perform a similar
antisenescence function in transformed cells. This is a particularly important
question because the loss of CDKN2A in many human cancers would, in principle,
bypass the requirement for Tbx2/3-mediated repression of ARF in suppressing
senescence. We show here that Tbx2 is overexpressed in melanoma cell lines and
that Tbx2 targets histone deacetylase 1 to the p21Cip1 (CDKN1A) initiator.
Strikingly, expression of an inducible dominant-negative Tbx2 (dnTbx2) leads to
displacement of histone deacetylase 1, up-regulation of p21(Cip1) expression, and
the induction of replicative senescence in CDKN2A-null B16 melanoma cells. In
human melanoma cells, expression of dnTbx2 leads to severely reduced growth and
induction of senescence-associated heterochromatin foci. The results suggest that
the activity of endogenous Tbx2 is critically required to maintain proliferation 
and suppress senescence in melanomas.

PMID: 15781639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Biomed Environ Sci. 2004 Dec;17(4):432-41.

Genes differentially expressed in human lung fibroblast cells transformed by
glycidyl methacrylate.

Yin XJ(1), Xu JN, Zou CQ, He FS, Fang FD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100005, China. xyin@hsc.wvu.edu

OBJECTIVE: To define the differences in gene expression patterns between glycidyl
methacrylate (GMA)-transformed human lung fibroblast cells (2BS cells) and
controls.
METHODS: The mRNA differential display polymerase chain reaction (DD-PCR)
technique was used. cDNAs were synthesized by reverse transcription and amplified
by PCR using 30 primer combinations. After being screened by dot blot analysis,
differentially expressed cDNAs were cloned, sequenced and confirmed by Northern
blot analysis.
RESULTS: Eighteen differentially expressed cDNAs were cloned and sequenced, of
which 17 were highly homologous to known genes (homology = 89%-100%) and one was 
an unknown gene. Northern blot analysis confirmed that eight genes encoding human
zinc finger protein 217 (ZNF217), mixed-lineage kinase 3 (MLK-3), ribosomal
protein (RP) L15, RPL41, RPS 16, TBX3, stanniocalcin 2 (STC2) and mouse ubiquitin
conjugating enzyme (UBC), respectively, were up-regulated, and three genes
including human transforming growth factor beta inducible gene (Betaig-h3),
alpha-1,2-mannosidase 1A2 (MAN 1A2) gene and an unknown gene were down-regulated 
in the GMA-transformed cells.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of the potential function of these genes suggest that they
may be possibly linked to a variety of cellular processes such as transcription, 
signal transduction, protein synthesis and growth, and that their differential
expression could contribute to the GMA-induced neoplastic transformation.

PMID: 15745248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cancer Lett. 2005 Feb 28;219(1):105-12.

Tbx3 expression is related to apoptosis and cell proliferation in rat bladder
both hyperplastic epithelial cells and carcinoma cells.

Ito A(1), Asamoto M, Hokaiwado N, Takahashi S, Shirai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology and Tumor Biology, Nagoya City University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 1-Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya
467-8601, Japan.

In the present study, Tbx3, a member of the T-box family of transcription
factors, was identified as an up-regulated gene by mRNA differential display in
the regression (apoptosis) stage after uracil-induction of papillomatosis in the 
rat urinary bladder. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that apoptosis cells
are negative and apoptosis resistant cells are positive for Tbx3 expression. That
suggests that Tbx3 is an apoptosis resistant gene rather than an apoptosis
induced gene. We have found the rat bladder carcinoma cell line, BC31, to feature
Tbx3 expression detectable by RT-PCR. To investigate its role in such cancer
cells, they were transfected with an anti-sense Tbx3 expression vector. The
obtained stable transfectant clones showed reduced expression of Tbx3 and much
slower cell growth, as compared with mock transfectants, and many apoptotic cells
were observed under normal culture conditions. These results indicate that Tbx3
is a negative regulator of apoptosis in bladder normal epithelial cells and
suppression of Tbx3 expression causes inhibition of cell proliferation and
induction of apoptosis in BC31, a rat bladder carcinoma cells.

PMID: 15694670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jan;232(1):11-20.

T-box genes and heart development: putting the "T" in heart.

Plageman TF Jr(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, ML7020, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Members of the T-box gene family (Tbx) are essential for normal heart
development, and mutations in human TBX genes cause congenital cardiovascular
malformations. T-box genes have been implicated in early cardiac lineage
determination, chamber specification, valvuloseptal development, and
diversification of the specialized conduction system in vertebrate embryos. These
genes include Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx5, Tbx18, and Tbx20, all of which exhibit
complex temporal spatial regulation in developing cardiac structures. Less is
known about T-box genes in invertebrate heart development, but multiple T-box
genes are expressed in Drosophila cardiac lineages. The molecular hierarchies and
developmental processes controlled by T-box genes in the heart are the focus of
this review.

PMID: 15580613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Proteins. 2005 Jan 1;58(1):211-21.

ATCUN-like metal-binding motifs in proteins: identification and characterization 
by crystal structure and sequence analysis.

Sankararamakrishnan R(1), Verma S, Kumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kanpur, India. rsankar@iitk.ac.in <rsankar@iitk.ac.in>

The amino terminal Cu(II)- and Ni(II)-binding (ATCUN) motif is a small
metal-binding site found in the N-terminus of many naturally occurring proteins. 
The ATCUN motif has been implicated in DNA cleavage and has been shown to have
antitumor activity. In proteins, the ATCUN motif is formed from a histidine in
the third position, its preceding residue and the free N-terminus. Four nitrogen 
atoms from these three residues act as metal ligands. Knowledge of metal-binding 
geometry helps in the design of metal-binding peptides and in understanding of
the mechanisms of metal-mediated functions. Since the N-terminus region of
ATCUN-containing proteins is highly disordered, no geometrical features can be
derived from the protein structures. However, the crystal structure of a small
metal-bound ATCUN peptide shows that the nitrogen ligands form a distorted square
planar geometry. Distance constraints derived from this designed peptide were
used to search 1949 polypeptide chains to find ATCUN-like motifs in any position 
along the polypeptide chain. Only approximately 1.9% and approximately 0.3% of
histidines are involved in partial and full ATCUN-like geometric features,
respectively. These two datasets were compared with the dataset of all
histidines. None of the ATCUN-like motifs occur in the middle of an alpha-helix
or a beta-strand. Further sequence analysis revealed total conservation of ATCUN 
histidines in four proteins including the transcription factor TBX3, implicated
in Ulnar-Mammary Syndrome. Our analysis suggests that the ATCUN-like motif in
TBX3 is a potential metal-binding site, although a structural role was not
completely ruled out. Metal-binding activity in TBX3, if confirmed, will help us 
to understand the role of metals in transcriptional regulation and is likely to
cast light on the causes of some serious genetic disorders. A conformational role
is suggested for ATCUN-like motifs in other proteins.

PMID: 15508143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 15;10(18 Pt 1):6152-8.

Met proto-oncogene and insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3
overexpression correlates with metastatic ability in well-differentiated
pancreatic endocrine neoplasms.

Hansel DE(1), Rahman A, House M, Ashfaq R, Berg K, Yeo CJ, Maitra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Pancreatic endocrine neoplasms are neoplastic proliferations of islet cells or
islet cell precursors and are capable of secreting a variety of synthetic
products, including insulin, glucagon, gastrin, and vasoactive intestinal
peptide. The biological behavior of pancreatic endocrine neoplasms is often
unpredictable, and there are few reliable histopathologic criteria reliably
correlating with metastatic ability. We have used the Affymetrix U133 GeneChip
set (HG_U133 A and B; Affymetrix; Santa Clara, CA) representing approximately
33,000 characterized transcripts to examine global gene expression profiles from 
well-differentiated nonmetastatic (n=5) and metastatic (n=7) pancreatic endocrine
neoplasms to determine molecular markers that predict disease progression.
Microarray hybridization data were normalized using the GeneLogic GeneExpress
Software System to identify differentially up- and down-regulated genes in
metastatic versus nonmetastatic pancreatic endocrine neoplasms. Using a 3-fold
change in gene expression as a threshold, we have identified 65 overexpressed and
57 underexpressed genes in metastatic pancreatic endocrine neoplasms as compared 
with nonmetastatic pancreatic endocrine neoplasms. Several classes of genes,
including growth factors and growth factor-related molecules (IGFBP1, IGFBP3, and
MET), developmental factors (TBX3 and MEIS2), cytoskeletal factors (beta 1
tubulin and ACTN2), cholesterol homeostasis mediators (LRP5, SLC27A2, and RXRG), 
intracellular signaling pathway mediators (DYRK1A, PKIB, and AK2),
methyltransferases (MGMT and GAMT), and DNA repair and regulatory molecules
(CHEK1 and ZNF198), were identified as differentially over- or underexpressed via
this method. Immunohistochemical validation of microarray data were performed for
two overexpressed genes, namely, the met proto-oncogene (MET) and insulin-like
growth factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP3) with tissue microarrays of nonmetastatic
(n=24) and metastatic (n=15) pancreatic endocrine neoplasms. Increased expression
of IGFBP3 was confirmed in metastatic versus nonmetastatic pancreatic endocrine
neoplasms (12 of 15, 80% versus 10 of 24, 42%), as well as in lymph node (6 of 7,
86%) and liver (9 of 9, 100%) metastases. Similarly, overexpression of MET was
confirmed in metastatic versus nonmetastatic pancreatic endocrine neoplasms (5 of
15, 33% versus 4 of 24, 17%), as well as in lymph node metastases (4 of 7, 57%)
and liver metastases (5 of 9, 56%). The majority of genes that demonstrated
altered expression has not been previously identified as differentially expressed
in metastatic pancreatic endocrine neoplasm lesions and may therefore represent
newly identified molecules in the progression of these lesions.

PMID: 15448002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Dev Biol. 2004 Sep 1;273(1):106-20.

Tbx5 and Tbx4 transcription factors interact with a new chicken PDZ-LIM protein
in limb and heart development.

Krause A(1), Zacharias W, Camarata T, Linkhart B, Law E, Lischke A, Miljan E,
Simon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Feinberg School of Medicine, Children's Memorial
Institute for Education and Research, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60614,
USA.

The T-domain transcription factors, Tbx5 and Tbx4, play important roles in
vertebrate limb and heart development. To identify interacting and potential
Tbx-regulating proteins, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen with the
C-terminal domain of Tbx5 as bait. We identified a new PDZ-LIM protein composed
of one N-terminal PDZ and three C-terminal LIM domains, which we named chicken
LMP-4. Among the Tbx2, 3, 4, 5 subfamily, we observed exclusive interaction with 
Tbx5 and Tbx4 proteins. Tbx3 nor Tbx2 can substitute for LMP-4 binding. While
chicken LMP-4 associates with Tbx5 or Tbx4, it uses distinct LIM domains to bind 
to the individual proteins. Subcellular co-localization of LMP-4 and Tbx proteins
supports the protein interaction and reveals interference of LMP-4 with Tbx
protein distribution, tethering the transcription factors to the cytoskeleton.
The protein-protein interaction indicates regulation of Tbx function at the level
of transcription factor nuclear localization. During chicken limb and heart
development, Tbx5/LMP-4 and Tbx4/LMP-4 are tightly co-expressed in a temporal and
spatial manner, suggesting that they operate in the same pathway. Surprisingly,
chicken LMP-4 expression domains outside those of Tbx5 in the heart led to the
discovery of Tbx4 expression in the outflow tract and the right ventricle of this
organ. The Tbx4-expressing cells coincide with those of the recently discovered
secondary anterior heart-forming field. The discrete posterior or anterior
expression domains in the heart and the exclusive fore- or hindlimb expression of
Tbx5 and Tbx4, respectively, suggest common pathways in the heart and limbs. The 
identification of a new Tbx5/4-specific binding factor further suggests a novel
mechanism for Tbx transcription factor regulation in development and disease.

PMID: 15302601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2004 Apr;9(2):109-18.

The role of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in mammary development and tumorigenesis.

Rowley M(1), Grothey E, Couch FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

TBX2 and TBX3 are members of a family of genes encoding developmental
transcription factors, characterized by a 200 amino acid DNA binding domain
(T-box). Tbx2 and Tbx3 are closely related T-box proteins that have been
implicated in development of a number of different tissues including the mammary 
gland. TBX3 is required for normal mammary development in mouse models and in
patients with ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS). In addition to a role in development,
TBX2 and TBX3 have been implicated in tumor development through downregulation of
the alternative reading frame (ARF) tumor suppressor and an associated bypass of 
senescence. Here we review the current information on the roles of Tbx2 and Tbx3 
in mammary gland development and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15300007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 1;64(15):5132-9.

TBX3 and its isoform TBX3+2a are functionally distinctive in inhibition of
senescence and are overexpressed in a subset of breast cancer cell lines.

Fan W(1), Huang X, Chen C, Gray J, Huang T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Robert R. Sprague Hall 314,
University of California-Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

TBX3 is a transcription factor of the T-box gene family. Mutations of TBX3 cause 
ulnar-mammary syndrome (MIM 181450) in humans, an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by the absence or underdevelopment of the mammary glands and other 
congenital anomalies. It recently was found that TBX3 was able to immortalize
mouse embryo fibroblast (MEF) cells. In addition, TBX2, a homologue of TBX3, is
active in preventing senescence in rodent cells and was found to be amplified in 
some human breast cancers, suggesting TBX3 plays a role in breast cancer. This
study examined the function of TBX3 and its isoform, TBX3 + 2a. TBX3 + 2a differs
from TBX3 in the DNA binding domain with an extra 20 amino acids produced by
alternative splicing. We first examined the tissue expression and alternative
splicing patterns of these two isoforms. We found that TBX3 and TBX3 + 2a are
widely expressed in humans and mice, and alternative splicing could be tissue
specific and species specific. Overexpression of TBX3 is able to immortalize MEF 
cells, whereas TBX3 + 2a shows an acceleration of senescence, a functional
difference that may be explained by the fact that these two isoforms may have
different downstream targets. TBX3, but not TBX3 + 2a, is able to bind to the
previously identified T-box binding site in a gel shift assay. A subset of human 
breast cancer cell lines overexpresses TBX3. Our results indicate that TBX3 and
TBX3 + 2a are functionally distinctive in inhibition of senescence of MEF cells
and may play a role in breast cancer.

PMID: 15289316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Anat. 2004 Jul;205(1):1-13.

Interactions between FGF and Wnt signals and Tbx3 gene expression in mammary
gland initiation in mouse embryos.

Eblaghie MC(1), Song SJ, Kim JY, Akita K, Tickle C, Jung HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Wellcome
Trust Biocentre, University of Dundee, Scotland, UK.

Interactions between Wnts, Fgfs and Tbx genes are involved in limb initiation and
the same gene families have been implicated in mammary gland development. Here we
explore how these genes act together in mammary gland initiation. We compared
expression of Tbx3, the gene associated with the human condition ulnar-mammary
syndrome, expression of the gene encoding the dual-specificity MAPK phosphatase
Pyst1/MKP3, which is an early response to FGFR1 signalling (as judged by
sensitivity to the SU5402 inhibitor), and expression of Lef1, encoding a
transcription factor mediating Wnt signalling and the earliest gene so far known 
to be expressed in mammary gland development. We found that Tbx3 is expressed
earlier than Lef1 and that Pyst1 is also expressed early but only transiently.
Patterns of expression of Tbx3, Pyst1 and Lef1 in different glands suggest that
the order of mammary gland initiation is 3, 4, 1, 2 and 5. Consistent with
expression of Pyst1 in the mammary gland, we detected expression of Fgfr1b, Fgf8 
and Fgf9 in both surface ectoderm and mammary bud epithelium, and Fgf4 and Fgf17 
in mammary bud epithelium. Beads soaked in FGF-8 applied to the flank of mouse
embryos, at a stage just prior to mammary bud initiation, induce expression of
Pyst1 and Lef1 and maintain Tbx3 expression in flank tissue surrounding the bead.
Grafting beads soaked in the FGFR1 inhibitor, SU5402, abolishes Tbx3, Pyst1 and
Lef1 expression, supporting the idea that FGFR1 signalling is required for early 
mammary gland initiation. We also showed that blocking Wnt signalling abolishes
Tbx3 expression but not Pyst1 expression. These data, taken together with
previous findings, suggest a model in which Tbx3 expression is induced and
maintained in early gland initiation by both Wnt and Fgf signalling through
FGFR1.

PMCID: PMC1571327
PMID: 15255957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Dev Biol. 2004 Jul 15;271(2):439-66.

Molecular anatomy of placode development in Xenopus laevis.

Schlosser G(1), Ahrens K.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Bremen, 28334 Bremen, Germany.
gschloss@uni-bremen.de

We analyzed the spatiotemporal pattern of expression of 15 transcription factors 
(Six1, Six4, Eya1, Sox3, Sox2, Pax6, Pax3, Pax2, Pax8, Dlx3, Msx1, FoxI1c, Tbx2, 
Tbx3, Xiro1) during placode development in Xenopus laevis from neural plate to
late tail bud stages. Out of all genes investigated, only the expression of Eya1,
Six1, and Six4 is maintained in all types of placode (except the lens) throughout
embryonic development, suggesting that they may promote generic placodal
properties and that their crescent-shaped expression domain surrounding the
neural plate defines a panplacodal primordium from which all types of placode
originate. Double-labeling procedures were employed to reveal the precise
position of this panplacodal primordium relative to neural plate, neural crest,
and other placodal markers. Already at neural plate stages, the panplacodal
primordium is subdivided into several subregions defined by particular
combinations of transcription factors allowing us to identify the approximate
regions of origin of various types of placode. Whereas some types of placode were
already prefigured by molecularly distinct areas at neural plate stages, the
epibranchial, otic, and lateral line placodes arise from a common posterior
placodal area (characterized by Pax8 and Pax2 expression) and acquire
differential molecular signatures only after neural tube closure. Our findings
argue for a multistep mechanism of placode induction, support a combinatorial
model of placode specification, and suggest that different placodes evolved from 
a common placodal primordium by successive recruitment of new inducers and target
genes.

PMID: 15223346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 May;1015:171-81.

Development of the building plan of the heart.

Moorman AF(1), Soufan AT, Hagoort J, de Boer PA, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Molecular Cardiology Group, Department of Anatomy and
Embryology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
a.f.moorman@amc.uva.nl

In this communication we discuss the formation of the synchronously contracting
chambered heart from a peristaltically contracting linear heart tube. It is
proposed that members of the T-box family of transcription factors play a crucial
role in the formation of the building plan of the formed heart. Tbx5 may confer
venoarterial polarity to the heart tube, whereas Tbx2 initially and Tbx3 in later
developmental stages prevent the cardiac inflow tract, atrioventricular region,
outflow tract, as well as the cardiac inner curvatures from chamber
differentiation. With the exception of the outflow tract that becomes
incorporated into the ventricles, these regions contribute to the cardiac
conduction system.

PMID: 15201158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Cardiovasc Res. 2004 Jun 1;62(3):489-99.

The transcriptional repressor Tbx3 delineates the developing central conduction
system of the heart.

Hoogaars WM(1), Tessari A, Moorman AF, de Boer PA, Hagoort J, Soufan AT, Campione
M, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Molecular Cardiology Group, AMC, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2004 Jun 1;62(3):444-6.

OBJECTIVE: The molecular mechanisms that regulate the formation of the conduction
system are poorly understood. We studied the developmental expression pattern and
functional aspects of the T-box transcription factor Tbx3, a novel marker for the
murine central conduction system (CCS).
METHODS: The patterns of expression of Tbx3, and of Cx40, Cx43, and Nppa, which
are markers for atrial and ventricular chamber-type myocardium in the developing 
heart, were analyzed in mice by in situ hybridization and three-dimensional
reconstruction analysis. The function of Tbx3 in regulating Nppa and Cx40
promoter activity was studied in vitro.
RESULTS: In the formed heart, Tbx3 is expressed in the sinoatrial node (SAN),
atrioventricular node (AVN), bundle and proximal bundle branches (BBs), as well
as the internodal regions and the atrioventricular region. Throughout cardiac
development, Tbx3 is expressed in an uninterrupted myocardial domain that extends
from the sinoatrial node to the atrioventricular region. This expression domain
is present in the looping heart tube from E8.5 onwards. Expression of the
chamber-type myocardial markers is specifically absent from the Tbx3 expression
domain. Tbx3 is able to repress Nppa and Cx40 promoter activity and abolish the
synergistic activation of the Nppa promoter by Tbx5 and Nkx2.5.
CONCLUSION: We identified the T-box transcription factor Tbx3 as a novel and
accurate marker for the central conduction system. Our analysis implicates a role
for Tbx3 in repressing a chamber-specific program of gene expression in regions
from which the components of the central conduction system are subsequently
formed.

PMID: 15158141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Dev Biol. 2004 Jun 1;270(1):214-31.

Sonic hedgehog signaling regulates Gli3 processing, mesenchymal proliferation,
and differentiation during mouse lung organogenesis.

Li Y(1), Zhang H, Choi SC, Litingtung Y, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN 37232-8240, USA.

Lack of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling, mediated by the Gli proteins, leads to
severe pulmonary hypoplasia. However, the precise role of Gli genes in lung
development is not well established. We show Shh signaling prevents Gli3
proteolysis to generate its repressor forms (Gli3R) in the developing murine
lung. In Shh(-/-) or cyclopamine-treated wild-type (WT) lung, we found that Gli3R
level is elevated, and this upregulation appears to contribute to defects in
proliferation and differentiation observed in the Shh(-/-) mesenchyme, where Gli3
is normally expressed. In agreement, we found Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) lungs exhibit
enhanced growth potential. Vasculogenesis is also enhanced; in contrast,
bronchial myogenesis remains absent in Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) compared with Shh(-/-) 
lungs. Genes upregulated in Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) relative to Shh(-/-) lung include 
Wnt2 and, surprisingly, Foxf1 whose expression has been reported to be
Shh-dependent. Cyclins D1, D2, and D3 antibody labelings also reveal distinct
expression patterns in the normal and mutant lungs. We found significant
repression of Tbx2 and Tbx3, both linked to inhibition of cellular senescence, in
Shh(-/-) and partial derepression in Shh(-/-); Gli3(-/-) lungs, while Tbx4 and
Tbx5 expressions are less affected in the mutants. Our findings shed light on the
role of Shh signaling on Gli3 processing in lung growth and differentiation by
regulating several critical genes.

PMID: 15136151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Cancer Res. 2004 Mar 1;64(5):1669-74.

Tbx2 directly represses the expression of the p21(WAF1) cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor.

Prince S(1), Carreira S, Vance KW, Abrahams A, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Signalling and Development Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, Oxted, 
Surrey, United Kingdom.

T-box factors play a crucial role in the development of many tissues, and
mutations in T-box factor genes have been implicated in multiple human disorders.
Some T-box factors have been implicated in cancer; for example, Tbx2 and Tbx3 can
suppress replicative senescence, whereas Tbx3 can cooperate with Myc and Ras in
cellular transformation. The p21(WAF1) cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor plays a 
key role in senescence and in cell cycle arrest after DNA damage. Here, using a
combination of in vitro DNA-binding, transfection, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we show that Tbx2 can bind and repress the p21
promoter in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, small interfering RNA-mediated
down-regulation of Tbx2 expression results in a robust activation of p21
expression. Taken together, these results implicate Tbx2 as a novel direct
regulator of p21 expression and have implications for our understanding of the
role of T-box factors in the regulation of senescence and oncogenesis, as well as
in development.

PMID: 14996726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Neurobiol. 2004 Feb 15;58(3):392-402.

TBX2/TBX3 transcriptional factor homologue controls olfactory adaptation in
Caenorhabditis elegans.

Miyahara K(1), Suzuki N, Ishihara T, Tsuchiya E, Katsura I.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Center, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima 411-8540,
Japan.

Although transcriptional factors are known to play important roles in synaptic
plasticity, their role in olfactory adaptation has not been studied well. Here we
report that Ce-TBX-2, the TBX2/TBX3 transcriptional factor homologue of the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, is involved in olfactory adaptation. Two
missense hypomorphic mutations in this gene confer abnormality in adaptation, but
not chemotaxis, to all the odorants sensed by AWC olfactory neurons. The Ce-tbx-2
gene is expressed in AWB, AWC, ASJ, and many pharyngeal neurons, but expression
in AWC neurons is sufficient for normal adaptation. Unexpectedly, the protein
product is localized mostly in cytoplasm. The AWC neurons in the mutants retain
their characteristic morphology and many marker gene expressions, suggesting that
the mutants are abnormal in neural functions rather than neuronal
differentiation. The results of this study imply that some of the mammalian T-box
family proteins, which play central roles in embryonic development, may also
control functions like neural plasticity in differentiated neurons.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Neurobiol 58: 392-402, 2004

PMID: 14750151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Dev Cell. 2004 Jan;6(1):43-53.

Tbx Genes Specify Posterior Digit Identity through Shh and BMP Signaling.

Suzuki T(1), Takeuchi J, Koshiba-Takeuchi K, Ogura T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara, 630-0101, Japan.

Erratum in
    Dev Cell. 2005 Jun;8(6):971-2.

Despite extensive studies on the anterior-posterior (AP) axis formation of limb
buds, mechanisms that specify digit identities along the AP axis remain obscure. 
Using the four-digit chick leg as a model, we report here that Tbx2 and Tbx3
specify the digit identities of digits IV and III, respectively. Misexpression of
Tbx2 and Tbx3 induced posterior homeotic transformation of digit III to digit IV 
and digit II to digit III, respectively. Conversely, misexpression of their
mutants VP16 Delta Tbx2 and VP16 Delta Tbx3 induced anterior transformation. In
both cases, alterations in the expression of several markers (e.g., BMP2, Shh,
and HoxD genes) were observed. In addition, Tbx2 and Tbx3 rescued Noggin-mediated
inhibition of interdigital BMP signaling, signaling which is pivotal in
establishing digit identities. Hence, we conclude that Tbx3 specifies digit III, 
and the combination of Tbx2 and Tbx3 specifies digit IV, acting together with the
interdigital BMP signaling cascade.

PMID: 14723846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Development. 2003 May;130(10):2263-73.

Mammary gland, limb and yolk sac defects in mice lacking Tbx3, the gene mutated
in human ulnar mammary syndrome.

Davenport TG(1), Jerome-Majewska LA, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, 701 W 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Spontanteous mutations in the T-box gene TBX3, result in the human ulnar-mammary 
syndrome, a dominant developmental disorder characterized by abnormal forelimb
and apocrine gland development. In order to develop a mouse model to study the
role of this gene during development and disease, we produced a mutation in the
mouse ortholog, Tbx3. The phenotype of the mutant mice verifies the role of this 
gene in limb and mammary gland development, and, in addition, reveals a
previously unknown role for the gene in the yolk sac, a fetal membrane that is
the site of hematopoiesis and is essential for survival during gestation. In
homozygous mutant embryos, the yolk sac undergoes cell death and degeneration at 
midgestation and the fetuses die over a range of several days; none survive to
birth. Tbx3 is the first T-box gene implicated in yolk sac development.
Homozygous embryos show a deficiency of mammary gland induction, and exhibit both
forelimb and hindlimb abnormalities. Although heterozygous mice, unlike their
heterozygous human counterparts, have no apparent phenotype in limb or mammary
gland, the homozygous defects in the development of these organs represent more
severe manifestations of the defects characteristic of the ulnar-mammary
syndrome.

PMID: 12668638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Apr 1;12 Spec No 1:R37-44.

T-box genes in human disorders.

Packham EA(1), Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham, NG7 2UH, UK.

The T-box gene family encodes a large family of transcription factors with more
than 20 members identified in humans so far, and homologues in many other
organisms. A number of human disorders have been linked to mutations in T-box
genes, confirming their medical importance. They include Holt- Oram
syndrome/TBX5, Ulnar-Mammary syndrome/TBX3, and more recently DiGeorge
syndrome/TBX1, ACTH deficiency/TBX19 and cleft palate with ankyloglossia/TBX22.
This review describes the key features of these disorders and the involvement of 
T-box genes in their phenotype.

PMID: 12668595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Ann Genet. 2002 Oct-Dec;45(4):213-7.

Haploinsufficiency of TBX3 causes ulnar-mammary syndrome in a large Turkish
family.

Wollnik B(1), Kayserili H, Uyguner O, Tukel T, Yuksel-Apak M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Health, Division of Medical Genetics, Istanbul University, 
Millet Cad, Capa, 34390, Istanbul, Turkey. wollnik@superonline.com
<wollnik@superonline.com>

We present a large Turkish family with autosomal dominant inherited ulnar-mammary
syndrome in which 10 affected family members, spanning three generations, were
diagnosed. The phenotypic expression of the disease was found to be highly
variable among the affected family members showing posterior-limb deficiencies
and/or duplications, mammary-gland hypoplasia, apocrine dysfunction, dental and
genital abnormalities. Mutation analysis of the TBX3 gene showed a novel one
base-pair insertion at position 89 (designated 88_89insA) in the coding region.
The mutation leads to a shift of the open reading frame and causes a premature
truncation of the protein (M30fsX110). The truncated protein lacks almost all
functional important parts of TBX3, most likely leading to a complete loss of
functional protein. Our findings indicate that ulnar-mammary syndrome shows a
wide range of phenotypes even within the same family and provide further evidence
that haploinsufficiency of TBX3 is the disease-causing mechanism.

PMID: 12668170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Dev Biol. 2002 Oct 15;250(2):251-62.

Regulation of Tbx3 expression by anteroposterior signalling in vertebrate limb
development.

Tümpel S(1), Sanz-Ezquerro JJ, Isaac A, Eblaghie MC, Dobson J, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, The Wellcome Trust Biocentre,
University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, United Kingdom.

Tbx3, a T-box gene family member related to the Drosophila gene optomotor blind
(omb) and encoding a transcription factor, is expressed in anterior and posterior
stripes in developing chick limb buds. Tbx3 haploinsufficiency has been linked
with the human condition ulnar-mammary syndrome, in which predominantly posterior
defects occur in the upper limb. Omb is expressed in Drosophila wing development 
in response to a signalling cascade involving Hedgehog and Dpp. Homologous
vertebrate signals Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and bone morphogenetic protein 2 (Bmp2)
are associated in chick limbs with signalling of the polarising region which
controls anteroposterior pattern. Here we carried out tissue transplantations,
grafted beads soaked in Shh, Bmps, and Noggin in chick limb buds, and analysed
Tbx3 expression. We also investigated Tbx3 expression in limb buds of chicken and
mouse mutants and retinoid-deficient quail in which anteroposterior patterning is
abnormal. We show that Tbx3 expression in anterior and posterior stripes is
regulated differently. Posterior Tbx3 expression is stable and depends on the
signalling cascade centred on the polarising region involving Shh and Bmps, while
anterior Tbx3 expression is labile and depends on the balance between positive
Bmp signals, produced anteriorly, and negative Shh signals, produced posteriorly.
Our results are consistent with the idea that posterior Tbx3 expression is
involved in specifying digit pattern and thus provides an explanation for the
posterior defects in human patients. Anterior Tbx3 expression appears to be
related to the width of limb bud, which determines digit number.

PMID: 12376101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Dev Growth Differ. 2002 Aug;44(4):257-71.

Conserved expression control and shared activity between cognate T-box genes Tbx2
and Tbx3 in connection with Sonic hedgehog signaling during Xenopus eye
development.

Takabatake Y(1), Takabatake T, Sasagawa S, Takeshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Human Informatics, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.

Tbx2 and Tbx3 are considered to be cognate genes within a Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily of
T-box genes and are expressed in closely overlapping areas in a variety of
tissues, including the eye. Herein, we show that misexpression of Tbx2 and Tbx3
in Xenopus embryos gave rise to defective eye morphogenesis, which was
reminiscent of the defect caused by attenuated Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling.
Indeed, Tbx2/3 misexpression suppressed Gli1, Gli2, Ptc2 and Pax2, mediators or
targets of Hedgehog (Hh) signals. From these data, Tbx2/3 may have a shared
function in inhibiting Gli-dependent Shh signaling during eye development.
Conversely, the expression of Tbx2/3 was severely affected by both Shh and a
putative dominant negative form of Hh, as well as by both transactivator and
transrepressor forms of Gli-fusion proteins, suggesting that the expression of
Tbx2/3 may be regulated by a Gli-dependent Hh signal transduction pathway.
Because the Shh signal has been considered to play crucial roles in the formation
of the proximal-distal and dorsal-ventral axes in the eyes, these findings about 
the mutual regulatory mechanism between Tbx2/3 and Gli-dependent Hh signaling
provide valuable insight into the cause of the localized expression of Tbx2/3 and
their role during the formation of these axes. In addition, our findings also
imply the conserved regulation and shared activity between the cognate genes of
Tbx2 and Tbx3.

PMID: 12175361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jul 15;110(4):365-9.

Novel mutation of TBX3 in a Japanese family with ulnar-mammary syndrome:
implication for impaired sex development.

Sasaki G(1), Ogata T, Ishii T, Hasegawa T, Sato S, Matsuo N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
g-sasaki@dp.u-netsurf.ne.jp

We report on a Japanese family (two brothers and their mother) with ulnar-mammary
syndrome (UMS). Clinical features included hypoplasia or aplasia of upper limbs
on the ulnar side in the three affected individuals, micropenis with or without
cryptorchidism, and hypoplastic nipples in the brothers; and hypoplastic mammary 
glands and nipples, poor perspiration, and bicornuate uterus in the mother.
Endocrine studies performed for the underdeveloped external genitalia when the
brothers were 11 6/12 and 7 2/12 years old, respectively, indicated low to
low-normal responses of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone
(FSH) to gonadotropin releasing hormone stimulation tests (elder brother: LH = < 
0.2 --> 2.2 IU/L, FSH = 0.6 --> 2.2 IU/L; younger brother: LH = < 0.2 --> 3.3
IU/L, FSH = 0.7 --> 4.4 IU/L) and normal testosterone responses to human
gonadotropin stimulation tests (elder brother: < 0.5 --> 8.8 nmol/L; younger
brother: < 0.5 --> 6.3 nmol/L). Testosterone enanthate therapy (25 mg/dose IM
twice) was effective in the brothers, with penile length increase being similar
between the brothers (approximately 5 mm/dose) and 23 age-matched boys with
idiopathic micropenis (mean 4.4 mm/dose, range 2.5-7.5 mm/dose). Sequence
analysis of the TBX3 gene showed a novel heterozygous nonsense mutation (A817T,
K273X) in exon 4 of the three patients. The results are consistent with the
previous finding that UMS is caused by haploinsufficiency of TBX3, and imply that
mild gonadotropin deficiency may be the primary cause for underdeveloped external
genitalia in males with UMS.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12116211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Oncogene. 2002 May 30;21(24):3827-35.

Tbx3 impinges on the p53 pathway to suppress apoptosis, facilitate cell
transformation and block myogenic differentiation.

Carlson H(1), Ota S, Song Y, Chen Y, Hurlin PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Shriners Hospitals for Children, Oregon Health Sciences University, 3101 Sam
Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97201, USA.

Tbx3 is a member of the T-box family of transcription factors. Mutations in Tbx3 
cause ulnar-mammary syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by
upper limb defects, apocrine-gland defects including mammary hypoplasia, and
tooth, hair and genital defects. In cell culture, Tbx3 and its close relative
Tbx2 are capable of immortalizing mouse embryo fibroblasts. We show that
expression of Tbx3 together with Myc or oncogenic Ras (H-Ras(Val17)) leads to
efficient transformation of mouse embryo fibroblasts. Oncogene cooperation by
Tbx3 correlates with an ability of Tbx3 to suppress the induction of p19ARF and
p53 that is typically caused by overexpression Myc and Ras, and to protect
against Myc-induced apoptosis. Whereas Tbx3 is capable of interfering with
apoptosis caused by excessive Myc levels, a Tbx3 mutant lacking its C-terminal
repression domain shows no anti-apoptotic activity and fails to repress levels of
p19ARF or p53. Consistent with an ability to suppress p53 pathway function, we
find that Tbx3, but not a Tbx3 C-terminal mutant, efficiently blocks myogenic
differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts. Our results support the idea that
deregulation and/or excessive levels of Tbx3 may have oncogenic potential in
vivo.

PMID: 12032820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Structure. 2002 Mar;10(3):343-56.

Structure of the DNA-bound T-box domain of human TBX3, a transcription factor
responsible for ulnar-mammary syndrome.

Coll M(1), Seidman JG, Müller CW.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Grenoble Outstation, France.

T-box genes encode transcription factors involved in morphogenesis and
organogenesis of vertebrates and invertebrates. Mutations in human T-box genes
TBX3, TBX5, and TBX1 cause severe genetic disorders known as Ulnar-Mammary
syndrome (UMS), Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), and DiGeorge syndrome, respectively.
The crystal structure of the T-box domain of the first human T-box transcription 
factor, TBX3, in complex with DNA at 1.7 A resolution explains structural
consequences of T-box domain point mutations observed in UMS and HOS patients.
Comparison with the structure of the T-box domain from Xenopus laevis (Xbra)
bound to DNA shows differences in several secondary structure elements and in the
quaternary structure of the two complexes. TBX3 independently recognizes the two 
binding sites present in the palindromic DNA duplex, whereas in Xbra, binding to 
the palindrome is stabilized through interactions between the two monomers. The
different quaternary structures suggest different DNA binding modes for T-box
transcription factors.

PMID: 12005433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):26120-7. Epub 2002 May 8.

The T-box repressors TBX2 and TBX3 specifically regulate the tumor suppressor
gene p14ARF via a variant T-site in the initiator.

Lingbeek ME(1), Jacobs JJ, van Lohuizen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 
121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The murine tumor suppressor p19(ARF) (p14(ARF) in humans) is thought to fulfill
an important protective role in preventing primary cells from oncogenic
transformation via its action in the p53 pathway. Several disease-implicated
regulators of p19(ARF) are known to date, among which are the T-box genes TBX2,
which resides on an amplicon in primary breast tumors, and TBX3, which is mutated
in the human developmental disorder Ulnar-Mammary syndrome. Here we identify a
variant T-site, matching 13 of 20 nucleotides of a consensus T-site, as the
essential TBX2/TBX3-binding element in the human p14(ARF) promoter. Mutant
analysis indicates that both the consensus T-box and a C-terminal conserved
repression domain are essential for p14(ARF) repression. Whereas the core
nucleotides required for interaction of the archetypal T-box protein Brachyury
with a consensus T-site are conserved in the variant site, additional flanking
nucleotides contribute to the specificity of TBX2 binding. This is illustrated by
the inability of TBX1A or Xbra to activate via the variant p14(ARF) T-site.
Importantly, this suggests a hitherto unsuspected level of specificity associated
with T-box factors and corresponding recognition sites in regulating their target
genes in vivo.

PMID: 12000749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Gene. 2002 Jan 23;283(1-2):117-24.

Murine Tbx2 contains domains that activate and repress gene transcription.

Paxton C(1), Zhao H, Chin Y, Langner K, Reecy J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

T-box (Tbx) genes represent a phylogenetically conserved family of transcription 
factors that play important roles during embryonic development. Tbx family
members have been shown to either activate or inhibit gene expression. However,
little is known about the domains within Tbx proteins responsible for mediating
gene transcription. While Tbx2 is known to repress gene expression, the domain(s)
within Tbx2 remains poorly defined. Deletion of the carboxy-terminus of Tbx2,
which contains a domain that is highly conserved with Tbx3 and ET, which has been
demonstrated to contain a repression domain, only minimally diminishes the
ability of Tbx2 to repress gene expression. However, in combination with the
carboxy-terminal truncation, deletion of the amino acids located amino-terminal
to the T-box abolished the ability of Tbx2 to repress gene expression. Both of
these domains were capable of repressing gene expression when linked to the GAL4 
DNA binding domain. In contrast to these two repression domains, the T-box was
capable of weakly activating gene expression depending on the promoter context.
Deletion analysis of the T-box suggests that this activation domain is located in
the amino-terminal end of the T-box. These results reveal a novel transcription
repression domain, confirm the presence of a previously implicated domain, and
suggest a novel role for the T-box. Taken together, these results provide the
basis for understanding the molecular mechanism whereby Tbx2 regulates gene
expression and subsequently controls embryonic development.

PMID: 11867218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jan 18;290(2):737-42.

Retina dorsal/ventral patterning by Xenopus TBX3.

Wong K(1), Peng Y, Kung HF, He ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Although it is well known that patterning in the retina of vertebrates is
essential for retina formation and for the retinotopic projection of axons in the
embryo, knowledge of molecular and cellular mechanisms of retina patterning is
limited. We have previously identified the Xenopus Tbx3 gene (XTbx3) which is
expressed in the dorsal retina but not in the ventral retina in Xenopus embryos
[H. Li, C. Tierney, L. Wen, J. Y. Wu, and Y. Rao (1997) Development 124, 603-615;
M.-L. He, L. Wen, C. E. Campbell, J. Y. Wu, and Y. Rao (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 96, 10212-10217]. Dosage-sensitive phenotypes in humans suggest that the
manipulation of the amount and location of its products could be informative for 
understanding its normal function. Here we report that ectopic expression of Tbx3
by mRNA injection suppressed formation of the ventral retina. Furthermore, Tbx3
injection led to inhibition of molecular markers for the ventral retina including
Pax-2 and netrin, indicating that Tbx3 plays an important role in retina
dorsal/ventral patterning in vertebrates by inhibition of gene expression for
ventral retina specification.

PMID: 11785961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):6567-72. Epub 2001 Dec 17.

TBX-3, the gene mutated in Ulnar-Mammary Syndrome, is a negative regulator of
p19ARF and inhibits senescence.

Brummelkamp TR(1), Kortlever RM, Lingbeek M, Trettel F, MacDonald ME, van
Lohuizen M, Bernards R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Prolonged culturing of rodent cells in vitro activates p19(ARF) (named p14(ARF)
in man), resulting in a p53-dependent proliferation arrest known as senescence.
The p19(ARF)-Mdm2-p53 pathway also serves to protect primary cells against
oncogenic transformation. We have used a genetic screen in mouse neuronal cells, 
conditionally immortalized by a temperature-sensitive mutant of SV40 large T
antigen, to identify genes that allow bypass of senescence. Using retroviral cDNA
expression libraries, we have identified TBX-3 as a potent inhibitor of
senescence. TBX-3 is a T-box gene, which is found mutated in the human
developmental disorder Ulnar-Mammary Syndrome. We have shown that TBX-3 potently 
represses expression of both mouse p19(ARF) and human p14(ARF). We have also
shown here that point mutants of TBX-3, which are found in Ulnar-Mammary
Syndrome, have lost the ability to inhibit senescence and fail to repress mouse
p19(ARF) and human p14(ARF) expression. These data suggest that the
hypoproliferative features of this genetic disorder may be caused, at least in
part, by deregulated expression of p14(ARF).

PMID: 11748239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2001 Dec;42(13):3095-102.

Expression of Drosophila omb-related T-box genes in the developing human and
mouse neural retina.

Sowden JC(1), Holt JK, Meins M, Smith HK, Bhattacharya SS.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College
London, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.
j.sowden@ich.ucl.ac.uk

PURPOSE: To examine the role of Drosophila optomotor blind (omb)-related T-box
genes in development of human and mouse retina.
METHODS: Mouse Tbx2, Tbx3, and Tbx5 and human TBX2 cDNAs were isolated from
retinal cDNA libraries by hybridization to the Drosophila omb gene. Gene
expression patterns in developing retina were analyzed by in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: TBX2/Tbx2, TBX3/Tbx3, and TBX5/Tbx5 were expressed asymmetrically across
the embryonic neural retina with highest levels of mRNA within dorsal and
peripheral retina. The dorsoventral gradient of TBX2 expression disappeared
before the ganglion cell layer (GCL) formed. Its expression then became
restricted to the inner neuroblastic retina and later to the GCL and inner
nuclear layer (INL). The dorsal expression domains of TBX5/Tbx5 and TBX3/Tbx3
were maintained during formation of the GCL. As the retina matured, TBX3/Tbx3
expression was restricted to the INL, and TBX5/Tbx5 was expressed within the GCL.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression pattern of TBX2, TBX3, and TBX5 within the developing
retina supports the idea that the encoded transcription factors play a role in
providing positional information important for topographic mapping and in
differentiation of distinct cell types across the laminar axis of the retina.

PMID: 11726608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Oct 1;10(21):2403-13.

A dominant repression domain in Tbx3 mediates transcriptional repression and cell
immortalization: relevance to mutations in Tbx3 that cause ulnar-mammary
syndrome.

Carlson H(1), Ota S, Campbell CE, Hurlin PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Shriners Hospitals for Children and Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, Oregon Health Sciences University, 3101 Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland,
OR 97201, USA.

Mutations in Tbx3 are responsible for ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS), an autosomal 
dominant disorder affecting limb, tooth, hair, apocrine gland and genital
development. Tbx3 is a member of a family of transcription factors that share a
highly conserved DNA-binding domain known as the T-domain. UMS-causing mutations 
in Tbx3 have been found at numerous sites within the TBX3 gene, with many
occurring downstream from the N-terminally located T-domain. The occurrence of
mutations downstream of the DNA-binding domain raises the possibility that there 
exist important functional domains in C-terminal portions of the Tbx3 protein
that affect its behavior as a transcription factor. To determine if and how such 
C-terminal mutations affect transcription we have mapped regions that confer
transcriptional activity and nuclear localization and characterized the DNA
binding properties of Tbx3. We find that Tbx3 binds the canonical Brachyury
binding site as a monomer and represses transcription. We show that a key
repression domain (RD1) resides in the Tbx3 C-terminus that can function as a
portable repression domain. Most UMS-associated C-terminal mutants lack the RD1
and exhibit decreased or loss of transcriptional repression activity. In
addition, we identify a domain responsible for nuclear localization of Tbx3 and
show that two C-terminal mutants of Tbx3 have increased rates of protein decay.
Finally, we show that Tbx3 can immortalize primary embryo fibroblasts and that
the RD1 repression domain is required for this activity. Our results identify
critical functional domains within the Tbx3 protein and facilitate interpretation
of the functional consequences of present and future UMS mutations.

PMID: 11689487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2001 Jan;30(1):14-7.

[Cloning of cNDAs involved in malignant transformation induced by glycidyl
methacrylate].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu J(1), Yin X, Wang Q, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Occupational Medicine, Chinese Academy of Preventive Medicine,
Beijing 100050, China.

The malignant transformation of human embryonic lung fibroblasts (HELF) induced
by glycidyl methacrylate (GMA) in vitro was used as a model for comparing gene
expression between the transformed cells and controls. Using mRNA differential
display PCR(DD-PCR) technique, the three cDNA fragments up-regulated in the
transformed cells were identified and highly homologous to human breast cancer
transcription factor(ZABC1), Tbx3 and mouse ubiquitin conjugating enzyme(E2)
gene. These results suggest that activation or inactivation of genes including
ZABC1, Tbx3 and E2 may be involved in GMA-induced transformation.

PMID: 11255752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Genomics. 2000 Jul 1;67(1):92-5.

Virtual cloning and physical mapping of a human T-box gene, TBX4.

Yi CH(1), Russ A, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
United Kingdom.

The Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily is one of the largest subgroupings within the T-box gene
family, the members of which encode developmentally critical transcription
factors. TBX4, a human member of the Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily, has been identified
and characterized from a high-throughput genomic sequence. The genomic
organization of TBX4 was elucidated by computational sequence analysis, and the
putative cDNA sequence was assembled. The genomic organization of TBX4 is very
similar to that of TBX5, as is the situation for TBX2 and TBX3. The physical
configuration of the TBX4-TBX2 cluster on human chromosome 17q21-q22 is similar
to that of the TBX5-TBX3 cluster on chromosome 12q23-q24. The assembled TBX4 cDNA
sequence was searched against the EST databases, and a TBX4 EST was identified.

PMID: 10945475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Mech Dev. 2000 Mar 1;91(1-2):433-7.

Conserved and divergent expression of T-box genes Tbx2-Tbx5 in Xenopus.

Takabatake Y(1), Takabatake T, Takeshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Human Informatics, Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya,
Japan.

We report here the identification of four members of T-box family genes,
Xltbx2-Xltbx5, in Xenopus. Two of them are probable pseudovariant genes of XTbx5 
and ET, a putative Xenopus ortholog of Tbx3. We compared their expression
patterns in both embryos and limbs. In embryos, expression of Xltbx2 and Xltbx3
showed novel diversities, such as Xltbx2 in the neural crest cells and Xltbx3 in 
the ventral spinal cord, together with mutual similarities in the following
regions: dorsal retina, proctoderm, lateral line organ, cement gland and cranial 
ganglia. The patterns in limbs were highly conserved with mouse and chick
orthologs, including the limb-type specific expression of Xltbx4 and Xltbx5. In
addition, RT-PCR analysis showed that they are expressed weakly even in adult
limbs as previously reported in the newt.

PMID: 10704879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Aug 31;96(18):10212-7.

Transcription repression by Xenopus ET and its human ortholog TBX3, a gene
involved in ulnar-mammary syndrome.

He Ml(1), Wen L, Campbell CE, Wu JY, Rao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999 Nov 9;96(23):13589.

T box (Tbx) genes are a family of developmental regulators with more than 20
members recently identified in invertebrates and vertebrates. Mutations in Tbx
genes have been found to cause several human diseases. Our understanding of
functional mechanisms of Tbx products has come mainly from the prototypical
T/Brachyury, which is a transcription activator. We previously discovered ET, a
Tbx gene expressed in Xenopus embryos. We report here that ET is an ortholog of
the human Tbx3 and that ET is a repressor of basal and activated transcription.
Functional dissection of the ET protein reveals a novel transcription-repression 
domain highly conserved among ET, human TBX3, and TBX2. These results reveal a
new transcription repressor domain, show the existence of a subfamily of
transcription repressors in the Tbx superfamily, and provide a basis for
understanding etiology of diseases caused by Tbx3 mutations.

PMCID: PMC17868
PMID: 10468588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Anat Embryol (Berl). 1999 Aug;200(2):137-52.

Origin and development of the avian tongue muscles.

Huang R(1), Zhi Q, Izpisua-Belmonte JC, Christ B, Patel K.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomisches Institut der Universitat Freiburg, Germany.

The musculature of the vertebrate tongue is composed of cells recruited from the 
somites. In this paper we have investigated the migration and organisation of the
muscle cells that give rise to the tongue muscle during chick embryogenesis. At
the molecular level, our data suggests that a population of Tbx-3 expressing
cells migrate away from the occipital somites prior to the migration of muscle
precursors that express Pax-3. Both populations take the same pathway and form
the hypoglossal cord. The first signs of muscle cell differentiation were not
detected until cells had migrated some distance from the somites. We have
determined the contribution of single somites to the musculature of the tongue
and show in contrast to previous data that somites 2-6 take part in the formation
of all glossal and infrahyoid muscles to the same extent but do not contribute to
suprahyoid muscle. This is particularly interesting since glossal and infrahyoid 
muscle differ from the suprahyoid muscles not only in their morphology, but also 
in their developmental origin. Furthermore we show that myocytes cross the
midline and contribute to the contralateral glossal and infrahyoid muscles. This 
is supported from our molecular data, which showed that the migratory precursor
population was maintained primarily at the rostral tip of the developing
hypoglossal cord.

PMID: 10424872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Jun;64(6):1550-62.

The spectrum of mutations in TBX3: Genotype/Phenotype relationship in
ulnar-mammary syndrome.

Bamshad M(1), Le T, Watkins WS, Dixon ME, Kramer BE, Roeder AD, Carey JC, Root S,
Schinzel A, Van Maldergem L, Gardner RJ, Lin RC, Seidman CE, Seidman JG,
Wallerstein R, Moran E, Sutphen R, Campbell CE, Jorde LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Eccles Institute of Human Genetics, 15 North 2030
East, Room 2100, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112-5330, USA
mike@genetics.utah.edu.

Ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS) is a pleiotropic disorder affecting limb,
apocrine-gland, tooth, hair, and genital development. Mutations that disrupt the 
DNA-binding domain of the T-box gene, TBX3, have been demonstrated to cause UMS. 
However, the 3' terminus of the open reading frame (ORF) of TBX3 was not
identified, and mutations were detected in only two families with UMS.
Furthermore, no substantial homology outside the T-box was found among TBX3 and
its orthologues. The subsequent cloning of new TBX3 cDNAs allowed us to complete 
the characterization of TBX3 and to identify alternatively transcribed TBX3
transcripts, including one that interrupts the T-box. The complete ORF of TBX3 is
predicted to encode a 723-residue protein, of which 255 amino acids are encoded
by newly identified exons. Comparison of other T-box genes to TBX3 indicates
regions of substantial homology outside the DNA-binding domain. Novel mutations
have been found in all of eight newly reported families with UMS, including five 
mutations downstream of the region encoding the T-box. This suggests that a
domain(s) outside the T-box is highly conserved and important for the function of
TBX3. We found no obvious phenotypic differences between those who have missense 
mutations and those who have deletions or frameshifts.

PMCID: PMC1377898
PMID: 10330342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Development. 1999 Jun;126(12):2703-13.

Zebrafish tbx-c functions during formation of midline structures.

Dheen T(1), Sleptsova-Friedrich I, Xu Y, Clark M, Lehrach H, Gong Z, Korzh V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Agrobiology and Department of Biological Sciences,
National University of Singapore, Singapore. vlad@ima.org. sg.

Several genes containing the conserved T-box region in invertebrates and
vertebrates have been reported recently. Here, we describe three novel members of
the T-box gene family in zebrafish. One of these genes, tbx-c, is studied in
detail. It is expressed in the axial mesoderm, notably, in the notochordal
precursor cells immediately before formation of the notochord and in the
chordoneural hinge of the tail bud, after the notochord is formed. In addition,
its expression is detected in the ventral forebrain, sensory neurons, fin buds
and excretory system. The expression pattern of tbx-c differs from that of the
other two related genes, tbx-a and tbx-b. The developmental role of tbx-c has
been analysed by overexpression of the full-length tbx-c mRNA and a truncated
form of tbx-c mRNA, which encodes the dominant-negative Tbx-c. Overexpression of 
tbx-c causes expansion of the midline mesoderm and formation of ectopic midline
structures at the expense of lateral mesodermal cells. In dominant-negative
experiments, the midline mesoderm is reduced with the expansion of lateral
mesoderm to the midline. These results suggest that tbx-c plays a role in
formation of the midline mesoderm, particularly, the notochord. Moreover,
modulation of tbx-c activity alters the development of primary motor neurons.
Results of in vitro analysis in zebrafish animal caps suggest that tbx-c acts
downstream of early mesodermal inducers (activin and ntl) and reveal an
autoregulatory feedback loop between ntl and tbx-c. These data and analysis of
midline (ntl-/- and flh-/-) and lateral mesoderm (spt-/-) mutants suggest that
tbx-c may function during formation of the notochord.

PMID: 10331981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cell Tissue Res. 1999 Apr;296(1):57-66.

T-box genes and the formation of vertebrate forelimb- and hindlimb specific
pattern.

Simon H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Medical School,
CMIER-Developmental Systems Biology, 2300 Children's Plaza M/C 204, Chicago, IL
60614, USA.hgsimon@nwu.edu

Limb patterning is thought to be a multistep process involving specification of
the limb fields, establishment of defined signaling centers that globally inform 
cells of their position, interpretation of positional signals, and regulated
growth and differentiation of the limb structures. Great progress has been made
over the past few years in identifying the molecular players that control limb
outgrowth and patterning, in particular, how the limb axes are specified.
However, the molecular mechanism for determination of the morphological and
functional differences between forelimbs and hindlimbs has remained elusive. The 
recent identification of a series of limb-specific transcription factors has now 
provided excellent candidates for such upstream regulators of limb identity, and 
has allowed new insights into the regulatory network of making a hand or a foot.

PMID: 10199965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mech Dev. 1999 Feb;80(2):219-21.

Spatially and temporally-restricted expression of two T-box genes during
zebrafish embryogenesis.

Yonei-Tamura S(1), Tamura K, Tsukui T, Izpisúa Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Gene Expression Laboratory, 10010
N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037-1099, USA.

T-box genes are conserved in all animal species. We have identified two members
of the T-box gene family from the zebrafish, Danio rerio. Zf-tbr1 and zf-tbx3
share high amino acid identity with human, murine, chick and Xenopus orthologs
and are expressed in specific regions during zebrafish development.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 10072792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Genomics. 1999 Jan 1;55(1):10-20.

Identification, mapping, and phylogenomic analysis of four new human members of
the T-box gene family: EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19.

Yi CH(1), Terrett JA, Li QY, Ellington K, Packham EA, Armstrong-Buisseret L,
McClure P, Slingsby T, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Nottingham, Queen's
Medical Centre, Nottingham, NG7 2UH.

Brachyury(T) is a mouse mutation, first described over 70 years ago, that causes 
defects in mesoderm formation. Recently several related genes, the T-box gene
family, that encode a similar N-terminal DNA binding domain, the T-box, and that 
play critical roles in human embryonic development have been identified. It has
been shown that human TBX5 and TBX3, if mutated, cause developmental disorders,
Holt-Oram syndrome (OMIM 142900) and ulnar-mammary syndrome (OMIM 181450),
respectively. We have identified four new human members of the T-box gene family,
EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19, and these genes have been mapped to different
chromosomal regions by radiation hybrid mapping. The four T-box genes were
classified into four different subfamilies and have also been subjected to
phylogenomic analysis. Human EOMES maps at 3p21.3-p21.2. This Tbr1-subfamily gene
is likely to play a significant role in early embryogenesis similar to that
described for Xenopus eomesodermin. Human TBX6 maps at 16p12-q12. This
Tbx6-subfamily gene is likely to participate in paraxial mesoderm formation and
somitogenesis in human embryo. TBX18 is a novel member of the Tbx1 subfamily that
maps at 6q14-q15. Two subgroups, TBX1/10 and TBX15/18 subgroups, could be
distinguished within the Tbx1 subfamily. TBX19 is an orthologue of chick TbxT and
maps at 1q23-q24. The genomic organization of TBX19 is highly similar to that of 
human T(Brachyury), another human member of the same subfamily.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9888994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Mech Dev. 1998 Jun;74(1-2):165-9.

Expression of T-box genes Tbx2-Tbx5 during chick organogenesis.

Gibson-Brown JJ(1), I Agulnik S, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, 701 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

T-box genes encode putative transcription factors implicated in diverse
developmental processes (Papaioannou, V.E. and Silver, L.M., 1998. BioEssays 20, 
9-19). We have previously reported the embryonic expression patterns of T-box
genes in mice (Chapman, D.L., Garvey, N., Hancock, S., Alexiou, M., Agulnik,
S.I., Gibson-Brown, J.J., Cebra-Thomas, J., Bollag, R.J., Silver, L.M.,
Papaioannou, V.E., 1996. Dev. Dyn. 206, 379-390; Chapman, D.L., Agulnik, I.,
Hancock, S., Silver, L.M. and Papaioannou, V.E., 1996. Dev. Biol. 180, 534-542;
Gibson-Brown, J.J., Agulnik, S.I., Chapman, D.L., Alexiou, M., Garvey, N.,
Silver, L.M., Papaioannou, V.E., 1996. Mech. Dev. 56, 93-101). Four of these
genes (Tbx2-Tbx5) are represented in the mouse genome as two cognate, linked gene
pairs (Agulnik, S.I., Garvey, N., Hancock, S., Ruvinsky, I., Chapman, D.L.,
Agulnik, I., Bollag, R., Papaioannou, V.E., Silver, L.M., 1996. Genetics 144,
249-254), and have all been implicated in playing important roles in limb
development (Gibson-Brown, J.J., Agulnik, S.I., Chapman, D.L., Alexiou, M.,
Garvey, N., Silver, L.M., Papaioannou, V.E., 1996. Mech. Dev. 56, 93-101). To
investigate the role of these genes in limb development, we cloned the chicken
orthologs and report functional studies, as well as patterns of expression in the
developing limbs, elsewhere (Gibson-Brown, J.J., Agulnik, S.I., Silver, L.M.,
Niswander, L., Papaioannou, V.E., Development, in press). This report details the
patterns of expression of Tbx2-Tbx5 in chick embryonic tissues other than the
limbs.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved

PMID: 9651516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Gene. 1998 Jun 8;212(2):237-48.

Isolation of a Drosophila T-box gene closely related to human TBX1.

Porsch M(1), Hofmeyer K, Bausenwein BS, Grimm S, Weber BH, Miassod R, Pflugfelder
GO.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Genetik, Theodor-Boveri-Institut, Biozentrum, Am Hubland, D
97074, Würzburg, Germany.

T-box genes, in all metazoans studied from nematode to man, exist in small gene
families. They encode transcription factors with a novel, large, and highly
conserved DNA binding domain termed the T-domain. In all cases studied, T-box
genes have important developmental roles. Two familial diseases, Holt-Oram
syndrome and ulnar-mammary syndrome, were recently shown to be caused by
mutations in the human T-box genes TBX5 and TBX3, respectively. T-box genes were 
first identified in Drosophila and mouse. Two of the three known Drosophila T-box
genes show a close sequence homology to mammalian genes. Similarities in the
phenotypes of fly and mammalian mutants can be taken as evidence of functional
conservation. We report here the isolation of a fourth Drosophila T-box gene,
optomotor-blind-related gene-1 (org-1), closely related to mouse and human TBX1. 
We localized TBX1 to chromosomal band 22q11, confirming a recent report, and
discuss TBX1 as a candidate gene for DiGeorge and related syndromes.

PMID: 9611267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Development. 1998 Jul;125(13):2499-509.

Involvement of T-box genes Tbx2-Tbx5 in vertebrate limb specification and
development.

Gibson-Brown JJ(1), Agulnik SI, Silver LM, Niswander L, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

We have recently shown in mice that four members of the T-box family of
transcription factors (Tbx2-Tbx5) are expressed in developing limb buds, and that
expression of two of these genes, Tbx4 and Tbx5, is primarily restricted to the
developing hindlimbs and forelimbs, respectively. In this report, we investigate 
the role of these genes in limb specification and development, using the chick as
a model system. We induced the formation of ectopic limbs in the flank of chick
embryos to examine the relationship between the identity of the limb-specific
T-box genes being expressed and the identity of limb structures that subsequently
develop. We found that, whereas bud regions expressing Tbx4 developed
characteristic leg structures, regions expressing Tbx5 developed characteristic
wing features. In addition, heterotopic grafts of limb mesenchyme (wing bud into 
leg bud, and vice versa), which are known to retain the identity of the donor
tissue after transplantation, retained autonomous expression of the appropriate, 
limb-specific T-box gene, with no evidence of regulation by the host bud. Thus
there is a direct relationship between the identity of the structures that
develop in normal, ectopic and recombinant limbs, and the identity of the T-box
gene(s) being expressed. To investigate the regulation of T-box gene expression
during limb development, we employed several other embryological manipulations.
By surgically removing the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) from either wing or leg 
buds, we found that, in contrast to all other genes implicated in the patterning 
of developing appendages, maintenance of T-box gene expression is not dependent
on the continued provision of signals from the AER or the zone of polarizing
activity (ZPA). By generating an ectopic ZPA, by grafting a sonic hedgehog
(SHH)-expressing cell pellet under the anterior AER, we found that Tbx2
expression can lie downstream of SHH. Finally, by grafting a SHH-expressing cell 
pellet to the anterior margin of a bud from which the AER had been removed, we
found that Tbx2 may be a direct, short-range target of SHH. Our findings suggest 
that these genes are intimately involved in limb development and the
specification of limb identity, and a new model for the evolution of vertebrate
appendages is proposed.

PMID: 9609833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mamm Genome. 1998 Jan;9(1):70-3.

Genomic structure of TBX2 indicates conservation with distantly related T-box
genes.

Campbell CE(1), Casey G, Goodrich K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Ohio 44195-5001, USA.

TBX2 is a member of a recently discovered gene family of transcription factors,
named T-box genes after the Brachyury or T gene. Mutations in two of these family
members, TBX5 and TBX3, have recently been shown to be responsible for the
congenital abnormalities associated with Holt Oram syndrome and ulnar-mammary
syndrome respectively, while mutations in T-box genes in other species also
result in developmental abnormalities in the tissues where the gene is normally
expressed. Thus, it likely that other T-box genes are responsible for additional 
human developmental anomalies. Here we report the exon/intron boundaries of TBX2 
and a polymorphism within intron 2 of TBX2 that should be useful for exploring
the involvement of this gene in human genetic disease. We further note that the
exon/intron boundaries of TBX2 are highly conserved within the T-box domain with 
those of both T and TBX5, as well as with a new human T-box gene and more
distantly related genes from Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila. This
observation should facilitate the analysis of the genomic structure of other
members of this gene family. It is also of interest that several members of this 
gene family have an additional intron that is variably present within members of 
at least two different lineages of the T-box family. This observation has
implications regarding the evolution of T-box genes.

PMID: 9434949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Nat Genet. 1997 Jul;16(3):311-5.

Mutations in human TBX3 alter limb, apocrine and genital development in
ulnar-mammary syndrome.

Bamshad M(1), Lin RC, Law DJ, Watkins WC, Krakowiak PA, Moore ME, Franceschini P,
Lala R, Holmes LB, Gebuhr TC, Bruneau BG, Schinzel A, Seidman JG, Seidman CE,
Jorde LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake
City 84112, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 1998 May;19(1):102.

Ulnar-mammary syndrome is a rare pleiotropic disorder affecting limb, apocrine
gland, tooth and genital development. We demonstrate that mutations in human
TBX3, a member of the T-box gene family, cause ulnar-mammary syndrome in two
families. Each mutation (a single nucleotide deletion and a splice-site mutation)
is predicted to cause haploinsufficiency of TBX3, implying that critical levels
of this transcription factor are required for morphogenesis of several organs.
Limb abnormalities of ulnar-mammary syndrome involve posterior elements.
Mutations in TBX5, a related and linked gene, cause anterior limb abnormalities
in Holt-Oram syndrome. We suggest that during the evolution of TBX3 and TBX5 from
a common ancestral gene, each has acquired specific yet complementary roles in
patterning the mammalian upper limb.

PMID: 9207801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Dev Dyn. 1996 Aug;206(4):379-90.

Expression of the T-box family genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, during early mouse development.

Chapman DL(1), Garvey N, Hancock S, Alexiou M, Agulnik SI, Gibson-Brown JJ,
Cebra-Thomas J, Bollag RJ, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicans and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

A novel family of genes, characterized by the presence of a region of homology to
the DNA-binding domain of the Brachyury (T) locus product, has recently been
identified. The region of homology has been named the T-box, and the new mouse
genes that contain the T-box domain have been named T-box 1-6 (Tbx1 through
Tbx6). As the basis for further study of the function and evolution of these
genes, we have examined the expression of 5 of these genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, across a
wide range of embryonic stages from blastocyst through gastrulation and early
organogenesis by in situ hybridization of wholemounts and tissue sections. Tbx3
is expressed earliest, in the inner cell mass of the blastocyst. Four of the
genes are expressed in different components of the mesoderm or mesoderm/endoderm 
during gastrulation (Tbx1 and Tbx3-5). All of these genes have highly specific
patterns of expression during later embryogenesis, notably in areas undergoing
inductive tissue interactions. In several cases there is complementary expression
of different genes in 2 interacting tissues, as in the lung epithelium (Tbx1) and
lung mesenchyme (Tbx2-5), and in mammary buds (Tbx3) and mammary stroma (Tbx2).
Tbx1 shows very little overlap in the sites of expression with the other 4 genes,
in contrast to a striking similarity in expression between members of the 2
cognate gene sets, Tbx2/Tbx3 and Tbx4/Tbx5. This is a clear reflection of the
evolutionary relationship between the 5 genes since the divergence of Tbx1
occurred long before the relatively recent divergence of Tbx2 and 3 and Tbx4 and 
5 from common ancestral genes. These studies are a good indication that the T-box
family of genes has important roles in inductive interactions in many stages of
mammalian embryogenesis.

PMID: 8853987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mech Dev. 1996 May;56(1-2):93-101.

Evidence of a role for T-box genes in the evolution of limb morphogenesis and the
specification of forelimb/hindlimb identity.

Gibson-Brown JJ(1), Agulnik SI, Chapman DL, Alexiou M, Garvey N, Silver LM,
Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Tetrapod fore-and hindlimbs have evolved from the pectoral and pelvic fins of an 
ancient vertebrate ancestor. In this ancestor, the pectoral fin appears to have
arisen following the rostral homeotic recapitulation of an existing pelvic
appendage (Tabin and Laufer (1993), Nature 361, 692-693). Thus the basic
appendage outgrowth program is reiterated in both tetrapod fore- and hindlimbs
and the pectoral and pelvic fins of extant teleost fishes (Sordino et al. (1995) 
Nature 375, 678-681). Recently a novel family of putative transcription factors, 
which includes the T (Brachyury) locus, has been identified and dubbed the
"T-box' family. In mice, all of these genes have expression patterns indicative
of involvement in embryonic induction (Chapman et al. (1996) Dev. Dyn., in
press), and four (Tbx2-Tbx5) are represented as two cognate, linked gene pairs
(Agulnik et al., (1996), Genetics, in press). We now report that, whereas Tbx2
and Tbx3 are expressed in similar spatiotemporal patterns in both limbs, Tbx5 and
Tbx4 expression is primarily restricted to the developing fore- and hindlimb
buds, respectively. These observations suggest that T-box genes have played a
role in the evolution of fin and limb morphogenesis, and that Tbx5 and Tbx4 may
have been divergently selected to play a role in the differential specification
of fore- (pectoral) versus hind- (pelvic) limb (fin) identity.

PMID: 8798150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Mamm Genome. 1995 Nov;6(11):793-7.

Identification, characterization, and localization to chromosome 17q21-22 of the 
human TBX2 homolog, member of a conserved developmental gene family.

Law DJ(1), Gebuhr T, Garvey N, Agulnik SI, Silver LM.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109-0674, USA.

The T-box motif is present in a family of genes whose structural features and
expression patterns support their involvement in developmental gene regulation.
Previously, sequence comparisons among the T-box domains of ten vertebrate and
invertebrate T-box (Tbx) genes established a phylogenetic tree with three major
branches. The Tbx2-related branch includes mouse Mm-Tbx2 and Mm-Tbx3, Drosophila 
optomotor-blind (Dm-Omb), and Caenorhabditis elegans Ce-Tbx2 and Ce-Tbx2 and
Ce-Tbx7 genes. From the localization of Mm-Tbx2 to Chromosome (Chr) 11, we
focused our search for the human homolog, Hs-TBX2, within a region of synteny
conservation on Chr 17q. We used Dm-Omb polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers
to amplify a 137-basepair(bp)_ product from human genomic, Chr 17 monochromosome 
hybrid, and fetal kidney cDNA templates. The human PCR product showed 89% DNA
sequence identity and 100% peptide sequence identity to the corresponding T-box
segment of Mm-Tbx2. The putative Hs-TBX2 locus was isolated within a YAC contig
that included three anonymous markers, D17S792, and D17S948, located at Chr
17q21-22. Hybridization-and PCR-based screening of a 15-week fetal kidney cDNA
library yielded several TBX2 clones. Sequence analysis of clone lambda omicron
TBX2-1 confirmed homology to Mm-TBx2-90% DNA sequence identity over 283 nt, and
96% peptide sequence identity over 94 amino acids. Similar analysis of Hs-TBX2
cosmid 154F11 confirmed the cDNA coding sequence and also identified a 1.7-kb
intron located at the same relative position as in Mm-Tbx2. Phylogenetic analyses
of the T-box domain sequences found in several vertebrate and invertebrate
species further suggested that the putative human TBX2 and mouse Tbx2 are true
homologs. Northern blot analysis identified two major TBX2 expression fetal
kidney and lung; and in adult kidney, lung, ovary, prostate, spleen, and testis. 
Reduced expression levels were seen in heart, white blood cells, small intestine,
and thymus. These results suggest that Hs-TBX2 could play important roles in both
developmental and postnatal gene regulation.

PMID: 8597636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


