
1. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Mar 24. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5043. [Epub ahead of print]

TBX5 loss-of-function mutation contributes to atrial fibrillation and atypical
Holt-Oram syndrome.

Guo DF(1), Li RG(2), Yuan F(2), Shi HY(2), Hou XM(2), Qu XK(2), Xu YJ(2), Zhang
M(2), Liu X(2), Jiang JQ(3), Yang YQ(2), Qiu XB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Shanghai Gongli Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai 200135, P.R. China. (2)Department of Cardiology,
Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, P.R.
China. (3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China.

Previous genome-wide association studies have demonstrated that single nucleotide
polymorphisms in T-box (TBX)5 are associated with increased susceptibility to
atrial fibrillation (AF), and a recent study has causally linked a TBX5 mutation 
to atypical Holt-Oram syndrome and paroxysmal AF. However, the prevalence and
spectrum of TBX5 mutations in patients with AF remain to be elucidated. In the
present study, a cohort of 190 unrelated patients with idiopathic AF were
prospectively recruited, with 400 unrelated healthy individuals recruited as
controls. The coding exons and flanking introns of the TBX5 gene were sequenced
in the participants. The functional characteristics of the mutant TBX5 were
delineated in contrast with its wild-type counterpart using a dual-luciferase
reporter assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous TBX5 mutation, p.P132S, 
was identified in an index patient with AF, with a mutational prevalence of
~0.53%. Genetic analysis of the proband's family showed that the mutation
co-segregated with AF, and was transmitted in an autosomal dominant pattern. The 
missense mutation was absent in the 800 control chromosomes, and the altered
amino acid was completely evolutionarily conserved across species. Functional
analyses revealed that the mutant TBX5 had significantly reduced transcriptional 
activity. Furthermore, the mutation markedly decreased the synergistic activation
between TBX5 and NK2 homeobox 5, another transcription factor which has been
causatively linked to AF. The present study was the first, to the best of our
knowledge, to report on the association between a TBX5 loss-of-function mutation 
and increased susceptibility to AF. These results provide novel insight into the 
molecular mechanism underpinning AF, and have potential implications in the
development of novel prophylactic and therapeutic strategies for AF, the most
common form of sustained cardiac arrhythmia.

PMID: 27035640  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Turk Ger Gynecol Assoc. 2015 Jul 14;17(1):55-7. doi: 10.5152/jtgga.2015.15233. 
eCollection 2016.

A novel mutated sequence in the T-box transcription factor-5 (TBX-5) gene
(c.241A>T) in Holt-Oram syndrome.

Ersoy AÖ(1), Topçu V(2), Kale I(3), Ersoy E(1), Özler S(1), Danisman N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Perinatology, Zekai Tahir Burak Women's Health Care Training and
Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. (2)Clinic of Medical Genetics, Zekai Tahir
Burak Women's Health Care Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sar Hospital, Rize, Turkey.

We report a case of a 31-year-old pregnant woman who was admitted to our
perinatology outpatient clinic because of a fetal ventricular septal defect and
limb reduction in the upper extremities of fetus revealed by ultrasonographic
investigation diagnosed in the 16(th) week of gestation. First child of the
family was diagnosed with Holt-Oram syndrome who had atrial septal defect and
upper limb anomalies, whereas the father was documented to have arrhythmia and
shortening of upper limbs. The pregnancy was terminated in the 16(th) week of
gestation with the consent of the family. We performed mutation analysis in T-box
transcription factor-5 (TBX5) gene coding exons, including exon/intron boundaries
from peripheral blood or skin fibroblasts. The sequence analysis revealed c.241
adenine (A)>thymine (T) [p. arginine (Arg) 81 Tryptophan (Trp)] alteration in
exon-3 of the TBX5 gene in affected family members and fetus. This is a novel
mutation causing Holt-Oram syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4794294
PMID: 27026770  [PubMed]


3. Nat Genet. 2016 Mar 28. doi: 10.1038/ng.3537. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcriptomic and epigenomic characterization of the developing bat wing.

Eckalbar WL(1,)(2), Schlebusch SA(3), Mason MK(3), Gill Z(3), Parker AV(3),
Booker BM(1,)(2), Nishizaki S(1,)(2), Muswamba-Nday C(3), Terhune E(4,)(5),
Nevonen KA(4), Makki N(1,)(2), Friedrich T(2,)(6), VanderMeer JE(1,)(2), Pollard 
KS(2,)(6,)(7), Carbone L(4,)(8), Wall JD(2,)(7), Illing N(3), Ahituv N(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA. (2)Institute for Human
Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California,
USA. (3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape
Town, South Africa. (4)Oregon National Primate Research Center, Division of
Neuroscience, Primate Genetics Section, Beaverton, Oregon, USA. (5)Department of 
Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder,
Colorado, USA. (6)Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, California, USA.
(7)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA. (8)Department of Behavioral
Neuroscience, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA.

Bats are the only mammals capable of powered flight, but little is known about
the genetic determinants that shape their wings. Here we generated a genome for
Miniopterus natalensis and performed RNA-seq and ChIP-seq (H3K27ac and H3K27me3) 
analyses on its developing forelimb and hindlimb autopods at sequential embryonic
stages to decipher the molecular events that underlie bat wing development. Over 
7,000 genes and several long noncoding RNAs, including Tbx5-as1 and Hottip, were 
differentially expressed between forelimb and hindlimb, and across different
stages. ChIP-seq analysis identified thousands of regions that are differentially
modified in forelimb and hindlimb. Comparative genomics found 2,796
bat-accelerated regions within H3K27ac peaks, several of which cluster near
limb-associated genes. Pathway analyses highlighted multiple ribosomal proteins
and known limb patterning signaling pathways as differentially regulated and
implicated increased forelimb mesenchymal condensation in differential growth. In
combination, our work outlines multiple genetic components that likely contribute
to bat wing formation, providing insights into this morphological innovation.

PMID: 27019111  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Heart Rhythm. 2016 Mar 19. pii: S1547-5271(16)30082-0. doi:
10.1016/j.hrthm.2016.03.038. [Epub ahead of print]

Postmortem Genetic Analysis Of Sudden Unexplained Death Syndrome Under 50 Years
Of Age: A Next-Generation Sequencing Study.

Hata Y(1), Kinoshita K(1), Mizumaki K(2), Yamaguchi Y(3), Hirono K(4), Ichida
F(4), Takasaki A(4), Mori H(5), Nishida N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Toyama, Japan. (2)Clinical Research and Ethics Center,
University of Toyama, Japan. (3)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Graduate 
School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Toyama, Japan. (5)Department of Molecular Neuroscience,
Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama,
Japan. (6)Department of Legal Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Japan. Electronic address:
nishida@med.u-toyama.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies on the genetic analysis of victims of sudden
unexplained death syndrome (SUDS) have shown diagnostic potential. Previously,
such analyses have mainly targeted the major channelopathy-associated genes.
OBJECTIVE: Our study aimed to evaluate the utility of next-generation sequencing 
(NGS) in the postmortem diagnosis of SUDS.
METHODS: Our data are derived from 25 cases of SUDS (21 men and 4 women aged
19-50 years). A total of 70 genes were examined by NGS and the pathogenicity of
any detected rare variants with minor allele frequencies of <0.5% was evaluated
using a widely used database and eight in silico algorithms.
RESULTS: Five known and 15 potentially pathogenic variants with high in silico
score were identified in 14 cases. In all, six channelopathy-related variants
were identified in five cases, including two cases with history of arrhythmia; 11
cases had cardiomyopathy- or cardiac transcription factor-related variants. Three
cases with desmosomal gene- or other cardiomyopathy-related variants showed
possibly related pathological changes. Three cases with RYR2 or TBX5 variants
showed possible pathogenic fibrosis of the cardiac conduction system. Only 11
variants showed moderate or strong possible pathogenicity in SUDS cases compared 
with qualifying controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Hereditary heart diseases other than channelopathy may also be a
significant cause of SUDS, even if clinical and pathological findings do not show
advanced disease. A combination of gene analysis using NGS and some predictive
methods for detecting variants and careful pathological evaluation may provide a 
reliable diagnosis of hereditary heart disease for potential SUDS cases.

Copyright © 2016 Heart Rhythm Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 27005929  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Elife. 2016 Mar 15;5. pii: e12115. doi: 10.7554/eLife.12115.

Molecular shifts in limb identity underlie development of feathered feet in two
domestic avian species.

Domyan ET(1), Kronenberg Z(2), Infante CR(3), Vickrey AI(1), Stringham SA(1),
Bruders R(1), Guernsey MW(1), Park S(3), Payne J(4), Beckstead RB(4), Kardon
G(2), Menke DB(3), Yandell M(2,)(5), Shapiro MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, United States.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, United
States. (3)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, United States. 
(4)Poultry Science Department, University of Georgia, Athens, United States.
(5)Utah Center for Genetic Discovery, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, United 
States.

Birds display remarkable diversity in the distribution and morphology of scales
and feathers on their feet, yet the genetic and developmental mechanisms
governing this diversity remain unknown. Domestic pigeons have striking variation
in foot feathering within a single species, providing a tractable model to
investigate the molecular basis of skin appendage differences. We found that
feathered feet in pigeons result from a partial transformation from hindlimb to
forelimb identity mediated by cis-regulatory changes in the genes encoding the
hindlimb-specific transcription factor Pitx1 and forelimb-specific transcription 
factor Tbx5. We also found that ectopic expression of Tbx5 is associated with
foot feathers in chickens, suggesting similar molecular pathways underlie
phenotypic convergence between these two species. These results show how changes 
in expression of regional patterning genes can generate localized changes in
organ fate and morphology, and provide viable molecular mechanisms for diversity 
in hindlimb scale and feather distribution.

PMCID: PMC4805547
PMID: 26977633  [PubMed - in process]


6. Cell Stem Cell. 2016 Mar 3;18(3):382-95. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.02.003.

Bmi1 Is a Key Epigenetic Barrier to Direct Cardiac Reprogramming.

Zhou Y(1), Wang L(1), Vaseghi HR(1), Liu Z(1), Lu R(2), Alimohamadi S(1), Yin
C(1), Fu JD(3), Wang GG(4), Liu J(1), Qian L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; McAllister Heart Institute, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. (2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. (3)Department of
Medicine, Heart and Vascular Research Center, MetroHealth Campus, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44109, USA. (4)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA. (5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; McAllister Heart Institute, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic address:
li_qian@med.unc.edu.

Direct reprogramming of induced cardiomyocytes (iCMs) suffers from low efficiency
and requires extensive epigenetic repatterning, although the underlying
mechanisms are largely unknown. To address these issues, we screened for
epigenetic regulators of iCM reprogramming and found that reducing levels of
the polycomb complex gene Bmi1 significantly enhanced induction of beating iCMs
from neonatal and adult mouse fibroblasts. The inhibitory role of Bmi1 in iCM
reprogramming is mediated through direct interactions with regulatory regions of 
cardiogenic genes, rather than regulation of cell proliferation. Reduced Bmi1
expression corresponded with increased levels of the active histone mark H3K4me3 
and reduced levels of repressive H2AK119ub at cardiogenic loci, and de-repression
of cardiogenic gene expression during iCM conversion. Furthermore, Bmi1 deletion 
could substitute for Gata4 during iCM reprogramming. Thus, Bmi1 acts as a
critical epigenetic barrier to iCM production. Bypassing this barrier simplifies 
iCM generation and increases yield, potentially streamlining iCM production for
therapeutic purposes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4779178 [Available on 2017-03-03]
PMID: 26942853  [PubMed - in process]


7. Biochemistry. 2016 Mar 29;55(12):1702-10. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00171. Epub 
2016 Mar 9.

Intermolecular Interactions of Cardiac Transcription Factors NKX2.5 and TBX5.

Pradhan L(1), Gopal S(1), Li S(1), Ashur S(1), Suryanarayanan S(1), Kasahara
H(2), Nam HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Texas at Dallas , Richardson,
Texas 75080, United States. (2)Department of Functional Genomics, University of
Florida , Gainesville, Florida 32610, United States.

Heart development in mammalian systems is controlled by combinatorial
interactions of master cardiac transcription factors such as TBX5 and NKX2.5.
They bind to promoters/enhancers of downstream targets as homo- or
heteromultimeric complexes. They physically interact and synergistically regulate
their target genes. To elucidate the molecular basis of the intermolecular
interactions, a heterodimer and a homodimer of NKX2.5 and TBX5 were studied using
X-ray crystallography. Here we report a crystal structure of human NKX2.5 and
TBX5 DNA binding domains in a complex with a 19 bp target DNA and a crystal
structure of TBX5 homodimer. The ternary complex structure of NKX2.5 and TBX5
with the target DNA shows physical interactions between the two proteins through 
Lys158 (NKX2.5), Asp140 (TBX5), and Pro142 (TBX5), residues that are highly
conserved in TBX and NKX families across species. Extensive homodimeric
interactions were observed between the TBX5 proteins in both crystal structures. 
In particular, in the crystal structure of TBX5 protein that includes the
N-terminal and DNA binding domains, intermolecular interactions were mediated by 
the N-terminal domain of the protein. The N-terminal domain of TBX5 was predicted
to be "intrinsically unstructured", and in one of the two molecules in an
asymmetric unit, the N-terminal domain assumes a ß-strand conformation bridging
two ß-sheets from the two molecules. The structures reported here may represent
general mechanisms for combinatorial interactions among transcription factors
regulating developmental processes.

PMID: 26926761  [PubMed - in process]


8. Int J Med Sci. 2016 Jan 23;13(1):60-7. doi: 10.7150/ijms.13264. eCollection 2016.

Prevalence and Spectrum of TBX5 Mutation in Patients with Lone Atrial
Fibrillation.

Wang ZC(1), Ji WH(2), Ruan CW(1), Liu XY(3), Qiu XB(4), Yuan F(4), Li RG(4), Xu
YJ(4), Liu X(4), Huang RT(5), Xue S(5), Yang YQ(6).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Eighth People's Hospital, 8 Caobao Road,
Shanghai 200235, China; (2)2. Department of Internal Medicine, Huajing Community 
Health Service Center of Xu Hui Distric, 180 Jianhua Road, Shanghai 200231,
China; (3)3. Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School 
of Medicine, 389 Xincun Road, Shanghai 200065, China; (4)4. Department of
Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 241 West
Huaihai Road, Shanghai 200030, China; (5)5. Department of Cardiovascular Surgery,
Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200127, China; (6)4. Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, 241 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai 200030, China;; 6.
Department of Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, Shanghai Chest Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 241 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai 200030, China;; 7.
Department of Central Laboratory, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, 241 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai 200030, China.

Atrial fibrillation (AF), the most common type of cardiac rhythm disturbance
encountered in clinical practice, is associated with substantially increased
morbidity and mortality. Aggregating evidence demonstrates that abnormal
cardiovascular development is involved in the pathogenesis of AF. A recent study 
has revealed that the TBX5 gene, which encodes a T-box transcription factor key
to cardiovascular development, was associated with AF and atypical Holt-Oram
syndrome. However, the prevalence and spectrum of TBX5 mutation in patients with 
lone AF remain unclear. In this study, the coding regions and splicing junction
sites of TBX5 were sequenced in 192 unrelated patients with lone AF and 300
unrelated ethnically-matched healthy individuals used as controls. The causative 
potential of the identified TBX5 variation was evaluated by MutationTaster and
PolyPhen-2. The functional effect of the mutant TBX5 was assayed by using a
dual-luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous TBX5
mutation, p.H170D, was identified in a patient, with a mutational prevalence of
approximately 0.52%. This mutation, which was absent in the 300 control
individuals, altered the amino acid completely conserved evolutionarily across
species, and was predicted to be disease-causing. Functional deciphers showed
that the mutant TBX5 was associated with significantly reduced transcriptional
activity when compared with its wild-type counterpart. Furthermore, the mutation 
significantly decreased the synergistic activation between TBX5 and NKX2-5 or
GATA4. The findings expand the mutational spectrum of TBX5 linked to AF and
provide new evidence that dysfunctional TBX5 may contribute to lone AF.

PMCID: PMC4747871
PMID: 26917986  [PubMed - in process]


9. Epigenetics. 2016 Feb 18:1-11. [Epub ahead of print]

Methylation and expression analyses of Pallister-Killian syndrome reveal partial 
dosage compensation of tetrasomy 12p and hypomethylation of gene-poor regions on 
12p.

Davidsson J(1,)(2), Johansson B(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Molecular Hematology , Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University , Lund , Sweden. (2)b Division of Clinical Genetics , Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Lund University , Lund , Sweden. (3)c Department of Clinical
Genetics, Office for Medical Services , Division of Laboratory Medicine , Lund , 
Sweden.

To ascertain the epigenomic features, i.e., the methylation, non-coding RNA, and 
gene expression patterns, associated with gain of i(12p) in Pallister-Killian
syndrome (PKS), we investigated single cell clones, harboring either disomy 12 or
tetrasomy 12p, from a patient with PKS. The i(12p)-positive cells displayed a
characteristic expression and methylation signature. Of all the genes on 12p, 13%
were overexpressed, including the ATN1, COPS7A, and NECAP1 genes in 12p13.31, a
region previously implicated in PKS. However, the median expression fold change
(1.3) on 12p was lower than expected by tetrasomy 12p. Thus, partial dosage
compensation occurs in cells with i(12p). The majority (89%) of the significantly
deregulated genes were not situated on 12p, indicating that global perturbation
of gene expression is a key pathogenetic event in PKS. Three genes-ATP6V1G1 in
9q32, GMPS in 3q25.31, and TBX5 in 12q24.21-exhibited concomitant
hypermethylation and decreased expression. The i(12p)-positive cells displayed
global hypomethylation of gene-poor regions on 12p, a footprint previously
associated with constitutional and acquired gains of whole chromosomes as well as
with X-chromosome inactivation in females. We hypothesize that this non-genic
hypomethylation is associated with chromatin processing that facilitates cellular
adaptation to excess genetic material.

PMID: 26890086  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Genet Sel Evol. 2016 Feb 16;48(1):14. doi: 10.1186/s12711-016-0190-4.

A multi-trait meta-analysis with imputed sequence variants reveals twelve QTL for
mammary gland morphology in Fleckvieh cattle.

Pausch H(1), Emmerling R(2), Schwarzenbacher H(3), Fries R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl fuer Tierzucht, Technische Universitaet Muenchen, 85354, Freising,
Germany. hubert.pausch@tierzucht.tum.de. (2)Institut fuer Tierzucht, Bayerische
Landesanstalt fuer Landwirtschaft, 85586, Poing, Germany.
reiner.emmerling@lfl.bayern.de. (3)ZuchtData EDV Dienstleistungen GmbH, 1200,
Vienna, Austria. schwarzenbacher@zuchtdata.at. (4)Lehrstuhl fuer Tierzucht,
Technische Universitaet Muenchen, 85354, Freising, Germany. ruedi.fries@tum.de.

BACKGROUND: The availability of whole-genome sequence data from key ancestors in 
bovine populations provides an exhaustive catalogue of polymorphic sites that
segregate within and across cattle breeds. Sequence variants identified from the 
sequenced genome of key ancestors can be imputed into animals that have been
genotyped using medium- and high-density genotyping arrays. Association analysis 
with imputed sequences, particularly when applied to multiple traits
simultaneously, is a very powerful approach to detect candidate causal variants
that underlie complex phenotypes.
RESULTS: We used whole-genome sequence data from 157 key ancestors of the German 
Fleckvieh cattle population to impute 20,561,798 sequence variants into 10,363
animals that had (partly imputed) genotypes based on 634,109 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). Rare variants were more frequent among the sequence-derived
than the array-derived genotypes. Association studies with imputed sequence
variants were performed using seven correlated udder conformation traits as
response variables. The calculation of an approximate multi-trait test statistic 
enabled us to detect 12 quantitative trait loci (QTL) (P < 2.97 × 10(-9)) that
affect different morphological features of the mammary gland. Among the tested
variants, the most significant associations were found for imputed sequence
variants at 11 QTL, whereas the top association signal was observed for an
array-derived variant at a QTL on bovine chromosome 14. Seven QTL were associated
with multiple phenotypes. Most QTL were located in non-coding regions of the
genome but in close proximity of candidate genes that could be involved in
mammary gland morphology (SP5, GC, NPFFR2, CRIM1, RXFP2, TBX5, RBM19 and ADAM12).
CONCLUSIONS: Using imputed sequence variants in association analyses allows the
detection of QTL at maximum resolution. Multi-trait approaches can reveal QTL
that are not detected in single-trait association studies. Most QTL for udder
conformation traits were located in non-coding regions of the genome, which
suggests that mutations in regulatory sequences are the major determinants of
variation in mammary gland morphology in cattle.

PMCID: PMC4756527
PMID: 26883850  [PubMed - in process]


11. Cell. 2016 Feb 25;164(5):999-1014. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.004. Epub 2016 Feb
11.

Complex Interdependence Regulates Heterotypic Transcription Factor Distribution
and Coordinates Cardiogenesis.

Luna-Zurita L(1), Stirnimann CU(2), Glatt S(2), Kaynak BL(1), Thomas S(3), Baudin
F(4), Samee MA(3), He D(1), Small EM(5), Mileikovsky M(6), Nagy A(7), Holloway
AK(8), Pollard KS(8), Müller CW(9), Bruneau BG(10).

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA;
Roddenberry Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (2)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European 
Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Gladstone Institute
of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (4)Structural and
Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117
Heidelberg, Germany; UJF-EMBL-CNRS UMI 3265, Unit of Virus Host-Cell
Interactions, 38042 Grenoble Cedex 9, France. (5)Aab Cardiovascular Research
Institute, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester,
NY 14642, USA. (6)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada. (7)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount
Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada; Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology and Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON 
M5S 1A8, Canada. (8)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco,
CA 94158, USA; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (9)Structural and
Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117
Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: cmueller@embl.de. (10)Gladstone
Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA; Roddenberry
Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San Francisco, CA 94158, 
USA; Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic address:
benoit.bruneau@gladstone.ucsf.edu.

Transcription factors (TFs) are thought to function with partners to achieve
specificity and precise quantitative outputs. In the developing heart,
heterotypic TF interactions, such as between the T-box TF TBX5 and the
homeodomain TF NKX2-5, have been proposed as a mechanism for human congenital
heart defects. We report extensive and complex interdependent genomic occupancy
of TBX5, NKX2-5, and the zinc finger TF GATA4 coordinately controlling cardiac
gene expression, differentiation, and morphogenesis. Interdependent binding
serves not only to co-regulate gene expression but also to prevent TFs from
distributing to ectopic loci and activate lineage-inappropriate genes. We define 
preferential motif arrangements for TBX5 and NKX2-5 cooperative binding sites,
supported at the atomic level by their co-crystal structure bound to DNA,
revealing a direct interaction between the two factors and induced DNA bending.
Complex interdependent binding mechanisms reveal tightly regulated TF genomic
distribution and define a combinatorial logic for heterotypic TF regulation of
differentiation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4769693 [Available on 2017-02-25]
PMID: 26875865  [PubMed - in process]


12. Dev Cell. 2016 Feb 8;36(3):262-75. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2016.01.009.

The Cardiac TBX5 Interactome Reveals a Chromatin Remodeling Network Essential for
Cardiac Septation.

Waldron L(1), Steimle JD(2), Greco TM(3), Gomez NC(4), Dorr KM(1), Kweon J(2),
Temple B(5), Yang XH(2), Wilczewski CM(1), Davis IJ(6), Cristea IM(3), Moskowitz 
IP(2), Conlon FL(7).

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina McAllister Heart Institute, UNC-Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Integrative Program for Biological & Genome Sciences,
UNC-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. (2)Departments of Pediatrics,
Pathology, and Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA. (4)Integrative Program for Biological & Genome Sciences, UNC-Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, UNC-Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. (5)R.L. Juliano Structural Bioinformatics Core,
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, UNC-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
27599, USA. (6)Department of Genetics, UNC-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA; Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, UNC-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
27599, USA. (7)University of North Carolina McAllister Heart Institute,
UNC-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Integrative Program for Biological &
Genome Sciences, UNC-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of
Genetics, UNC-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, UNC-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of
Biology, UNC-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic address:
frank_conlon@med.unc.edu.

Human mutations in the cardiac transcription factor gene TBX5 cause congenital
heart disease (CHD), although the underlying mechanism is unknown. We report
characterization of the endogenous TBX5 cardiac interactome and demonstrate that 
TBX5, long considered a transcriptional activator, interacts biochemically and
genetically with the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) repressor
complex. Incompatible gene programs are repressed by TBX5 in the developing
heart. CHD mis-sense mutations that disrupt the TBX5-NuRD interaction cause
depression of a subset of repressed genes. Furthermore, the TBX5-NuRD interaction
is required for heart development. Phylogenetic analysis showed that the
TBX5-NuRD interaction domain evolved during early diversification of vertebrates,
simultaneous with the evolution of cardiac septation. Collectively, this work
defines a TBX5-NuRD interaction essential to cardiac development and the
evolution of the mammalian heart, and when altered may contribute to human CHD.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26859351  [PubMed - in process]


13. Dev Cell. 2016 Feb 8;36(3):242-4. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2016.01.015.

TBX5 and NuRD Divide the Heart.

Boogerd CJ(1), Evans SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address:
cboogerd@ucsd.edu. (2)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Departments of Pharmacology and Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address: syevans@ucsd.edu.

In this issue of Developmental Cell, Waldron et al. (2016) identify an
interaction between a master regulator of heart development, TBX5, and the NuRD
complex and describe how mutations affecting the interaction may contribute to
congenital heart disease. Furthermore, these interactions may have contributed to
the evolution of cardiac septation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26859347  [PubMed - in process]


14. Genet Couns. 2015;26(4):401-7.

A PATIENT WITH PARTIAL CHROMOSOME 12q DUPLICATION AND 10q DELETION.

Saat H, Soysal Y, Kurtgoz S, Ergun MA, Percin EF.

Chromosomal deletions and/or duplications are relatively common cytogenetic
abnormalities. Clinical findings depend on pure or complex forms of the anomaly, 
the location and size. In those cases, using current analytical technologies
increases the possibility of discovering candidate genes that were not detected
by conventional karyotyping responsible for these features. Here, we report an
18-month-old girl with prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, secundum ASD
and PDA, facial dysmorphic features including frontal bossing, arched eyebrows,
hypertelorism, wide nasal bridge and chronic diarrhea. Chromosome analysis on the
peripheral leukocytes showed a 46,XX del(10)(q26.3),dup(12)(q24.11-q24.33) dn
karyotype. An array-CGH analysis was performed to understand which genes were
located on the deletion and duplication regions and what was their relationship
with the phenotype. Based on our analyses, the deletion of the CALY gene on
Chromosome 10q and the duplication of PTPN11 and TBX5 genes on chromosome 12q
were possibly relevant for the clinical findings with our patient.

PMID: 26852510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 29. pii: jbc.M115.698472. [Epub ahead of print]

A Hippo and Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor Autocrine Pathway in
Cholangiocarcinoma.

Rizvi S(1), Yamada D(1), Hirsova P(1), Bronk SF(1), Werneburg NW(1), Krishnan
A(1), Salim W(1), Zhang L(1), Trushina E(1), Truty MJ(1), Gores GJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, United States. (2)Mayo Clinic, United States
gores.gregory@mayo.edu.

Herein, we identify crosstalk between the Hippo and fibroblast growth factor
receptor (FGFR) oncogenic signaling pathways in cholangiocarcinoma (CCA).
Yes-associated protein (YAP) nuclear localization and upregulation of canonical
target genes was observed in CCA cell lines and a patient-derived xenograft
(PDX). Expression of FGFR 1, 2, and 4 was identified in human CCA cell lines and 
was driven, in part, by YAP coactivation of TBX5. In turn, FGFR signaling in a
cell line with minimal basal YAP expression induced its cellular protein
expression and nuclear localization. Treatment of YAP-positive CCA cell lines
with BGJ398, a pan-FGFR inhibitor, resulted in a decrease in YAP activation. FGFR
activation of YAP appears to be largely driven by FGF5 activation of FGFR2, as
siRNA silencing of this ligand or receptor, respectively, inhibits YAP nuclear
localization. BGJ398 treatment of YAP expressing cells induced cell death due to 
Mcl-1 depletion. In a YAP-associated mouse model of CCA, expression of FGFR 1, 2,
and 4 was also significantly increased. Accordingly, BGJ398 treatment was tumor
suppressive in this model and in a YAP-positive PDX model. These preclinical data
not only suggest that YAP and Hippo signaling pathways culminate in an Mcl-1
regulated tumor survival pathway, but also suggest nuclear YAP expression may be 
a biomarker for employing FGFR-directed therapy.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26826125  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 20;6:19197. doi: 10.1038/srep19197.

Irx3 is required for postnatal maturation of the mouse ventricular conduction
system.

Kim KH(1), Rosen A(2,)(3), Hussein SM(4,)(5), Puviindran V(1), Korogyi AS(2,)(3),
Chiarello C(2,)(3), Nagy A(4,)(6), Hui CC(1,)(7), Backx PH(2,)(3,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental &Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, ON M5G 0A4, Canada. (2)The Heart and Stroke Richard Lewar Centre of
Excellence, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E2, Canada. (3)Departments of
Physiology and Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada.
(4)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario
M5G 1X5, Canada. (5)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec Research Center
and Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Quebec City, QC G1V 4G2, Canada.
(6)Institute of Medical Science and Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5T 3H7, Canada. (7)Department of
Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada. (8)Peter 
Munk Cardiac Centre and Division of Cardiology, University Health Network,
Toronto ON.

The ventricular conduction system (VCS) orchestrates the harmonious contraction
in every heartbeat. Defects in the VCS are often associated with life-threatening
arrhythmias and also promote adverse remodeling in heart disease. We have
previously established that the Irx3 homeobox gene regulates rapid electrical
propagation in the VCS by modulating the transcription of gap junction proteins
Cx40 and Cx43. However, it is unknown whether other factors contribute to the
conduction defects observed in Irx3 knockout (Irx3(-/-)) mice. In this study, we 
show that during the early postnatal period, Irx3(-/-) mice develop morphological
defects in the VCS which are temporally dissociated from changes in gap junction 
expression. These morphological defects were accompanied with progressive changes
in the cardiac electrocardiogram including right bundle branch block. Hypoplastic
VCS was not associated with increased apoptosis of VCS cardiomyocytes but with a 
lack of recruitment and maturation of ventricular cardiomyocytes into the VCS.
Computational analysis followed by functional verification revealed that Irx3
promotes VCS-enriched transcripts targeted by Nkx2.5 and/or Tbx5. Altogether,
these results indicate that, in addition to ensuring the appropriate expression
of gap junctional channels in the VCS, Irx3 is necessary for the postnatal
maturation of the VCS, possibly via its interactions with Tbx5 and Nkx2.5.

PMCID: PMC4726432
PMID: 26786475  [PubMed - in process]


17. Cancer Med. 2016 Jan 18. doi: 10.1002/cam4.641. [Epub ahead of print]

The Barrett-associated variants at GDF7 and TBX5 also increase esophageal
adenocarcinoma risk.

Becker J(1,)(2), May A(3), Gerges C(4), Anders M(5,)(6), Schmidt C(7), Veits
L(8), Noder T(5), Mayershofer R(9), Kreuser N(10), Manner H(11), Venerito M(12), 
Hofer JH(13), Lyros O(10), Ahlbrand CJ(14), Arras M(14), Hofer S(14), Heinrichs
SK(1,)(2), Weise K(1,)(2), Hess T(1,)(2), Böhmer AC(1,)(2), Kosiol N(1,)(2),
Kiesslich R(11), Izbicki JR(15), Hölscher AH(7), Bollschweiler E(7),
Malfertheiner P(12), Lang H(14), Moehler M(16), Lorenz D(17), Ott K(18,)(19),
Schmidt T(19), Nöthen MM(1,)(2), Hackelsberger A(20), Schumacher B(4,)(21), Pech 
O(22), Vashist Y(15), Vieth M(8), Weismüller J(23), Knapp M(24), Neuhaus H(4),
Rösch T(5), Ell C(3), Gockel I(10), Schumacher J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (2)Department 
of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine II, Sana Klinikum, Offenbach, Germany. (4)Department of
Internal Medicine II, Evangelisches Krankenhaus, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Department of Interdisciplinary Endoscopy, University Hospital
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (6)Departments of Gastroenterology and
Interdisciplinary Endoscopy, Vivantes Wenckebach-Kinikum, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Department of General, Visceral and Cancer Surgery, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany. (8)Institute of Pathology, Klinikum Bayreuth, Bayreuth,
Germany. (9)Gastroenterologie am Burgweiher, Bonn, Germany. (10)Department of
Visceral Transplant, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital of
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (11)Department of Internal Medicine II, HSK Hospital, 
Wiesbaden, Germany. (12)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious
Diseases, Otto-von-Guericke University Hospital, Magdeburg, Germany. (13)Magen
Darm Zentrum Wiener Platz, Cologne, Germany. (14)Department of General, Visceral 
and Transplant Surgery, University Medical Center, University of Mainz, Mainz,
Germany. (15)Department of General, Visceral and Thoracic Surgery, University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.
(16)First Department of Internal Medicine, University Medical Center, University 
of Mainz, Mainz, Germany. (17)Departments of General and Visceral Surgery, Sana
Klinikum, Offenbach, Germany. (18)Department of General, Visceral and
Transplantation Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(19)Department of General, Visceral and Thorax Surgery, RoMed Klinikum Rosenheim,
Rosenheim, Germany. (20)Gastropraxis, Wiesbaden, Germany. (21)Departments of
Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology, Elisabeth Hospital, Essen, Germany.
(22)Departments of Gastroenterology and Interventional Endoscopy, St. John of God
Hospital, Regensburg, Germany. (23)Gastroenterologische Gemeinschaftspraxis,
Koblenz, Germany. (24)Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and
Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Barrett's esophagus (BE) and esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) represent two stages
within the esophagitis-metaplasia-dysplasia-adenocarcinoma sequence. Previously
genetic risk factors have been identified that confer risk to BE and EAC
development. However, to which extent the genetic variants confer risk to
different stages of the BE/EAC sequence remains mainly unknown. In this study we 
analyzed three most recently identified BE variants at the genes GDF7 (rs3072),
TBX5 (rs2701108), and ALDH1A2 (rs3784262) separately in BE and EAC samples in
order to determine their risk effects during BE/EAC sequence. Our data show that 
rs3072 at GDF7 and rs2701108 at TBX5 are also associated with EAC and conclude
that both loci confer disease risk also at later stages of the BE/EAC sequence.
In contrast, rs3784262 at ALDH1A2 was highly significantly associated with BE,
but showed no association with EAC. Our data do not provide evidence that the
ALDH1A2 locus confers equal risk in early and late stages of BE/EAC sequence.

© 2016 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26783083  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Dec;167(12):3192-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37359. Epub 2015
Sep 28.

A unique TBX5 microdeletion with microinsertion detected in patient with
Holt-Oram syndrome.

Morine M(1), Kohmoto T(2,)(3), Masuda K(2), Inagaki H(4), Watanabe M(2,)(3),
Naruto T(5), Kurahashi H(4), Maeda K(1), Imoto I(2).

Author information: 
(1)General Perinatal Medical Center, Shikoku Medical Center for Children and
Adults, Zentsuji, Japan. (2)Department of Human Genetics, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Tokushima University Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan. (3)Student Lab,
Tokushima University Faculty of Medicine, Tokushima, Japan. (4)Division of
Molecular Genetics, Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health
University, Toyoake, Japan. (5)Department of Stress Science, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Tokushima University Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is an autosomal dominant condition characterized by
upper limb and congenital heart defects and caused by numerous germline mutations
of TBX5 producing preterminal stop codons. Here, we report on a novel and unusual
heterozygous TBX5 microdeletion with microinsertion (microindel) mutation
(c.627delinsGTGACTCAGGAAACGCTTTCCTGA), which is predicted to synthesize a
truncated TBX5 protein, detected in a sporadic patient with clinical features of 
HOS prenatally diagnosed by ultrasonography. This uncommon and relatively large
inserted sequence contains sequences derived from nearby but not adjacent
templates on both sense and antisense strands, suggesting two possible models,
which require no repeat sequences, causing this complex microindel through the
bypass of large DNA adducts via an error-prone DNA polymerase-mediated
translesion synthesis. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26780237  [PubMed - in process]


19. Cardiovasc Res. 2016 Mar 1;109(3):442-50. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvw003. Epub 2016 Jan 
13.

TBX5 mutations contribute to early-onset atrial fibrillation in Chinese and
Caucasians.

Ma JF(1), Yang F(2), Mahida SN(3), Zhao L(2), Chen X(4), Zhang ML(3), Sun Z(5),
Yao Y(6), Zhang YX(2), Zheng GY(2), Dong J(2), Feng MJ(4), Zhang R(1), Sun J(1), 
Li S(1), Wang QS(1), Cao H(2), Benjamin EJ(7), Ellinor PT(8), Li YG(9), Tian
XL(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China. (2)Department of Human Population
Genetics and Beijing Key Laboratory of Cardiometabolic Molecular Medicine,
Institute of Molecular Medicine (IMM), Peking University, 5 Yiheyuan Rd., Beijing
100871, China. (3)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown, MA, USA. (4)Key Laboratory of Ningbo First Hospital and
Cardiovascular Center of Ningbo First Hospital, Ningbo University, 59 Liuting
St., Ningbo 315010, China. (5)Cardiovascular Department, PLA General Hospital, 28
Fuxing Rd, Beijing 100853, China. (6)Department of Cardiology, Beijing Anzhen
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing Institute of Heart, Lung and Blood 
Vessel Diseases, Beijing, China. (7)Department of Epidemiology, Boston University
School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute's and Boston University's Framingham Heart Study, Framingham, MA, USA
Preventive Medicine Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA Cardiology Section, Department of Medicine, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. (8)Cardiovascular Research
Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA Cardiac Arrhythmia
Service, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (9)Department of
Cardiology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200092, China tianxiaoli@pku.edu.cn drliyigang@outlook.com.
(10)Department of Human Population Genetics and Beijing Key Laboratory of
Cardiometabolic Molecular Medicine, Institute of Molecular Medicine (IMM), Peking
University, 5 Yiheyuan Rd., Beijing 100871, China tianxiaoli@pku.edu.cn
drliyigang@outlook.com.

AIMS: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a common arrhythmia with an important heritable
aspect. The genetic factors underlying AF have not been fully elucidated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We screened six candidate genes (CAV1, KCNJ2, KCNQ1, NKX2.5,
PITX2, and TBX5) for novel mutations in 139 patients of Chinese descent with
early-onset AF and 576 controls. Four missense TBX5 mutations, p.R355C, p.Q376R, 
p.A428S, and p.S372L, were identified in evolutionarily conserved regions. We did
not find any mutations in CAV1, KCNJ2, KCNQ1, NKX2.5, and PITX2. These mutations 
increased the expression of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and connexin-40
(CX40) in the primarily cultured rat atrial myocytes but did not alter the
expression of cardiac structural genes, atrial myosin heavy chain-a (MHC-a) and
myosin light chain-2a (MLC-2a). Overexpression of p.R355C developed an atrial
arrhythmia suggestive of paroxysmal AF in the zebrafish model. To replicate our
findings, we screened TBX5 in 527 early-onset AF cases from the Massachusetts
General Hospital AF study. A novel TBX5 deletion (<U+0394>Asp118, p.D118del) was
identified, while no TBX5 mutations were identified in 1176 control subjects.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide both genetic and functional evidence to support
the contribution of TBX5 gene in the pathogenesis of AF. The potential mechanism 
of arrhythmia may be due in part to the disturbed expression of ANP and CX40.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2016. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4752043 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26762269  [PubMed - in process]


20. Cell Reprogram. 2016 Jan 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Hypoxia Enhances Direct Reprogramming of Mouse Fibroblasts to Cardiomyocyte-Like 
Cells.

Wang Y(1), Shi S(1), Liu H(1), Meng L(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Histology and EmbryologyHarbin Medical University , Harbin,
China, 150081 . (2)2 University Hospital Fertility Center, Case Western Reserve
University , Cleveland, OH, USA, 44122 .

Recent work has shown that mouse and human fibroblasts can be reprogrammed to
cardiomyocyte-like cells with a combination of transcription factors. Current
research has focused on improving the efficiency and mechanisms for fibroblast
reprogramming. Previously, it has been reported that hypoxia enhances fibroblast 
cell reprogramming to pluripotent stem cells. In this study, we observed that 6<U+2009>h
of hypoxic conditions (2% oxygen) on newborn mouse dermal fibroblasts can improve
the efficiency of reprogramming to cardiomyocyte-like cells. Expression of
cardiac-related genes and proteins increased at 4 weeks after transfer of three
transcription factors (Gata4/Mef2c/Tbx5 [GMT]). However, beating cardiomyocyte
cells were not detected. The epigenetic mechanism of hypoxia-induced fibroblast
reprogramming to cardiomyocyte cells requires further study.

PMID: 26757100  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Jan 8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37550. [Epub ahead of print]

Novel copy number variants and major limb reduction malformation: Report of three
cases.

Shamseldin HE(1), Anazi S(1), Wakil SM(1), Faqeih E(2), El Khashab HY(3,)(4),
Salih MA(3), Al-Qattan MM(5), Hashem M(1), Alsedairy H(1), Alkuraya FS(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (2)Department of Pediatric Specialties, Children's
Hospital, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital, Ain Shams University, Cairo,
Egypt. (5)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, King Saud University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (6)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of
Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Limb reduction malformations are highly heterogeneous in their clinical
presentation and so, predicting the underlying mutation on a clinical basis can
be challenging. Molecular karyotyping is a powerful genomic tool that has quickly
become the mainstay for the study of children with malformation syndromes. We
describe three patients with major limb reduction anomalies in whom pathogenic
copy number variants were identified on molecular karyotyping. These include a
patient with hypoplastic phalanges and absent hallux bilaterally with de novo
deletion of 11.9<U+2009>Mb on 7p21.1-22.1 spanning 63 genes including RAC1, another
patient with severe Holt-Oram syndrome and a large de novo deletion 2.2<U+2009>Mb on
12q24.13-24.21 spanning 20 genes including TBX3 and TBX5, and a third patient
with acheiropodia who had a nullizygous deletion of 102<U+2009>kb on 7q36.3 spanning
LMBR1. We discuss the potential of these novel genomic rearrangements to improve 
our understanding of limb development in humans. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26749485  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Mar 15;25(6):1140-51. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv636. Epub 2016 Jan 
6.

Gene network and familial analyses uncover a gene network involving
Tbx5/Osr1/Pcsk6 interaction in the second heart field for atrial septation.

Zhang KK(1), Xiang M(2), Zhou L(3), Liu J(4), Curry N(4), Heine Suñer D(5),
Garcia-Pavia P(6), Zhang X(7), Wang Q(8), Xie L(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, ND INBRE
Bioinformatics Core, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND 58202, USA.
(2)Department of Basic Sciences, School of Medicine and Health Sciences and ND
INBRE Bioinformatics Core, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND 58202,
USA. (3)Department of Basic Sciences, School of Medicine and Health Sciences and 
Department of Gerontology, Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, China. (4)Department of Basic Sciences, School
of Medicine and Health Sciences and. (5)Laboratori de Genetica Molecular,
Hospital Son Espases, Palma de Mallorca 07010, Spain. (6)Department of
Cardiology, Heart Failure and Inherited Cardiac Diseases Unit, Hospital
Universitario Puerta de Hierro Majadahonda, Manuel de Falla, 1, 28222
Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain. (7)Nemours Research Institute, Nemours Children's
hospital, Orlando, FL 32827, USA. (8)Department of Molecular Cardiology, Center
for Cardiovascular Genetics, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA, Department of Molecular Medicine and Department of
Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
44106, USA and. (9)Department of Basic Sciences, School of Medicine and Health
Sciences and Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Texas A&M University,
Cater-Mattil Hall Rm 217B, TAMU 2253, College Station, TX 77843, USA
linglin.xie@tamu.edu.

Atrial septal defects (ASDs) are a common human congenital heart disease (CHD)
that can be induced by genetic abnormalities. Our previous studies have
demonstrated a genetic interaction between Tbx5 and Osr1 in the second heart
field (SHF) for atrial septation. We hypothesized that Osr1 and Tbx5 share a
common signaling networking and downstream targets for atrial septation. To
identify this molecular networks, we acquired the RNA-Seq transcriptome data from
the posterior SHF of wild-type, Tbx5(+/) (-), Osr1(+/-), Osr1(-/-) and
Tbx5(+/-)/Osr1(+/-) mutant embryos. Gene set analysis was used to identify the
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways that were affected by the doses 
of Tbx5 and Osr1. A gene network module involving Tbx5 and Osr1 was identified
using a non-parametric distance metric, distance correlation. A subset of 10 core
genes and gene-gene interactions in the network module were validated by gene
expression alterations in posterior second heart field (pSHF) of Tbx5 and Osr1
transgenic mouse embryos, a time-course gene expression change during P19CL6 cell
differentiation. Pcsk6 was one of the network module genes that were linked to
Tbx5. We validated the direct regulation of Tbx5 on Pcsk6 using
immunohistochemical staining of pSHF, ChIP-quantitative polymerase chain reaction
and luciferase reporter assay. Importantly, we identified Pcsk6 as a novel gene
associated with ASD via a human genotyping study of an ASD family. In summary,
our study implicated a gene network involving Tbx5, Osr1 and Pcsk6 interaction in
SHF for atrial septation, providing a molecular framework for understanding the
role of Tbx5 in CHD ontogeny.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4764195 [Available on 2017-03-15]
PMID: 26744331  [PubMed - in process]


23. Tissue Eng Part C Methods. 2016 Jan 7. [Epub ahead of print]

Three-Dimensional Cultures of Human Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue-Derived
Progenitor Cells Based on RAD16-I Self-Assembling Peptide.

Castells-Sala C(1), Recha-Sancho L(1), Llucià-Valldeperas A(2), Soler-Botija
C(2), Bayes-Genis A(2), Semino CE(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Bioengineering, IQS-School of Engineering, Ramon Llull
University , Barcelona, Spain . (2)2 Heart Failure and Cardiac Regeneration
(ICREC) Research Program, Health Sciences Research Institute of the Germans Trias
i Pujol Foundation (IGTP), Cardiology Service, Germans Trias i Pujol University
Hospital , Badalona, Spain .

The prolonged ischemia after myocardial infarction leads to a high degree of
cardiomyocyte death, which leads to a reduction of normal heart function.
Valuable lessons can be learnt from human myocardium and stem cell biology that
would help scientists to develop new, effective, safe, and affordable
regenerative therapies. In vivo models are of high interest, but their high
complexity limits the possibility to analyze specific factors. In vitro models
permit analyzing specific factors of tissue physiology or pathophysiology
providing accurate approaches that may guide the creation of three-dimensional
(3D) engineered cell aggregates. These systems provide a simplistic way to
examine individual factors as compared to animal models, and better mimic the
reality than 2D models. In this sense, the objective of this work is to better
understand the behavior of a human mesenchymal stem cell-like cell line
(subcutaneous adipose tissue-derived progenitor cells [subATDPCs], susceptible to
be used in cell therapies) when they are embedded in the 3D environment provided 
by RAD16-I self-assembling peptide (SAP). Specifically, we study the effect in
subATDPCs viability, morphology, proliferation, and protein and gene expression
of matrix composition (i.e., RGD motif and heparin polysaccharide modifications) 
in RAD16-I matrix under different media conditions. Results demonstrated that the
3D environment provided by RAD16-I SAP is able to maintain subATDPCs in this new 
milieu and at the same time its cardiac commitment. Additionally, it has been
observed that chemical induction can induce upregulation of cardiac markers, such
as TBX5, MEF2C, ACTN1, and GJA1. Therefore, we propose this 3D model as a
promising platform to analyze the effect of specific cues that can help improve
cell performance for future cell therapy.

PMID: 26741987  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Dec 29;15:50. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0100-y.

A co-culture assay of embryonic zebrafish hearts to assess migration of
epicardial cells in vitro.

Yue MS(1), Plavicki JS(2), Li XY(3), Peterson RE(4,)(5), Heideman W(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center, University of Wisconsin, 1300
University Avenue, Madison, WI, 53706, USA. msyue@wisc.edu. (2)Pharmaceutical
Sciences Division, School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin, 777 Highland
Avenue, Madison, WI, 53705, USA. plavicki@wisc.edu. (3)College of Life Science,
Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710062, China. lixinyi@snnu.edu.cn.
(4)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center, University of Wisconsin, 1300
University Avenue, Madison, WI, 53706, USA. richard.peterson@wisc.edu.
(5)Pharmaceutical Sciences Division, School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin,
777 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI, 53705, USA. richard.peterson@wisc.edu.
(6)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center, University of Wisconsin, 1300
University Avenue, Madison, WI, 53706, USA. wheidema@wisc.edu. (7)Pharmaceutical 
Sciences Division, School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin, 777 Highland
Avenue, Madison, WI, 53705, USA. wheidema@wisc.edu.

BACKGROUND: The vertebrate heart consists of three cell layers: the innermost
endothelium, the contractile myocardium and the outermost epicardium. The
epicardium is vital for heart development and function, and forms from epicardial
progenitor cells (EPCs), which migrate to the myocardium during early
development. Disruptions in EPC migration and epicardium formation result in a
number of cardiac malformations, many of which resemble congenital heart diseases
in humans. Hence, it is important to understand the mechanisms that influence EPC
migration and spreading in the developing heart. In vitro approaches heretofore
have been limited to monolayer epicardial cell cultures, which may not fully
capture the complex interactions that can occur between epicardial and myocardial
cells in vivo.
RESULTS: Here we describe a novel in vitro co-culture assay for assessing
epicardial cell migration using embryonic zebrafish hearts. We isolated donor
hearts from embryonic zebrafish carrying an epicardial-specific fluorescent
reporter after epicardial cells were present on the heart. These were co-cultured
with recipient hearts expressing a myocardial-specific fluorescent reporter,
isolated prior to EPC migration. Using this method, we can clearly visualize the 
movement of epicardial cells from the donor heart onto the myocardium of the
recipient heart. We demonstrate the utility of this method by showing that
epicardial cell migration is significantly delayed or absent when myocardial
cells lack contractility and when myocardial cells are deficient in tbx5
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: We present a method to assess the migration of epicardial cells in
an in vitro assay, wherein the migration of epicardial cells from a donor heart
onto the myocardium of a recipient heart in co-culture is monitored and scored.
The donor and recipient hearts can be independently manipulated, using either
genetic tools or pharmacological agents. This allows flexibility in experimental 
design for determining the role that target genes/signaling pathways in specific 
cell types may have on epicardial cell migration.

PMCID: PMC4696273
PMID: 26715205  [PubMed - in process]


25. Genom Data. 2015 Sep 16;6:199-201. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.09.015. eCollection 
2015.

Generating and evaluating a ranked candidate gene list for potential vertebrate
heart field regulators.

Musso G(1), Mosimann C(2), Panáková D(3), Burger A(4), Zhou Y(5), Zon LI(5),
MacRae CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA 
; Stem Cell Program, Boston Children's Hospital, MA 02115, USA ; Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA ; Institute of Molecular Life
Sciences (IMLS), University of Zürich, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland. (3)Max-Delbrück 
Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), 13125 Berlin, Buch, Germany. (4)Institute of
Molecular Life Sciences (IMLS), University of Zürich, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA ; Stem Cell Program,
Boston Children's Hospital, MA 02115, USA ; Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The vertebrate heart develops from two distinct lineages of cardiomyocytes that
arise from the first and second heart fields (FHF and SHF, respectively). The FHF
forms the primitive heart tube, while adding cells from the SHF allows elongation
at both poles of the tube. Initially seen as an exclusive characteristic of
higher vertebrates, recent work has demonstrated the presence of a distinct FHF
and SHF in lower vertebrates, including zebrafish. We found that key
transcription factors that regulate septation and chamber formation in higher
vertebrates, including Tbx5 and Pitx2, influence relative FHF and SHF
contributions to the zebrafish heart tube. To identify molecular modulators of
heart field migration, we used microarray-based expression profiling following
inhibition of tbx5a and pitx2ab in embryonic zebrafish (Mosimann & Panakova, et
al, 2015; GSE70750). Here, we describe in more detail the procedure used to
process, prioritize, and analyze the expression data for functional enrichment.

PMCID: PMC4664750
PMID: 26697374  [PubMed]


26. Stem Cells Int. 2016;2016:4969430. doi: 10.1155/2016/4969430. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

Cardiac Niche Influences the Direct Reprogramming of Canine Fibroblasts into
Cardiomyocyte-Like Cells.

Palazzolo G(1), Quattrocelli M(2), Toelen J(3), Dominici R(4), Anastasia L(5),
Tettamenti G(6), Barthelemy I(7), Blot S(7), Gijsbers R(8), Cassano M(9),
Sampaolesi M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Cardiomyology Laboratory, Stem Cell Biology and Embryology Unit,
Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49 O&N4 Bus
814, 3000 Leuven, Belgium ; Laboratory of Stem Cells for Tissue Engineering,
IRCCS, San Donato Hospital, San Donato, Milan, Italy. (2)Translational
Cardiomyology Laboratory, Stem Cell Biology and Embryology Unit, Department of
Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49 O&N4 Bus 814, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium. (3)Organ Systems Development and Regeneration Unit, Department of
Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49 O&N4 Bus 814, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium. (4)Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry, Public Health Corporation of
Legnano, Magenta Hospital, 20013 Magenta, Italy. (5)Laboratory of Stem Cells for 
Tissue Engineering, IRCCS, San Donato Hospital, San Donato, Milan, Italy ;
Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milan, Segrate,
Milan, Italy. (6)Laboratory of Stem Cells for Tissue Engineering, IRCCS, San
Donato Hospital, San Donato, Milan, Italy. (7)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie, Ecole
Nationale Vétérinaire d'Alfort, 94704 Maisons-Alfort, France. (8)Laboratory of
Molecular Virology and Gene Therapy, Department of Pharmaceutical and
Pharmacological Sciences and Leuven Viral Vector Core, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. (9)School of Life Sciences, EPFL, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(10)Translational Cardiomyology Laboratory, Stem Cell Biology and Embryology
Unit, Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49 O&N4
Bus 814, 3000 Leuven, Belgium ; Human Anatomy Unit, Department of Public Health, 
Experimental and Forensic Medicine, University of Pavia, Via Forlanini 8, 27100
Pavia, Italy.

The Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies are caused by mutation of dystrophin
gene and primarily affect skeletal and cardiac muscles. Cardiac involvement in
dystrophic GRMD dogs has been demonstrated by electrocardiographic studies with
the onset of a progressive cardiomyopathy similar to the cardiac disease in DMD
patients. In this respect, GRMD is a useful model to explore cardiac and skeletal
muscle pathogenesis and for developing new therapeutic protocols. Here we
describe a protocol to convert GRMD canine fibroblasts isolated from heart and
skin into induced cardiac-like myocytes (ciCLMs). We used a mix of transcription 
factors (GATA4, HAND2, TBX5, and MEF2C), known to be able to differentiate mouse 
and human somatic cells into ciCLMs. Exogenous gene expression was obtained using
four lentiviral vectors carrying transcription factor genes and different
resistance genes. Our data demonstrate a direct switch from fibroblast into
ciCLMs with no activation of early cardiac genes. ciCLMs were unable to contract 
spontaneously, suggesting, differently from mouse and human cells, an incomplete 
differentiation process. However, when transplanted in neonatal hearts of
SCID/Beige mice, ciCLMs participate in cardiac myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4670879
PMID: 26681949  [PubMed]


27. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 14;5:18240. doi: 10.1038/srep18240.

MicroRNA 19a replacement partially rescues fin and cardiac defects in zebrafish
model of Holt Oram syndrome.

Chiavacci E(1), D'Aurizio R(2), Guzzolino E(3), Russo F(2,)(4), Baumgart M(5),
Groth M(5), Mariani L(1), D'Onofrio M(6), Arisi I(6), Pellegrini M(2), Cellerino 
A(7), Cremisi F(7), Pitto L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Physiology, National Research Council, via Moruzzi 1,
56124 Pisa, Italy. (2)Laboratory of Integrative Systems Medicine (LISM),
Institute of Informatics andTelematics (IIT) and Institute of Clinical Physiology
(IFC), (CNR), Pisa, Italy. (3)Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore
Sant'Anna, Piazza Martiri della Libertà 33, 56127 Pisa, Italy. (4)Department of
Computer Science, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (5)Leibniz Institute for Age
Research - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Beutenbergstr. 11, 07745 Jena, Germany.
(6)Genomics Facility, European Brain Research Institute, Via del Fosso di Fiorano
64 00143 Roma, Italy. (7)Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa, Piazza dei Cavalieri
7, 56100 Pisa, Italy.

Holt-Oram Syndrome (HOS) is an autosomal dominant heart-hand syndrome caused by
mutations in the TBX5 gene, a transcription factor capable of regulating hundreds
of cardiac-specific genes through complex transcriptional networks. Here we show 
that, in zebrafish, modulation of a single miRNA is sufficient to rescue the
morphogenetic defects generated by HOS. The analysis of miRNA-seq profiling
revealed a decreased expression of miR-19a in Tbx5-depleted zebrafish embryos
compared to the wild type. We revealed that the transcription of the miR-17-92
cluster, which harbors miR-19a, is induced by Tbx5 and that a defined dosage of
miR-19a is essential for the correct development of the heart. Importantly, we
highlighted that miR-19a replacement is able to rescue cardiac and pectoral fin
defects and to increase the viability of HOS zebrafish embryos. We further
observed that miR-19a replacement shifts the global gene expression profile of
HOS-like zebrafish embryos towards the wild type condition, confirming the
ability of miR-19a to rescue the Tbx5 phenotype. In conclusion our data
demonstrate the importance of Tbx5/miR-19a regulatory circuit in heart
development and provide a proof of principle that morphogenetic defects
associated with HOS can be rescued by transient miRNA modulation.

PMCID: PMC4677400
PMID: 26657204  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Vis Exp. 2015 Nov 13;(105). doi: 10.3791/53426.

Improved Generation of Induced Cardiomyocytes Using a Polycistronic Construct
Expressing Optimal Ratio of Gata4, Mef2c and Tbx5.

Wang L(1), Liu Z(1), Yin C(1), Zhou Y(1), Liu J(1), Qian L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, McAllister Heart Institute,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. (2)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, McAllister Heart Institute, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill; li_qian@med.unc.edu.

Direct conversion of cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) into induced cardiomyocytes (iCMs)
holds great potential for regenerative medicine by offering alternative
strategies for treatment of heart disease. This conversion has been achieved by
forced expression of defined factors such as Gata4 (G), Mef2c (M) and Tbx5 (T).
Traditionally, iCMs are generated by a cocktail of viruses expressing these
individual factors. However, reprogramming efficiency is relatively low and most 
of the in vitro G,M,T-transduced fibroblasts do not become fully reprogrammed,
making it difficult to study the reprogramming mechanisms. We recently have shown
that the stoichiometry of G,M,T is crucial for efficient iCM reprogramming. An
optimal stoichiometry of G,M,T with relative high level of M and low levels of G 
and T achieved by using our polycistronic MGT vector (hereafter referred to as
MGT) significantly increased reprogramming efficiency and improved iCM quality in
vitro. Here we provide a detailed description of the methodology used to generate
iCMs with MGT construct from cardiac fibroblasts. Isolation of cardiac
fibroblasts, generation of virus for reprogramming and evaluation of the
reprogramming process are also included to provide a platform for efficient and
reproducible generation of iCMs.

PMID: 26649751  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 1;14(4):15471-81. doi: 10.4238/2015.November.30.25.

Quantitative candidate gene association studies of metabolic traits in Han
Chinese type 2 diabetes patients.

Wei FJ(1), Cai CY(1), Yu P(1), Lv J(1), Ling C(1), Shi WT(1), Jiao HX(1), Chang
BC(2), Yang FH(1), Tian Y(1), Li MS(1), Wang YH(1), Zou L(1), Shi JM(1), Chen
LM(2), Li WD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China. (2)Metabolic Diseases Hospital, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China. (3)Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin, China liweidong98@tmu.edu.cn.

Recent genome-wide association studies have identified many loci associated with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), hyperuricemia, and obesity in various ethnic
populations. However, quantitative traits have been less well investigated in Han
Chinese T2DM populations. We investigated the association between candidate gene 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and metabolic syndrome-related
quantitative traits in Han Chinese T2DM subjects. Unrelated Han Chinese T2DM
patients (1975) were recruited. Eighty-six SNPs were genotyped and tested for
association with quantitative traits including lipid profiles, blood pressure,
body mass index (BMI), serum uric acid (SUA), glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), plasma
glucose [fasting plasma glucose (FPG)], plasma glucose 120 min post-OGTT (P2PG;
OGTT = oral glucose tolerance test), and insulin resistance-related traits. We
found that CAMTA1, ABI2, VHL, KAT2B, PKHD1, ESR1, TOX, SLC30A8, SFI1, and MYH9
polymorphisms were associated with HbA1c, FPG, and/or P2PG; GCK, HHEX, TCF7L2,
KCNQ1, and TBX5 polymorphisms were associated with insulin resistance-related
traits; ABCG2, SLC2A9, and PKHD1 polymorphisms were associated with SUA; CAMTA1, 
VHL, KAT2B, PON1, NUB1, SLITRK5, SMAD3, FTO, FANCA, and PCSK2 polymorphisms were 
associated with blood lipid traits; CAMTA1, SPAG16, TOX, KCNQ1, ACACB, and MYH9
polymorphisms were associated with blood pressure; and UBE2E3, SPAG16, SLC2A9,
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2, SMAD3, and PNPLA3 polymorphisms were associated with
BMI (all P values <0.05). Some of the candidate genes were associated with
metabolic and anthropometric traits in T2DM in Han Chinese. Although none of
these associations reached genome-wide significance (P < 5 x 10(-8)), genes and
loci identified in this study are worthy of further replication and
investigation.

PMID: 26634513  [PubMed - in process]


30. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Dec 8;5(6):1128-42. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.10.019.
Epub 2015 Nov 25.

Fibroblast Growth Factors and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Promote Cardiac 
Reprogramming under Defined Conditions.

Yamakawa H(1), Muraoka N(1), Miyamoto K(1), Sadahiro T(1), Isomi M(1), Haginiwa
S(1), Kojima H(1), Umei T(1), Akiyama M(1), Kuishi Y(1), Kurokawa J(2), Furukawa 
T(2), Fukuda K(1), Ieda M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, 
Japan. (2)Department of Bio-Informational Pharmacology, Medical Research
Institute, Tokyo Medical Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8510, Japan. (3)Department of Cardiology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; JST, CREST, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, 
Japan. Electronic address: mieda@z8.keio.jp.

Fibroblasts can be directly reprogrammed into cardiomyocyte-like cells (iCMs) by 
overexpression of cardiac transcription factors, including Gata4, Mef2c, and
Tbx5; however, this process is inefficient under serum-based culture conditions, 
in which conversion of partially reprogrammed cells into fully reprogrammed
functional iCMs has been a major hurdle. Here, we report that a combination of
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 2, FGF10, and vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), termed FFV, promoted cardiac reprogramming under defined serum-free
conditions, increasing spontaneously beating iCMs by 100-fold compared with those
under conventional serum-based conditions. Mechanistically, FFV activated
multiple cardiac transcriptional regulators and converted partially reprogrammed 
cells into functional iCMs through the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and
phosphoinositol 3-kinase/AKT pathways. Moreover, FFV enabled cardiac
reprogramming with only Mef2c and Tbx5 through the induction of cardiac
reprogramming factors, including Gata4. Thus, defined culture conditions promoted
the quality of cardiac reprogramming, and this finding provides new insight into 
the mechanism of cardiac reprogramming.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4682292
PMID: 26626177  [PubMed - in process]


31. Oncol Lett. 2015 Oct;10(4):2021-2026. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

High expression level of T-box transcription factor 5 predicts unfavorable
survival in stage I and II gastric adenocarcinoma.

Zheng Y(1), Li YF(2), Wang W(2), Chen YM(2), Wang DD(3), Zhao JJ(2), Pan QZ(2),
Jiang SS(2), Zhang XF(2), Yuan SQ(2), Qiu HB(2), Huang CY(2), Zhao BW(2), Zhou
ZW(2), Xia JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510060, P.R. China 
; Department of Thoracic Surgery, Henan Cancer Hospital, The Affiliated Cancer
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450008, P.R. China. (2)Sun
Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510060, P.R. China. (3)Sun
Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510060, P.R. China ;
National Laboratory for Bio-Drugs of Ministry of Health, Provincial Laboratory
for Modern Medicine and Technology of Shandong, Research Center for Medicinal
Biotechnology, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan, Shandong 250062, P.R.
China.

The expression of T-box transcription factor 5 (TBX5) has previously been
observed in human cancer. The aim of the present study was to investigate TBX5
expression and its potential clinical significance in gastric cancer (GC). Using 
reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction, the TBX5 mRNA
expression levels in 30 pairs of surgically resected healthy gastric tissues and 
early stage (stages I and II) GC tissues were evaluated. The TBX5 mRNA expression
levels were increased in GC stage I and II tumor tissues (P=0.01, n=30) compared 
with the matched adjacent non-tumor tissue. However, no significant difference
was observed in TBX5 mRNA expression levels in matched adjacent non-tumor tissue 
compared with the tumor tissue from stage III and IV GC samples (P=0.318, n=30). 
Immunohistochemical analysis for TBX5 expression was performed on 161
paraffin-embedded stage I and II GC tissue blocks. Statistical analysis was
performed to evaluate the associations between TBX5 expression,
clinicopathological factors and prognosis. Patients with stage I and II GC and
tumors with high TBX5 expression levels presented poor overall survival (OS) rate
(P=0.024). The Cox proportional hazards model analysis demonstrated that TBX5
expression was an independent risk factor (P=0.017). The present study indicates 
that high expression of TBX5 is associated with unfavorable OS rates in patients 
with stage I and II GC. In conclusion, the expression of TBX5 may be a valuable
biomarker for the selection of cases of high-risk stage I and II GC.

PMCID: PMC4579827
PMID: 26622790  [PubMed]


32. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2015 Dec;4(12):1415-24. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2015-0136. Epub 
2015 Nov 12.

Generation of Functional Human Cardiac Progenitor Cells by High-Efficiency
Protein Transduction.

Li XH(1), Li Q(2), Jiang L(3), Deng C(3), Liu Z(3), Fu Y(3), Zhang M(3), Tan
H(3), Feng Y(3), Shan Z(3), Wang J(4), Yu XY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Cardiovascular Institute of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology Department, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, Michigan, USA. (2)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, Wayne
State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, USA. (3)Guangdong
Cardiovascular Institute of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of
Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (4)Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology Department, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
Michigan, USA yuxycn@aliyun.com jjwang@med.wayne.edu. (5)Guangdong Cardiovascular
Institute of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences,
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China
yuxycn@aliyun.com jjwang@med.wayne.edu.

The reprogramming of fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells raises the
possibility that somatic cells could be directly reprogrammed to cardiac
progenitor cells (CPCs). The present study aimed to assess highly efficient
protein-based approaches to reduce or eliminate the genetic manipulations to
generate CPCs for cardiac regeneration therapy. A combination of
QQ-reagent-modified Gata4, Hand2, Mef2c, and Tbx5 and three cytokines rapidly and
efficiently reprogrammed human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs) into CPCs. This
reprogramming process enriched trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4, monoacetylated 
histone H3 lysine 9, and Baf60c at the Nkx2.5 cardiac enhancer region by the
chromatin immunoprecipitation quantitative polymerase chain reaction assay.
Protein-induced CPCs transplanted into rat hearts after myocardial infarction
improved cardiac function, and this was related to differentiation into
cardiomyocyte-like cells. These findings demonstrate that the highly efficient
protein-transduction method can directly reprogram HDFs into CPCs. This protein
reprogramming strategy lays the foundation for future refinements both in vitro
and in vivo and might provide a source of CPCs for regenerative
approaches.SIGNIFICANCE: The findings from the present study have demonstrated an
efficient protein-transduction method of directly reprogramming fibroblasts into 
cardiac progenitor cells. These results have great potential in cell-based
therapy for cardiovascular diseases.

©AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4675512 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26564862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Development. 2015 Dec 15;142(24):4329-39. doi: 10.1242/dev.124750. Epub 2015 Nov 
2.

Asymmetric cell convergence-driven zebrafish fin bud initiation and pre-pattern
requires Tbx5a control of a mesenchymal Fgf signal.

Mao Q(1), Stinnett HK(2), Ho RK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Development, Regeneration and Stem Cell Biology, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (2)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (3)Department of Organismal
Biology and Anatomy, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
rkh@uchicago.edu.

Tbx5 plays a pivotal role in vertebrate forelimb initiation, and loss-of-function
experiments result in deformed or absent forelimbs in all taxa studied to date.
Combining single-cell fate mapping and three-dimensional cell tracking in the
zebrafish, we describe a Tbx5a-dependent cell convergence pattern that is both
asymmetric and topological within the fin-field lateral plate mesoderm during
early fin bud initiation. We further demonstrate that a mesodermal Fgf24
convergence cue controlled by Tbx5a underlies this asymmetric convergent
motility. Partial reduction in Tbx5a or Fgf24 levels disrupts the normal
fin-field cell motility gradient and results in anteriorly biased perturbations
of fin-field cell convergence and truncations in the pectoral fin skeleton,
resembling aspects of the forelimb skeletal defects that define individuals with 
Holt-Oram syndrome. This study provides a quantitative reference model for
fin-field cell motility during vertebrate fin bud initiation and suggests that a 
pre-pattern of anteroposterior fate specification is already present in the
fin-field before or during migration because perturbations to these early cell
movements result in the alteration of specific fates.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4689218 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 26525676  [PubMed - in process]


34. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Oct 29;6:e1953. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.255.

miR-300 mediates Bmi1 function and regulates differentiation in primitive cardiac
progenitors.

Cruz FM(1), Tomé M(1,)(2), Bernal JA(1), Bernad A(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Development and Repair, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain. (2)Department of
Immunology and Oncology, Spanish National Center for Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC),
Campus Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

B lymphoma Mo-MLV insertion region 1 (Bmi1) is a polycomb-family transcriptional 
factor critical for self-renewal in many adult stem cells and human neoplasia. We
sought to identify microRNAs regulated by Bmi1 that could play a role in
multipotent cardiac progenitor cell (CPC) decisions. We found that miR-300, a
poorly characterized microRNA mapping in the Dlk1-Dio3 microRNA cluster, was
positively regulated by Bmi1 in CPCs. Forced expression of miR-300 in CPCs
promoted an improved stemness signature with a significant increase in Oct4
levels, a reduction in senescence progression and an enhanced proliferative
status via p19 activation and inhibition of p16 accumulation. Endothelial and
cardiogenic differentiation were clearly compromised by sustained miR-300
expression. Additionally, RNA and protein analysis revealed a significant
reduction in key cardiac transcription factors, including Nkx2.5 and Tbx5.
Collectively, these results suggest that some functions attributed to Bmi1 are
due to induction of miR-300, which decreases the cardiogenic differentiation
potential of multipotent CPCs in vitro and promotes self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC4632286
PMID: 26512961  [PubMed - in process]


35. J Hum Genet. 2016 Feb;61(2):157-62. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.126. Epub 2015 Oct 22.

Genetic mutation analysis in Japanese patients with non-syndromic congenital
heart disease.

Yoshida A(1,)(2), Morisaki H(1,)(2,)(3), Nakaji M(1,)(3), Kitano M(4), Kim KS(5),
Sagawa K(6), Ishikawa S(6), Satokata I(7), Mitani Y(8), Kato H(5), Hamaoka K(9), 
Echigo S(4), Shiraishi I(4), Morisaki T(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Genetics, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular
Center Research Institute, Suita, Japan. (2)Department of Medical Genetics,
National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan. (3)Department of
Molecular Pathophysiology, Osaka University Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Suita, Japan. (4)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, National Cerebral 
and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan. (5)Division of Cardiology, National
Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Pediatric
Cardiology, Fukuoka Children's Hospital Medical Center, Fukuoka, Japan.
(7)Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata,
Japan. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tsu, Japan. (9)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Nephrology, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyoto,
Japan.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defect occurring in
humans and some transcriptional factors have been identified as causative.
However, additional mutation analysis of these genes is necessary to develop
effective diagnostic and medical treatment methods. We conducted sequence
analysis of the coding regions of NKX2.5, GATA4, TBX1, TBX5, TBX20, CFC1 and ZIC3
in 111 Japanese patients with non-syndromic CHD and 9 of their relatives. All
patient samples were also analyzed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification using probes involved in chromosome deletion related to CHD. Five
novel variations of TBX5, GATA4 and TBX20 were detected in 6 of the patients,
whereas none were found in 200 controls. The TBX5 variation p.Pro108Thr, located 
in the T-box domain, was identified in a patient with tricuspid atresia, an
exon-intron boundary variation of GATA4 (IVS4+5G>A) was detected in a Tetralogy
of Fallot patient and an 8p23 microdeletion was detected in one patient with
atrioventricular septal defect and psychomotor delay. A total of seven
non-synonymous polymorphisms were found in the patients and controls.
Accumulation of novel variations of genes involving the cardiac development may
be required for better understanding of CHD.

PMID: 26490186  [PubMed - in process]


36. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 15;10(10):e0140831. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140831.
eCollection 2015.

Single-Cell Expression Profiling Reveals a Dynamic State of Cardiac Precursor
Cells in the Early Mouse Embryo.

Kokkinopoulos I(1), Ishida H(1), Saba R(1), Ruchaya P(2), Cabrera C(3), Struebig 
M(4), Barnes M(4), Terry A(4), Kaneko M(1), Shintani Y(1), Coppen S(1), Shiratori
H(5), Ameen T(1), Mein C(4), Hamada H(5), Suzuki K(1), Yashiro K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, William Harvey Research Institute,
Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of
London, London, United Kingdom. (2)Translational Medicine and Therapeutics,
William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom; Physiology
and Pathology, University of São Paulo State - UNESP, Araraquara School of
Dentistry, Araraquara, São Paulo, Brazil. (3)Clinical Pharmacology, William
Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom; Genome Centre, William
Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom; NIHR Barts
Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit, Barts and The London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom. (4)Genome
Centre, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom. 
(5)Department of Developmental Genetics, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences,
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

In the early vertebrate embryo, cardiac progenitor/precursor cells (CPs) give
rise to cardiac structures. Better understanding their biological character is
critical to understand the heart development and to apply CPs for the clinical
arena. However, our knowledge remains incomplete. With the use of single-cell
expression profiling, we have now revealed rapid and dynamic changes in gene
expression profiles of the embryonic CPs during the early phase after their
segregation from the cardiac mesoderm. Progressively, the nascent mesodermal gene
Mesp1 terminated, and Nkx2-5+/Tbx5+ population rapidly replaced the Tbx5low+
population as the expression of the cardiac genes Tbx5 and Nkx2-5 increased. At
the Early Headfold stage, Tbx5-expressing CPs gradually showed a unique molecular
signature with signs of cardiomyocyte differentiation. Lineage-tracing revealed a
developmentally distinct characteristic of this population. They underwent
progressive differentiation only towards the cardiomyocyte lineage corresponding 
to the first heart field rather than being maintained as a progenitor pool. More 
importantly, Tbx5 likely plays an important role in a transcriptional network to 
regulate the distinct character of the FHF via a positive feedback loop to
activate the robust expression of Tbx5 in CPs. These data expands our knowledge
on the behavior of CPs during the early phase of cardiac development,
subsequently providing a platform for further study.

PMCID: PMC4607431
PMID: 26469858  [PubMed - in process]


37. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 9;5:15014. doi: 10.1038/srep15014.

Directed Differentiation of Embryonic Stem Cells Into Cardiomyocytes by Bacterial
Injection of Defined Transcription Factors.

Bai F(1,)(2), Ho Lim C(3), Jia J(1,)(2), Santostefano K(3), Simmons C(4),
Kasahara H(5), Wu W(1), Terada N(3), Jin S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology and Colleges of Pharmacy
and Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. (2)Department of Molecular 
Genetics and Microbiology College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610. (3)Department of Pathology College of Medicine, University
of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610. (4)Department of Mechanical &Aerospace
Engineering College of Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611.
(5)Department of Physiology and Functional Genomics, University of Florida,
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

Forced expression of defined transcriptional factors has been well documented as 
an effective method for cellular reprogramming or directed differentiation.
However, transgene expression is not amenable for therapeutic application due to 
potential insertional mutagenesis. Here, we have developed a bacterial type III
secretion system (T3SS)-based protein delivery tool and shown its application in 
directing pluripotent stem cell differentiation by a controlled delivery of
transcription factors relevant to early heart development. By fusing to an
N-terminal secretion sequence for T3SS-dependent injection, three transcriptional
factors, namely Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5 (abbreviated as GMT), were translocated
into murine embryonic stem cells (ESCs), where the proteins are effectively
targeted to the nucleus with an average intracellular half-life of 5.5<U+2009>hours.
Exogenous GMT protein injection activated the cardiac program, and multiple
rounds of GMT protein delivery significantly improved the efficiency of ESC
differentiation into cardiomyocytes. Combination of T3SS-mediated GMT delivery
and Activin A treatment showed an additive effect, resulting in on average 60% of
the ESCs differentiated into cardiomyocytes. ESC derived cardiomyocytes displayed
spontaneous rhythmic contractile movement as well as normal hormonal responses.
This work serves as a foundation for the bacterial delivery of multiple
transcription factors to direct cell fate without jeopardizing genomic integrity.

PMCID: PMC4598736
PMID: 26449528  [PubMed - in process]


38. Lancet Respir Med. 2015 Oct;3(10):769-81. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(15)00283-0.
Epub 2015 Sep 27.

Novel insights into the genetics of smoking behaviour, lung function, and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (UK BiLEVE): a genetic association study in UK
Biobank.

Wain LV(1), Shrine N(1), Miller S(2), Jackson VE(1), Ntalla I(1), Soler Artigas
M(1), Billington CK(2), Kheirallah AK(2), Allen R(1), Cook JP(1), Probert K(2),
Obeidat M(3), Bossé Y(4), Hao K(5), Postma DS(6), Paré PD(3), Ramasamy A(7); UK
Brain Expression Consortium (UKBEC), Mägi R(8), Mihailov E(8), Reinmaa E(8),
Melén E(9), O'Connell J(10), Frangou E(11), Delaneau O(12); OxGSK Consortium,
Freeman C(13), Petkova D(13), McCarthy M(14), Sayers I(2), Deloukas P(15),
Hubbard R(16), Pavord I(17), Hansell AL(18), Thomson NC(19), Zeggini E(20),
Morris AP(21), Marchini J(10), Strachan DP(22), Tobin MD(23), Hall IP(24).

Collaborators: Hardy JA, Weale ME, Ryten M, Smith C, Walker R, Botía J,
Vandrocova J, Guelfi S, D'Sa K, Matarin M, Varghese V, Trabzuni D, Ramasamy A,
Forabosco P, Liu JZ, Tozzi F, Waterworth DM, Pillai SG, Muglia P, Middleton L,
Berrettini W, Knouff CW, Yuan X, Waeber G, Vollenweider P, Preisig M, Wareham NJ,
Zhao JH, Loos RJ, Barroso I, Khaw KT, Grundy S, Barter P, Mahley R, Kesaniemi A, 
McPherson R, Vincent JB, Strauss J, Kennedy JL, Farmer A, McGuffin P, Day R,
Matthews K, Bakke P, Gulsvik A, Lucae S, Ising M, Brueckl T, Horstmann S,
Wichmann HE, Rawal R, Dahmen N, Lamina C, Polasek O, Zgaga L, Huffman J, Campbell
S, Kooner J, Chambers JC, Burnett MS, Devaney JM, Pichard AD, Kent KM, Satler L, 
Lindsay JM, Waksman R, Epstein S, Wilson JF, Wild SH, Campbell H, Vitart V,
Reilly MP, Li M, Qu L, Wilensky R, Matthai W, Hakonarson HH, Rader DJ, Ellinghaus
D, Lieb W, Franke A, Uda M, Terracciano A, Xiao X, Busonero F, Scheet P,
Schlessinger D, St Clair D, Rujescu D, Abecasis GR, Grabe HJ, Teumer A, Völzke H,
Petersmann A, John U, Rudan I, Hayward C, Wright AF, Kolcic I, Wright BJ,
Thompson JR, Balmforth AJ, Hall AS, Samani NJ, Anderson CA, Ahmad T, Mathew CG,
Parkes M, Satsangi J, Caulfield M, Munroe PB, Farrall M, Dominiczak A,
Worthington J, Thomson W, Eyre S, Barton A, Mooser V, Francks C, Marchini J.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2015 Oct;3(10):737-9.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the genetic basis of airflow obstruction and smoking
behaviour is key to determining the pathophysiology of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). We used UK Biobank data to study the genetic causes of 
smoking behaviour and lung health.
METHODS: We sampled individuals of European ancestry from UK Biobank, from the
middle and extremes of the forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) distribution
among heavy smokers (mean 35 pack-years) and never smokers. We developed a custom
array for UK Biobank to provide optimum genome-wide coverage of common and
low-frequency variants, dense coverage of genomic regions already implicated in
lung health and disease, and to assay rare coding variants relevant to the UK
population. We investigated whether there were shared genetic causes between
different phenotypes defined by extremes of FEV1. We also looked for novel
variants associated with extremes of FEV1 and smoking behaviour and assessed
regions of the genome that had already shown evidence for a role in lung health
and disease. We set genome-wide significance at p<5<U+2008>×<U+2008>10(-8).
FINDINGS: UK Biobank participants were recruited from March 15, 2006, to July 7, 
2010. Sample selection for the UK BiLEVE study started on Nov 22, 2012, and was
completed on Dec 20, 2012. We selected 50,008 unique samples: 10,002 individuals 
with low FEV1, 10,000 with average FEV1, and 5002 with high FEV1 from each of the
heavy smoker and never smoker groups. We noted a substantial sharing of genetic
causes of low FEV1 between heavy smokers and never smokers (p=2.29<U+2008>×<U+2008>10(-16)) and
between individuals with and without doctor-diagnosed asthma (p=6.06<U+2008>×<U+2008>10(-11)). 
We discovered six novel genome-wide significant signals of association with
extremes of FEV1, including signals at four novel loci (KANSL1, TSEN54, TET2, and
RBM19/TBX5) and independent signals at two previously reported loci (NPNT and
HLA-DQB1/HLA-DQA2). These variants also showed association with COPD, including
in individuals with no history of smoking. The number of copies of a 150 kb
region containing the 5' end of KANSL1, a gene that is important for epigenetic
gene regulation, was associated with extremes of FEV1. We also discovered five
new genome-wide significant signals for smoking behaviour, including a variant in
NCAM1 (chromosome 11) and a variant on chromosome 2 (between TEX41 and PABPC1P2) 
that has a trans effect on expression of NCAM1 in brain tissue.
INTERPRETATION: By sampling from the extremes of the lung function distribution
in UK Biobank, we identified novel genetic causes of lung function and smoking
behaviour. These results provide new insight into the specific mechanisms
underlying airflow obstruction, COPD, and tobacco addiction, and show substantial
shared genetic architecture underlying airflow obstruction across individuals,
irrespective of smoking behaviour and other airway disease.
FUNDING: Medical Research Council.

Copyright © 2015 Wain et al. Open Access article distributed under the terms of
CC BY. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4593935
PMID: 26423011  [PubMed - in process]


39. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 27;6(33):34658-68. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5778.

Wnt activated ß-catenin and YAP proteins enhance the expression of non-coding RNA
component of RNase MRP in colon cancer cells.

Park J(1), Jeong S(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Lab for RNA Cell Biology, Department of Molecular Biology,
Dankook University, Yongin, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.

RMRP, the RNA component of mitochondrial RNA processing endoribonuclease, is a
non-coding RNA (ncRNA) part of the RNase MRP complex functioning in mitochondrial
and ribosomal RNA processing. Even though various mutations in the RMRP gene are 
linked to developmental defects and pathogenesis, its relevance to cancer
etiology has not been well established. Here we examined the expression of RMRP
and found a significant increase in colorectal and breast cancer patient tissues.
So we tested whether the oncogenic signaling pathways, Wnt/ß-catenin and
Hippo/YAP pathways, are relevant to the enhanced expression of RMRP in cancer
cells because of the predicted ß-catenin/TCF and YAP/TBX5 elements in the
upstream regions of the RMRP gene. As expected, Wnt signal activation
significantly induced the RMRP transcription thru ß-catenin and YAP transcription
factors. More importantly, YAP protein was critical for RMRP transcription by
association to the proximal site near the transcription start site of the RMRP
gene, a Pol III promoter, along with ß-catenin and TBX5 proteins. We propose that
the interplay of Wnt and Hippo signaling pathways could regulate target genes,
coding or non-coding, by the ß-catenin/YAP/TBX5 transcription complex in cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC4741480
PMID: 26415221  [PubMed - in process]


40. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;37(3):1066-74. doi: 10.1159/000430232. Epub 2015 Sep
25.

Exome sequencing identifies a c.148-1G>C mutation of TBX5 in a Holt-Oram family
with unusual genotype-phenotype correlations.

Guo Q, Shen J, Liu Y, Pu T, Sun K, Chen S.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Congenital heart defects (CHD) can occur with upper limbs
deformities. Holt-Oram syndrome is the main type of heart-hand syndromes,
characterized by upper limb radial ray malformations, CHD and/or conduction
abnormalities. Mutations of the TBX5 gene, most of which are found within the
T-box domain, are one cause of the disease. We aimed to find the cause of the
disease in a family with two children exhibiting symptoms of Holt-Oram syndrome
while the parents tend to be normal.
METHODS: Chromosomal microarray analysis and exome sequencing were applied in the
proband segments bearing the specific mutation and single nucleotide variants
(SNVs) suspected of being involved in the disease were analyzed by polymerase
chain reaction and direct sequencing.
RESULTS: A splice acceptor site mutation c.148-1G>C of TBX5 was detected in both 
the father and the proband. The mutation may result in an aberrant transcript
which will most probably undergo nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) system resulting
in haploinsufficiency of TBX5 protein. In the meantime, 3 candidated SNVs were
detected.
CONCLUSIONS: c.148-1G>C of TBX5 should be the pathogenic cause of the disease in 
this family. Works have been done to find a possible explanation of the unusual
genotype-phenotype correlations in this family and further studies are still
needed.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26401820  [PubMed - in process]


41. Nat Commun. 2015 Sep 10;6:8243. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9243.

High-efficiency reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes requires
suppression of pro-fibrotic signalling.

Zhao Y(1), Londono P(1), Cao Y(1), Sharpe EJ(2), Proenza C(1,)(2), O'Rourke R(3),
Jones KL(3), Jeong MY(1), Walker LA(1), Buttrick PM(1), McKinsey TA(1), Song
K(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado School 
of Medicine, 12700 E. 19th Avenue, B139, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, 12800 E. 19th Avenue, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
12801 E. 17th Avenue, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. (4)Charles C. Gates Center for
Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Biology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, 12700 E. 19th Avenue, B139, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

Direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes by forced expression of
cardiomyogenic factors, GMT (GATA4, Mef2C, Tbx5) or GHMT (GATA4, Hand2, Mef2C,
Tbx5), has recently been demonstrated, suggesting a novel therapeutic strategy
for cardiac repair. However, current approaches are inefficient. Here we
demonstrate that pro-fibrotic signalling potently antagonizes cardiac
reprogramming. Remarkably, inhibition of pro-fibrotic signalling using small
molecules that target the transforming growth factor-ß or Rho-associated kinase
pathways converts embryonic fibroblasts into functional cardiomyocyte-like cells,
with the efficiency up to 60%. Conversely, overactivation of these pro-fibrotic
signalling networks attenuates cardiac reprogramming. Furthermore, inhibition of 
pro-fibrotic signalling dramatically enhances the kinetics of cardiac
reprogramming, with spontaneously contracting cardiomyocytes emerging in less
than 2 weeks, as opposed to 4 weeks with GHMT alone. These findings provide new
insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying cardiac conversion of
fibroblasts and would enhance efforts to generate cardiomyocytes for clinical
applications.

PMCID: PMC4579788
PMID: 26354680  [PubMed - in process]


42. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Sep 22;112(38):11864-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1516237112. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Akt1/protein kinase B enhances transcriptional reprogramming of fibroblasts to
functional cardiomyocytes.

Zhou H(1), Dickson ME(1), Kim MS(2), Bassel-Duby R(1), Olson EN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148; Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and
Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148;
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9066. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148; Hamon Center for
Regenerative Science and Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148; Eric.Olson@utsouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 27;112(43):13131-2.

Conversion of fibroblasts to functional cardiomyocytes represents a potential
approach for restoring cardiac function after myocardial injury, but the
technique thus far has been slow and inefficient. To improve the efficiency of
reprogramming fibroblasts to cardiac-like myocytes (iCMs) by cardiac
transcription factors [Gata4, Hand2, Mef2c, and Tbx5 (GHMT)], we screened 192
protein kinases and discovered that Akt/protein kinase B dramatically accelerates
and amplifies this process in three different types of fibroblasts (mouse embryo,
adult cardiac, and tail tip). Approximately 50% of reprogrammed mouse embryo
fibroblasts displayed spontaneous beating after 3 wk of induction by Akt plus
GHMT. Furthermore, addition of Akt1 to GHMT evoked a more mature cardiac
phenotype for iCMs, as seen by enhanced polynucleation, cellular hypertrophy,
gene expression, and metabolic reprogramming. Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1)
and phosphoinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) acted upstream of Akt whereas the
mitochondrial target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and forkhead box o3 (Foxo3a)
acted downstream of Akt to influence fibroblast-to-cardiomyocyte reprogramming.
These findings provide insights into the molecular basis of cardiac reprogramming
and represent an important step toward further application of this technique.

PMCID: PMC4586885
PMID: 26354121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Biomaterials. 2015 Nov;70:94-104. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.07.063. Epub
2015 Aug 8.

Enhanced efficiency of genetic programming toward cardiomyocyte creation through 
topographical cues.

Morez C(1), Noseda M(2), Paiva MA(2), Belian E(2), Schneider MD(3), Stevens
MM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United
Kingdom; National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London W12
0NN, United Kingdom; British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence,
Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom. (2)National Heart and
Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom; British 
Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Imperial College London, London
W12 0NN, United Kingdom. (3)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
London, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom; British Heart Foundation Centre of
Research Excellence, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: m.d.schneider@imperial.ac.uk. (4)Department of Materials,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom; Department of
Bioengineering, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom;
Institute for Biomedical Engineering, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ,
United Kingdom. Electronic address: m.stevens@imperial.ac.uk.

Generation of de novo cardiomyocytes through viral over-expression of key
transcription factors represents a highly promising strategy for cardiac muscle
tissue regeneration. Although the feasibility of cell reprogramming has been
proven possible both in vitro and in vivo, the efficiency of the process remains 
extremely low. Here, we report a chemical-free technique in which topographical
cues, more specifically parallel microgrooves, enhance the directed
differentiation of cardiac progenitors into cardiomyocyte-like cells. Using a
lentivirus-mediated direct reprogramming strategy for expression of Myocardin,
Tbx5, and Mef2c, we showed that the microgrooved substrate provokes an increase
in histone H3 acetylation (AcH3), known to be a permissive environment for
reprogramming by "stemness" factors, as well as stimulation of myocardin
sumoylation, a post-translational modification essential to the transcriptional
function of this key co-activator. These biochemical effects mimicked those of a 
pharmacological histone deacetylase inhibitor, valproic acid (VPA), and like VPA 
markedly augmented the expression of cardiomyocyte-specific proteins by the
genetically engineered cells. No instructive effect was seen in cells
unresponsive to VPA. In addition, the anisotropy resulting from parallel
microgrooves induced cellular alignment, mimicking the native ventricular
myocardium and augmenting sarcomere organization.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26302234  [PubMed - in process]


44. Nat Commun. 2015 Aug 18;6:8082. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9082.

Association analysis identifies new risk loci for congenital heart disease in
Chinese populations.

Lin Y(1), Guo X(2), Zhao B(3), Liu J(2), Da M(4), Wen Y(1), Hu Y(4), Ni B(1),
Zhang K(1), Yang S(5), Xu J(6), Dai J(7), Wang X(6), Xia Y(8), Ma H(7), Jin G(7),
Yu S(3), Liu J(9), Keavney BD(10), Goodship JA(11), Cordell HJ(11), Wang X(8),
Shen H(1), Sha J(2), Zhou Z(2), Chen Y(6), Mo X(4), Luo L(12), Hu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing 210029, China [2] Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of
Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. (2)1] State Key
Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, 
China [2] Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing 210029, China. (3)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Xijing hospital, 
The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China. (4)Department of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Nanjing Children's Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing 210008, China. (5)Department of Cardiology, Nanjing Children's Hospital, 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210008, China. (6)Department of Thoracic and 
Cardiovascular Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China. (7)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
211166, China. (8)1] State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China [2] Department of Toxicology and Key
Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of Public
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. (9)1] State Key
Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, 
China [2] Center of Clinical Reproductive Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital
of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China. (10)1] Institute of Genetic
Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK [2] Institute of 
Cardiovascular Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9NT, UK.
(11)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 
3BZ, UK. (12)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development,
Ministry of Education, Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, School of
Life Sciences, Southwest University, Beibei, Chongqing 400715, China.

Our previous genome-wide association study (GWAS) identified two susceptibility
loci for congenital heart disease (CHD) in Han Chinese. Here we identify
additional loci by testing promising associations in an extended 3-stage
validation consisting of 6,053 CHD cases and 7,410 controls. We find GW
significant (P<5.0 × 10(-8)) evidence of 4 additional CHD susceptibility loci at 
4q31.22 (rs1400558, upstream of EDNRA, Pall=1.63 × 10(-9)), 9p24.2 (rs7863990,
close to SMARCA2, Pall=3.71 × 10(-14)), 12q24.13 (rs2433752, upstream of TBX3 and
TBX5, Pall=1.04 × 10(-10)) and 20q12 (rs490514, in PTPRT, Pall=1.20 × 10(-13)).
Moreover, the data from previous European GWAS supports that rs490514 is
associated with the risk of CHD (P=3.40 × 10(-3)). These results enhance our
understanding of CHD susceptibility.

PMID: 26283027  [PubMed - in process]


45. PLoS Genet. 2015 Aug 12;11(8):e1005393. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005393.
eCollection 2015.

Molecular Basis of Gene-Gene Interaction: Cyclic Cross-Regulation of Gene
Expression and Post-GWAS Gene-Gene Interaction Involved in Atrial Fibrillation.

Huang Y(1), Wang C(1), Yao Y(1), Zuo X(2), Chen S(1), Xu C(1), Zhang H(1), Lu
Q(1), Chang L(1), Wang F(1), Wang P(1), Zhang R(3), Hu Z(1), Song Q(1), Yang
X(1), Li C(1), Li S(1), Zhao Y(1), Yang Q(1), Yin D(1), Wang X(1), Si W(1), Li
X(1), Xiong X(1), Wang D(1), Huang Y(1), Luo C(1), Li J(1), Wang J(1), Chen J(1),
Wang L(1), Wang L(1), Han M(1), Ye J(1), Chen F(3), Liu J(3), Liu Y(3), Wu G(4), 
Yang B(4), Cheng X(5), Liao Y(5), Wu Y(6), Ke T(1), Chen Q(7), Tu X(1), Elston
R(8), Rao S(9), Yang Y(3), Xia Y(3), Wang QK(10).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, Cardio-X 
Center, College of Life Science and Technology and Center for Human Genome
Research, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (2)Sun
Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Dalian, China. (4)Department of Cardiology, People's Hospital, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, China. (5)Department of Cardiology, Union Hospital, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (6)Department of Cardiology, 
the First Affiliated Hospital of Wuhan City, Wuhan, China. (7)Center for
Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Molecular Cardiology, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America;
Department of Molecular Medicine, Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences,
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(8)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America. (9)Institute of
Medical Systems Biology and Department of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology,
School of Public Health, Guangdong Medical College, Dongguan, China. (10)Key
Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, Cardio-X Center,
College of Life Science and Technology and Center for Human Genome Research,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China; Center for
Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Molecular Cardiology, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America;
Department of Molecular Medicine, Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences,
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common cardiac arrhythmia at the clinic.
Recent GWAS identified several variants associated with AF, but they account for 
<10% of heritability. Gene-gene interaction is assumed to account for a
significant portion of missing heritability. Among GWAS loci for AF, only three
were replicated in the Chinese Han population, including SNP rs2106261 (G/A
substitution) in ZFHX3, rs2200733 (C/T substitution) near PITX2c, and rs3807989
(A/G substitution) in CAV1. Thus, we analyzed the interaction among these three
AF loci. We demonstrated significant interaction between rs2106261 and rs2200733 
in three independent populations and combined population with 2,020 cases/5,315
controls. Compared to non-risk genotype GGCC, two-locus risk genotype AATT showed
the highest odds ratio in three independent populations and the combined
population (OR=5.36 (95% CI 3.87-7.43), P=8.00×10-24). The OR of 5.36 for AATT
was significantly higher than the combined OR of 3.31 for both GGTT and AACC,
suggesting a synergistic interaction between rs2106261 and rs2200733. Relative
excess risk due to interaction (RERI) analysis also revealed significant
interaction between rs2106261 and rs2200733 when exposed two copies of risk
alleles (RERI=2.87, P<1.00×10-4) or exposed to one additional copy of risk allele
(RERI=1.29, P<1.00×10-4). The INTERSNP program identified significant genotypic
interaction between rs2106261 and rs2200733 under an additive by additive model
(OR=0.85, 95% CI: 0.74-0.97, P=0.02). Mechanistically, PITX2c negatively
regulates expression of miR-1, which negatively regulates expression of ZFHX3,
resulting in a positive regulation of ZFHX3 by PITX2c; ZFHX3 positively regulates
expression of PITX2C, resulting in a cyclic loop of cross-regulation between
ZFHX3 and PITX2c. Both ZFHX3 and PITX2c regulate expression of NPPA, TBX5 and
NKX2.5. These results suggest that cyclic cross-regulation of gene expression is 
a molecular basis for gene-gene interactions involved in genetics of complex
disease traits.

PMCID: PMC4534423
PMID: 26267381  [PubMed - in process]


46. J Anat. 2015 Oct;227(4):418-30. doi: 10.1111/joa.12361. Epub 2015 Aug 7.

How the embryo makes a limb: determination, polarity and identity.

Tickle C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, UK.

The vertebrate limb with its complex anatomy develops from a small bud of
undifferentiated mesoderm cells encased in ectoderm. The bud has its own
intrinsic polarity and can develop autonomously into a limb without reference to 
the rest of the embryo. In this review, recent advances are integrated with
classical embryology, carried out mainly in chick embryos, to present an overview
of how the embryo makes a limb bud. We will focus on how mesoderm cells in
precise locations in the embryo become determined to form a limb and express the 
key transcription factors Tbx4 (leg/hindlimb) or Tbx5 (wing/forelimb). These Tbx 
transcription factors have equivalent functions in the control of bud formation
by initiating a signalling cascade involving Wnts and fibroblast growth factors
(FGFs) and by regulating recruitment of mesenchymal cells from the coelomic
epithelium into the bud. The mesoderm that will form limb buds and the polarity
of the buds is determined with respect to both antero-posterior and dorso-ventral
axes of the body. The position in which a bud develops along the antero-posterior
axis of the body will also determine its identity - wing/forelimb or
leg/hindlimb. Hox gene activity, under the influence of retinoic acid signalling,
is directly linked with the initiation of Tbx5 gene expression in the region
along the antero-posterior axis of the body that will form wings/forelimbs and
determines antero-posterior polarity of the buds. In contrast, Tbx4 expression in
the regions that will form legs/hindlimbs is regulated by the homeoprotein Pitx1 
and there is no evidence that Hox genes determine antero-posterior polarity of
the buds. Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signalling determines the region along
the dorso-ventral axis of the body in which both wings/forelimbs and
legs/hindlimbs develop and dorso-ventral polarity of the buds. The polarity of
the buds leads to the establishment of signalling regions - the dorsal and
ventral ectoderm, producing Wnts and BMPs, respectively, the apical ectodermal
ridge producing fibroblast growth factors and the polarizing region, Sonic
hedgehog (Shh). These signals are the same in both wings/forelimbs and
legs/hindlimbs and control growth and pattern formation by providing the mesoderm
cells of the limb bud as it develops with positional information. The precise
anatomy of the limb depends on the mesoderm cells in the developing bud
interpreting positional information according to their identity - determined by
Pitx1 in hindlimbs - and genotype. The competence to form a limb extends along
the entire antero-posterior axis of the trunk - with Hox gene activity inhibiting
the formation of forelimbs in the interlimb region - and also along the
dorso-ventral axis.

© 2015 Anatomical Society.

PMID: 26249743  [PubMed - in process]


47. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jul 29;16(8):17368-93. doi: 10.3390/ijms160817368.

Direct Reprogramming-The Future of Cardiac Regeneration?

Doppler SA(1), Deutsch MA(2), Lange R(3,)(4), Krane M(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Surgery, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery,
Deutsches Herzzentrum München, Technische Universität München (TUM), Munich
80636, Germany. doppler@dhm.mhn.de. (2)Division of Experimental Surgery,
Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Deutsches Herzzentrum München, Technische
Universität München (TUM), Munich 80636, Germany. deutsch@dhm.mhn.de. (3)Division
of Experimental Surgery, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Deutsches
Herzzentrum München, Technische Universität München (TUM), Munich 80636, Germany.
lange@dhm.mhn.de. (4)DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research)-Partner
Site Munich Heart Alliance, Munich 80802, Germany. lange@dhm.mhn.de. (5)Division 
of Experimental Surgery, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Deutsches
Herzzentrum München, Technische Universität München (TUM), Munich 80636, Germany.
krane@dhm.mhn.de. (6)DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research)-Partner
Site Munich Heart Alliance, Munich 80802, Germany. krane@dhm.mhn.de.

Today, the only available curative therapy for end stage congestive heart failure
(CHF) is heart transplantation. This therapeutic option is strongly limited by
declining numbers of available donor hearts and by restricted long-term
performance of the transplanted graft. The disastrous prognosis for CHF with its 
restricted therapeutic options has led scientists to develop different concepts
of alternative regenerative treatment strategies including stem cell
transplantation or stimulating cell proliferation of different cardiac cell types
in situ. However, first clinical trials with overall inconsistent results were
not encouraging, particularly in terms of functional outcome. Among other
approaches, very promising ongoing pre-clinical research focuses on direct
lineage conversion of scar fibroblasts into functional myocardium, termed "direct
reprogramming" or "transdifferentiation." This review seeks to summarize
strategies for direct cardiac reprogramming including the application of
different sets of transcription factors, microRNAs, and small molecules for an
efficient generation of cardiomyogenic cells for regenerative purposes.

PMCID: PMC4581198
PMID: 26230692  [PubMed - in process]


48. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:263151. doi: 10.1155/2015/263151. Epub 2015 Jun 28.

A MicroRNA-Transcription Factor Blueprint for Early Atrial Arrhythmogenic
Remodeling.

Torrado M(1), Franco D(2), Lozano-Velasco E(2), Hernández-Torres F(2), Calviño
R(3), Aldama G(3), Centeno A(3), Castro-Beiras A(1), Mikhailov A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, University of La Coruña, 15006 La Coruña, Spain.
(2)Department of Experimental Biology, University of Jaén, Jaén, Spain.
(3)University Hospital Center of La Coruña, La Coruña, Spain.

Spontaneous self-terminating atrial fibrillation (AF) is one of the most common
heart rhythm disorders, yet the regulatory molecular mechanisms underlying this
syndrome are rather unclear. MicroRNA (miRNA) transcriptome and expression of
candidate transcription factors (TFs) with potential roles in arrhythmogenesis,
such as Pitx2, Tbx5, and myocardin (Myocd), were analyzed by microarray, qRT-PCR,
and Western blotting in left atrial (LA) samples from pigs with transitory AF
established by right atrial tachypacing. Induced ectopic tachyarrhythmia caused
rapid and substantial miRNA remodeling associated with a marked downregulation of
Pitx2, Tbx5, and Myocd expression in atrial myocardium. The downregulation of
Pitx2, Tbx5, and Myocd was inversely correlated with upregulation of the
corresponding targeting miRNAs (miR-21, miR-10a/10b, and miR-1, resp.) in the LA 
of paced animals. Through in vitro transient transfections of HL-1 atrial
myocytes, we further showed that upregulation of miR-21 did result in
downregulation of Pitx2 in cardiomyocyte background. The results suggest that
immediate-early miRNA remodeling coupled with deregulation of TF expression
underlies the onset of AF.

PMCID: PMC4499376
PMID: 26221584  [PubMed - in process]


49. Saudi Med J. 2015 Aug;36(8):980-2. doi: 10.15537/smj.2015.8.11891.

A novel missense mutation in the TBX5 gene in a Saudi infant with Holt-Oram
syndrome.

Al-Qattan MM(1), Abou Al-Shaar H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plastic Surgery, King Saud University, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia. E-mail. moqattan@hotmail.com.

We report on a Saudi infant with Holt-Oram syndrome caused by a de novo missense 
mutation of the TBX5 gene. The mutation (Thr72Lys) is novel and has not been
previously reported. The cardiac and limb defects in our patient were both
severe, and the infant also had micrognathia and cleft palate. Previously
reported cases of the Holt-Oram syndrome caused by missense mutations were
reviewed and their phenotypes were compared with the phenotype of our patient.

PMCID: PMC4549596
PMID: 26219450  [PubMed - in process]


50. Cell Rep. 2015 Aug 4;12(5):879-91. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.068. Epub 2015
Jul 23.

RA Acts in a Coherent Feed-Forward Mechanism with Tbx5 to Control Limb Bud
Induction and Initiation.

Nishimoto S(1), Wilde SM(1), Wood S(2), Logan MP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, Guy's Campus, King's
College London, London SE1 1UL, UK. (2)Procedural Services Section, MRC-National 
Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.
(3)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, Guy's Campus, King's
College London, London SE1 1UL, UK. Electronic address: malcolm.logan@kcl.ac.uk.

The retinoic acid (RA)- and ß-catenin-signaling pathways regulate limb bud
induction and initiation; however, their mechanisms of action are not understood 
and have been disputed. We demonstrate that both pathways are essential and that 
RA and ß-catenin/TCF/LEF signaling act cooperatively with Hox gene inputs to
directly regulate Tbx5 expression. Furthermore, in contrast to previous models,
we show that Tbx5 and Tbx4 expression in forelimb and hindlimb, respectively, are
not sufficient for limb outgrowth and that input from RA is required.
Collectively, our data indicate that RA signaling and Tbx genes act in a coherent
feed-forward loop to regulate Fgf10 expression and, as a result, establish a
positive feedback loop of FGF signaling between the limb mesenchyme and ectoderm.
Our results incorporate RA-, ß-catenin/TCF/LEF-, and FGF-signaling pathways into 
a regulatory network acting to recruit cells of the embryo flank to become limb
precursors.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4553633
PMID: 26212321  [PubMed - in process]


51. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Jul 25;15:30. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0080-y.

The pattern of congenital heart defects arising from reduced Tbx5 expression is
altered in a Down syndrome mouse model.

Polk RC(1,)(2), Gergics P(3), Steimle JD(4), Li H(1), Moskowitz IP(4), Camper
SA(3), Reeves RH(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology at Johns Hopkins, Biophysics 201, 725 N. Wolfe St.,
Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA. (2)McKusick Nathans Institute for Genetic Medicine,
School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. (3)Department
of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA. (4)Departments of Pediatrics, Pathology and Human Genetics, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. (5)Department of Physiology at Johns Hopkins,
Biophysics 201, 725 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA. rreeves@jhmi.edu.
(6)McKusick Nathans Institute for Genetic Medicine, School of Medicine, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. rreeves@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND: Nearly half of all individuals with Down Syndrome (DS) have some type
of congenital heart defect (CHD), suggesting that DS sensitizes to CHD but does
not cause it. We used a common mouse model of DS, the Ts65Dn mouse, to study the 
contribution of Tbx5, a known modifier of CHD, to heart defects on a trisomic
backgroun. Mice that were heterozygous for a Tbx5 null allele were crossed with
Ts65Dn mice. Thoraxes of progeny were fixed in 10% formalin, embedded in
paraffin, and sectioned for analysis of CHD. Gene expression in embryonic hearts 
was examined by quantitative PCR and in situ hybridization. A TBX5 DNA binding
site was verified by luciferase assays.
METHODS: Mice that were heterozygous for a Tbx5 null allele were crossed with
Ts65Dn mice. Thoraxes of progeny were fixed in 10% formalin, embedded in
paraffin, and sectioned for analysis of CHD. Gene expression in embryonic hearts 
was examined by quantitative PCR and in situ hybridization. A TBX5 DNA binding
site was verified by luciferase assays.
RESULTS: We crossed mice that were heterozygous for a Tbx5 null allele with
Ts65Dn mice. Mice that were trisomic and carried the Tbx5 mutation (Ts65Dn;Tbx5
(+/-) ) had a significantly increased incidence of overriding aorta compared to
their euploid littermates. Ts65Dn;Tbx5 (+/-) mice also showed reduced expression 
of Pitx2, a molecular marker for the left atrium. Transcript levels of the
trisomic Adamts1 gene were decreased in Tbx5 (+/-) mice compared to their euploid
littermates. Evidence of a valid binding site for TBX5 upstream of the trisomic
Adamts1 locus was also shown.
CONCLUSION: Haploinsufficiency of Tbx5 and trisomy affects alignment of the aorta
and this effect may stem from deviations from normal left-right patterning in the
heart. We have unveiled a previously unknown interaction between the Tbx5 gene
and trisomy, suggesting a connection between Tbx5 and trisomic genes important
during heart development.

PMCID: PMC4514943
PMID: 26208718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 May 1;8(5):5071-9. eCollection 2015.

Augmented miR-10b expression associated with depressed expression of its target
gene KLF4 involved in gastric carcinoma.

Ma Z(1), Chen Y(1), Min L(1), Li L(1), Huang H(1), Li J(1), Yan Q(2), Song P(3), 
Dai L(1), Yao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Huzhou Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Huzhou Central Hospital Huzhou,
Zhejiang, China. (2)Department of Surgery, Huzhou Central Hospital Huzhou,
Zhejiang, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Huzhou Central Hospital Huzhou,
Zhejiang, China.

Previous studies have revealed several targets of miR-10b, such as syndecan-1,
HOXD10, TBX5, and E-cadherin. In this study, we aimed to assess whether
Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is a target gene of miR-10b in gastric cancer (GC). 
Targeting of KLF4 by miR-10b was confirmed by dual-luciferase reporter assays.
The expression levels of miR-10b and KLF4 mRNA in 5 different gastric cancer cell
lines and 65 pairs of gastric cancer tissues were detected by Real-time PCR. In
addition, KLF4 protein in gastric cancer cell lines and 30 GC tissues was
measured by western blotting and immunochemistry, respectively. KLF4 is a direct 
target gene of miR-10b in GC, and its expression is reduced by miR-10b at both
mRNA and protein levels. In addition, the expression level of miR-10b was
tendentiously upregulated in GC tissues while the expression levels of KLF4 mRNA 
and protein were decreased in gastric cancer tissues compared with normal
adjacent tissue. There was a dramatically inverse correlation between the
expression levels of miR-10b and KLF4 mRNA in GC (r=-0.339, P=0.006). These
findings indicate that miR-10b was upregulated in GC and may have a key role in
GC pathogenesis and development through the downregulation of its target gene
KLF4.

PMCID: PMC4503073
PMID: 26191201  [PubMed - in process]


53. Stem Cells. 2015 Oct;33(10):3100-13. doi: 10.1002/stem.2101. Epub 2015 Jul 29.

Cardiac Repair With a Novel Population of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Resident in the 
Human Heart.

Zhang Y(1), Sivakumaran P(2), Newcomb AE(3,)(4,)(5), Hernandez D(1,)(2), Harris
N(2), Khanabdali R(3,)(2), Liu GS(6,)(7), Kelly DJ(1), Pébay A(6,)(7), Hewitt
AW(6,)(7), Boyle A(8), Harvey R(9), Morrison WA(3,)(2,)(10), Elliott DA(11),
Dusting GJ(3,)(6,)(2,)(7), Lim SY(3,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, St. Vincent's Hospital, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (2)O'Brien Institute Department, St. Vincent's
Institute of Medical Research, Fitzroy, Victoria, Australia. (3)Department of
Surgery, St. Vincent's Hospital, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. (4)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, St. Vincent's Hospital,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (5)Vascular and Cardiac Surgery, The
Cardiovascular Research Centre (CvRC), Australian Catholic University, Fitzroy,
Victoria, Australia. (6)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (7)Centre for Eye Research Australia & Royal
Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (8)School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales, 
Australia. (9)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Victor Chang Cardiac Research 
Institute, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, Australia. (10)AORTEC, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Australian Catholic University, Fitzroy, Victoria, Australia.
(11)Cardiac Development, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, The Royal
Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Cardiac resident stem cells (CRSCs) hold much promise to treat heart disease but 
this remains a controversial field. Here, we describe a novel population of
CRSCs, which are positive for W8B2 antigen and were obtained from adult human
atrial appendages. W8B2(+) CRSCs exhibit a spindle-shaped morphology, are
clonogenic and capable of self-renewal. W8B2(+) CRSCs show high expression of
mesenchymal but not hematopoietic nor endothelial markers. W8B2(+) CRSCs
expressed GATA4, HAND2, and TBX5, but not C-KIT, SCA-1, NKX2.5, PDGFRa, ISL1, or 
WT1. W8B2(+) CRSCs can differentiate into cardiovascular lineages and secrete a
range of cytokines implicated in angiogenesis, chemotaxis, inflammation,
extracellular matrix remodeling, cell growth, and survival. In vitro, conditioned
medium collected from W8B2(+) CRSCs displayed prosurvival, proangiogenic, and
promigratory effects on endothelial cells, superior to that of other adult stem
cells tested, and additionally promoted survival and proliferation of neonatal
rat cardiomyocytes. Intramyocardial transplantation of human W8B2(+) CRSCs into
immunocompromised rats 1 week after myocardial infarction markedly improved
cardiac function (~40% improvement in ejection fraction) and reduced fibrotic
scar tissue 4 weeks after infarction. Hearts treated with W8B2(+) CRSCs showed
less adverse remodeling of the left ventricle, a greater number of proliferating 
cardiomyocytes (Ki67(+) cTnT(+) cells) in the remote region, higher myocardial
vascular density, and greater infiltration of CD163(+) cells (a marker for M2
macrophages) into the border zone and scar regions. In summary, W8B2(+) CRSCs are
distinct from currently known CRSCs found in human hearts, and as such may be an 
ideal cell source to repair myocardial damage after infarction.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26184084  [PubMed - in process]


54. Development. 2015 Jul 15;142(14):2521-32. doi: 10.1242/dev.120220. Epub 2015 Jul 
2.

A common Shox2-Nkx2-5 antagonistic mechanism primes the pacemaker cell fate in
the pulmonary vein myocardium and sinoatrial node.

Ye W(1), Wang J(2), Song Y(3), Yu D(1), Sun C(1), Liu C(1), Chen F(1), Zhang
Y(4), Wang F(5), Harvey RP(6), Schrader L(1), Martin JF(2), Chen Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA
70118, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College 
of Medicine and the Texas Heart Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Department 
of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA
Southern Center for Biomedical Research and Fujian Key Laboratory of
Developmental and Neural Biology, College of Life Science, Fujian Normal
University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350108, P.R. China. (4)Southern Center for Biomedical 
Research and Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental and Neural Biology, College
of Life Science, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350108, P.R. China.
(5)Center for Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Biosciences and
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(6)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Division, The Victor Chang Cardiac
Research Institute, Darlinghurst, New South Wales 2010, Australia St. Vincent's
Clinical School and School of Biological and Biomolecular Sciences, University of
New South Wales, Kensington, New South Wales 2052, Australia. (7)Department of
Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA
Southern Center for Biomedical Research and Fujian Key Laboratory of
Developmental and Neural Biology, College of Life Science, Fujian Normal
University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350108, P.R. China ychen@tulane.edu.

In humans, atrial fibrillation is often triggered by ectopic pacemaking activity 
in the myocardium sleeves of the pulmonary vein (PV) and systemic venous return. 
The genetic programs that abnormally reinforce pacemaker properties at these
sites and how this relates to normal sinoatrial node (SAN) development remain
uncharacterized. It was noted previously that Nkx2-5, which is expressed in the
PV myocardium and reinforces a chamber-like myocardial identity in the PV, is
lacking in the SAN. Here we present evidence that in mice Shox2 antagonizes the
transcriptional output of Nkx2-5 in the PV myocardium and in a functional
Nkx2-5(+) domain within the SAN to determine cell fate. Shox2 deletion in the
Nkx2-5(+) domain of the SAN caused sick sinus syndrome, associated with the loss 
of the pacemaker program. Explanted Shox2(+) cells from the embryonic PV
myocardium exhibited pacemaker characteristics including node-like
electrophysiological properties and the capability to pace surrounding Shox2(-)
cells. Shox2 deletion led to Hcn4 ablation in the developing PV myocardium.
Nkx2-5 hypomorphism rescued the requirement for Shox2 for the expression of genes
essential for SAN development in Shox2 mutants. Similarly, the pacemaker-like
phenotype induced in the PV myocardium in Nkx2-5 hypomorphs reverted back to a
working myocardial phenotype when Shox2 was simultaneously deleted. A similar
mechanism is also adopted in differentiated embryoid bodies. We found that Shox2 
interacts with Nkx2-5 directly, and discovered a substantial genome-wide
co-occupancy of Shox2, Nkx2-5 and Tbx5, further supporting a pivotal role for
Shox2 in the core myogenic program orchestrating venous pole and pacemaker
development.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4510860 [Available on 2016-07-15]
PMID: 26138475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Histol Histopathol. 2015 Dec;30(12):1487-98. doi: 10.14670/HH-11-644. Epub 2015
Jun 23.

Transcription factors GATA4 and TBX5 promote cardiomyogenic differentiation of
rat bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells.

Chen W(1), Zhang L(2), Shao SX(1), Wang HP(3), Cui SJ(1), Zhang YN(1), Kong
XZ(4), Yin Q(1), Zhang JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang
City, Hebei Province, China. (2)Department of Histology and Embryology, Hebei
Medical University, Shijiazhuang City, Hebei Province, China.
zhanglei@hebmu.edu.cn. (3)Department of Histology and Embryology, Hebei North
University, Zhangjiakou City, Hebei Province, China. (4)Department of Neurology, 
the 1st Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang City, Hebei Province, 
China.

Bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells (BMSCs) have potential applications in cell
and gene therapies for cardiac disease. The cardiac-specific transcription
factors GATA-binding protein 4 (GATA4) and T-Box protein 5 (TBX5) are considered 
to be pivotal in cardiogenesis. The aim of this study was to investigate the
effects of GATA4 and TBX5 on cardiomyogenic differentiation of BMSCs. The BMSCs
were initially isolated and identified. Vectors harboring cardiac transcription
factor genes GATA4 and TBX5 or empty vectors were transferred into BMSCs.
Cardiomyogenic cells differentiated from BMSCs were identified by expression of
cardiac-specific markers including cardiac troponin T, connexin 43, ß-myosin
heavy chain, and myosin light chain-2 using immunocytochemical staining, western 
blotting, and quantitative real-time PCR. The ultrastructures of the
differentiated cells were examined by transmission electron microscopy, which
were similar to those of fetal cardiomyocytes. The differentiated cells exhibited
L-type calcium current activities reflective of the electrophysiological
characteristics of cardiomyocytes. These findings indicate that exogenous
expression of cardiac-specific transcription factors GATA4 and TBX5 enhance
cardiomyogenic differentiation of BMSCs.

PMID: 26100648  [PubMed - in process]


56. Dev Biol. 2015 Sep 1;405(1):56-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.06.009. Epub 2015
Jun 17.

Endodermal Wnt signaling is required for tracheal cartilage formation.

Snowball J(1), Ambalavanan M(1), Whitsett J(2), Sinner D(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Perinatal Institute Division of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary
Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center Research Foundation, USA. (2)The
Perinatal Institute Division of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary Biology,
Cincinnati Children's Medical Center Research Foundation, USA; University of
Cincinnati, College of Medicine, Cincinnati OH 45229, USA. (3)The Perinatal
Institute Division of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati
Children's Medical Center Research Foundation, USA; University of Cincinnati,
College of Medicine, Cincinnati OH 45229, USA. Electronic address:
Debora.sinner@cchmc.org.

Tracheobronchomalacia is a common congenital defect in which the walls of the
trachea and bronchi lack of adequate cartilage required for support of the
airways. Deletion of Wls, a cargo receptor mediating Wnt ligand secretion, in the
embryonic endoderm using ShhCre mice inhibited formation of tracheal-bronchial
cartilaginous rings. The normal dorsal-ventral patterning of tracheal mesenchyme 
was lost. Smooth muscle cells, identified by Acta2 staining, were aberrantly
located in ventral mesenchyme of the trachea, normally the region of Sox9
expression in cartilage progenitors. Wnt/ß-catenin activity, indicated by Axin2
LacZ reporter, was decreased in tracheal mesenchyme of Wls(f/f);Shh(Cre/+)
embryos. Proliferation of chondroblasts was decreased and reciprocally,
proliferation of smooth muscle cells was increased in Wls(f/f);Shh(Cre/+)
tracheal tissue. Expression of Tbx4, Tbx5, Msx1 and Msx2, known to mediate
cartilage and muscle patterning, were decreased in tracheal mesenchyme of
Wls(f/f);Shh(Cre/+) embryos. Ex vivo studies demonstrated that Wnt7b and Wnt5a,
expressed by the epithelium of developing trachea, and active Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling are required for tracheal chondrogenesis before formation of
mesenchymal condensations. In conclusion, Wnt ligands produced by the tracheal
epithelium pattern the tracheal mesenchyme via modulation of gene expression and 
cell proliferation required for proper tracheal cartilage and smooth muscle
differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4529778 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26093309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 15;5:11204. doi: 10.1038/srep11204.

Disturbance of cardiac gene expression and cardiomyocyte structure predisposes
Mecp2-null mice to arrhythmias.

Hara M(1), Takahashi T(1), Mitsumasu C(1), Igata S(2), Takano M(2), Minami T(3), 
Yasukawa H(3), Okayama S(4), Nakamura K(4), Okabe Y(5), Tanaka E(2), Takemura
G(6), Kosai K(7), Yamashita Y(8), Matsuishi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Gene Therapy and Regenerative Medicine, Cognitive and Molecular
Research Institute of Brain Diseases [2] Department of Pediatrics, Kurume
University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan. (2)Department of Physiology, Kurume
University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan. (3)Cardiovascular Research
Institute, Kurume University, Kurume, Japan. (4)Department of Anatomy, Kurume
University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan. (5)1] Division of Gene Therapy and 
Regenerative Medicine, Cognitive and Molecular Research Institute of Brain
Diseases [2] Department of Physiology, Kurume University School of Medicine,
Kurume, Japan. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, Asahi University School of
Dentistry, Gifu, Japan. (7)1] Division of Gene Therapy and Regenerative Medicine,
Cognitive and Molecular Research Institute of Brain Diseases [2] Department of
Pediatrics, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan [3] Department of
Gene Therapy and Regenerative Medicine, Advanced Therapeutics Course, Kagoshima
University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan.

Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) is an epigenetic regulator of gene
expression that is essential for normal brain development. Mutations in MeCP2
lead to disrupted neuronal function and can cause Rett syndrome (RTT), a
neurodevelopmental disorder. Previous studies reported cardiac dysfunction,
including arrhythmias in both RTT patients and animal models of RTT. In addition,
recent studies indicate that MeCP2 may be involved in cardiac development and
dysfunction, but its role in the developing and adult heart remains unknown. In
this study, we found that Mecp2-null ESCs could differentiate into
cardiomyocytes, but the development and further differentiation of cardiovascular
progenitors were significantly affected in MeCP2 deficiency. In addition, we
revealed that loss of MeCP2 led to dysregulation of endogenous cardiac genes and 
myocardial structural alterations, although Mecp2-null mice did not exhibit
obvious cardiac functional abnormalities. Furthermore, we detected methylation of
the CpG islands in the Tbx5 locus, and showed that MeCP2 could target these
sequences. Taken together, these results suggest that MeCP2 is an important
regulator of the gene-expression program responsible for maintaining normal
cardiac development and cardiomyocyte structure.

PMCID: PMC4466896
PMID: 26073556  [PubMed - in process]


58. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Sep;66:30-6. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.06.008.
Epub 2015 Jun 10.

Gata4, Tbx5 and Baf60c induce differentiation of adipose tissue-derived
mesenchymal stem cells into beating cardiomyocytes.

Li Q(1), Guo ZK(2), Chang YQ(3), Yu X(3), Li CX(3), Li H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Henan Key Laboratory of Medical Tissue Regeneration, Xinxiang Medical
University, Xinxiang 453003, PR China; Nursing school, Xinxiang Medical
University, Xinxiang 453003, PR China. (2)Henan Key Laboratory of Medical Tissue 
Regeneration, Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang 453003, PR China. Electronic 
address: gzk@xxmu.edu.cn. (3)Henan Key Laboratory of Medical Tissue Regeneration,
Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang 453003, PR China. (4)Department of Human
Anatomy, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, PR China.

The adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells (ADMSCs) are extensively
utilized in tissue engineering, regenerative medicine and cell therapy. ADMSCs
can differentiate into cardiomyocytes, and it has been shown that over-expression
of a cocktail of factors can induce ectopic heart formation and program
cardiogenesis in ESCs. However, which genes are responsible for differentiation
of ADMSCs into beating cardiomyocyte-like cells remains unknown. In this study we
have shown that the combination of Gata4, Tbx5 and Baf60c is sufficient for
inducing ADMSCs to form cardiomyocytes. It also appears that, while Gata4 and
Baf60c are key inducers of myocardial differentiation, Tbx5 is essential for the 
ability of cardiac cells to contract. These findings provide additional
experimental references for myocardial tissue engineering in the emerging field
of cell-based therapy of heart diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26071180  [PubMed - in process]


59. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 5;10(6):e0125384. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125384.
eCollection 2015.

Forward Programming of Cardiac Stem Cells by Homogeneous Transduction with MYOCD 
plus TBX5.

Belian E(1), Noseda M(1), Abreu Paiva MS(1), Leja T(1), Sampson R(1), Schneider
MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, National Heart and
Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London W14 0NN, United Kingdom.

Adult cardiac stem cells (CSCs) express many endogenous cardiogenic transcription
factors including members of the Gata, Hand, Mef2, and T-box family. Unlike its
DNA-binding targets, Myocardin (Myocd)-a co-activator not only for serum response
factor, but also for Gata4 and Tbx5-is not expressed in CSCs. We hypothesised
that its absence was a limiting factor for reprogramming. Here, we sought to
investigate the susceptibility of adult mouse Sca1+ side population CSCs to
reprogramming by supplementing the triad of GATA4, MEF2C, and TBX5 (GMT), and
more specifically by testing the effect of the missing co-activator, Myocd.
Exogenous factors were expressed via doxycycline-inducible lentiviral vectors in 
various combinations. High throughput quantitative RT-PCR was used to test
expression of 29 cardiac lineage markers two weeks post-induction. GMT induced
more than half the analysed cardiac transcripts. However, no protein was detected
for the induced sarcomeric genes Actc1, Myh6, and Myl2. Adding MYOCD to GMT
affected only slightly the breadth and level of gene induction, but, importantly,
triggered expression of all three proteins examined (a-cardiac actin, atrial
natriuretic peptide, sarcomeric myosin heavy chains). MYOCD + TBX was the most
effective pairwise combination in this system. In clonal derivatives homogenously
expressing MYOCD + TBX at high levels, 93% of cardiac transcripts were
up-regulated and all five proteins tested were visualized.IN SUMMARY: (1) GMT
induced cardiac genes in CSCs, but not cardiac proteins under the conditions
used. (2) Complementing GMT with MYOCD induced cardiac protein expression,
indicating a more complete cardiac differentiation program. (3) Homogeneous
transduction with MYOCD + TBX5 facilitated the identification of differentiating 
cells and the validation of this combinatorial reprogramming strategy. Together, 
these results highlight the pivotal importance of MYOCD in driving CSCs toward a 
cardiac muscle fate.

PMCID: PMC4457652
PMID: 26047103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Pediatr Cardiol. 2015 Dec;36(8):1642-6. doi: 10.1007/s00246-015-1210-9. Epub 2015
Jun 3.

Identification of Copy Number Variations in Isolated Tetralogy of Fallot.

Aguayo-Gómez A(1), Arteaga-Vázquez J(2), Svyryd Y(1), Calderón-Colmenero J(3),
Zamora-González C(4), Vargas-Alarcón G(5), Mutchinick OM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición
"Salvador Zubirán", Mexico, D.F., Mexico. (2)Department of Genetics, Instituto
Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición "Salvador Zubirán", Mexico, D.F.,
Mexico. jazminarteaga@hotmail.com. (3)Department of Pediatric Cardiology,
Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, Mexico, D.F., Mexico.
(4)Congenital Heart Defects Adults Clinic, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología
Ignacio Chávez, Mexico, D.F., Mexico. (5)Department of Molecular Biology,
Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, Mexico, D.F., Mexico.
(6)Department of Genetics, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición
"Salvador Zubirán", Mexico, D.F., Mexico. osvaldo@unam.mx.

Tetralogy of Fallot (ToF) is one of the most common and severe congenital heart
defects (CHD). Recently, unbalanced structural genomic variants or copy number
variations (CNVs) were proposed to be involved in the etiology of many complex
diseases, including CHDs. The aim of this study was to investigate the frequency 
of CNVs in a region with a high density of CNVs, 22q11.2, and other regions with 
CHD-related genes in a sample of 52 Mexican mestizo patients with isolated ToF
and negative fluorescence in situ hybridization staining for 22q11. CNVs were
studied using two multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) kits,
SALSA P250-B1® (DiGeorge gene region) and SALSA MLPA P311-A1® CHD-related gene
regions (GATA4, NKX2-5, TBX5, BMP4, and CRELD1). The MLPA assay detected a de
novo CNV deletion of the probes located in exons 2 and 7 of the TBX1 gene in one 
of the 52 patients studied; this result was confirmed by real-time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction. This deletion was not present in the patient's parents
and 104 chromosomes from healthy control subjects. Our results clearly suggest a 
possible etiologic association between the TBX1 deletion and the ToF in our
patient.

PMID: 26036351  [PubMed - in process]


61. Oncol Rep. 2015 Aug;34(2):585-94. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4023. Epub 2015 May 29.

Integrated analysis of DNA methylation and microRNA regulation of the lung
adenocarcinoma transcriptome.

Du J(1), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Chinese Medical University Affiliated No. 1
Hospital, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, P.R. China.

Lung adenocarcinoma, as a common type of non-small cell lung cancer (40%), poses 
a significant threat to public health worldwide. The present study aimed to
determine the transcriptional regulatory mechanisms in lung adenocarcinoma.
Illumina sequence data GSE 37764 including expression profiling, methylation
profiling and non-coding RNA profiling of 6 never-smoker Korean female patients
with non-small cell lung adenocarcinoma were obtained from the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database. Differentially methylated genes, differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) and differentially expressed microRNAs (miRNAs) between normal and
tumor tissues of the same patients were screened with tools in R. Functional
enrichment analysis of a variety of differential genes was performed.
DEG-specific methylation and transcription factors (TFs) were analyzed with
ENCODE ChIP-seq. The integrated regulatory network of DEGs, TFs and miRNAs was
constructed. Several overlapping DEGs, such as v-ets avian erythroblastosis virus
E26 oncogene homolog (ERG) were screened. DEGs were centrally modified by
histones of tri-methylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27me3) and
di-acetylation of lysine 12 or 20 on histone H2 (H2BK12/20AC). Upstream TFs of
DEGs were enriched in different ChIP-seq clusters, such as glucocorticoid
receptors (GRs). Two miRNAs (miR-126-3p and miR-30c-2-3p) and three TFs including
homeobox A5 (HOXA5), Meis homeobox 1 (MEIS1) and T-box 5 (TBX5), played important
roles in the integrated regulatory network conjointly. These DEGs, and
DEG-related histone modifications, TFs and miRNAs may be important in the
pathogenesis of lung adenocarcinoma. The present results may indicate directions 
for the next step in the study of the further elucidation and targeted prevention
of lung adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4487669
PMID: 26035298  [PubMed - in process]


62. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015 Aug;85:1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2015.05.005. Epub 2015
May 16.

Tbx5 and Osr1 interact to regulate posterior second heart field cell cycle
progression for cardiac septation.

Zhou L(1), Liu J(2), Olson P(2), Zhang K(3), Wynne J(4), Xie L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND 58202, USA; Department of
Gerontology, Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, Hubei 430030, China. (2)Department of Basic Sciences, School of Medicine
and Health Sciences, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND 58202, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of
North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND 58202, USA. (4)Department of Internal Medicine,
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, 
ND 58202, USA. (5)Department of Basic Sciences, School of Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND 58202, USA. Electronic
address: linglin.xie@med.und.edu.

RATIONALE: Mutations of TBX5 cause Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) in humans, a disease 
characterized by atrial or occasionally ventricular septal defects in the heart
and skeletal abnormalities of the upper extremity. Previous studies have
demonstrated that Tbx5 regulates Osr1 expression in the second heart field (SHF) 
of E9.5 mouse embryos. However, it is unknown whether and how Tbx5 and Osr1
interact in atrial septation.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if and how Tbx5 and Osr1 interact in the posterior SHF
for cardiac septation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In the present study, genetic inducible fate mapping showed 
that Osr1-expressing cells contribute to atrial septum progenitors between E8.0
and E11.0. Osr1 expression in the pSHF was dependent on the level of Tbx5 at E8.5
and E9.5 but not E10.5, suggesting that the embryo stage before E10.5 is critical
for Tbx5 interacting with Osr1 in atrial septation. Significantly more
atrioventricular septal defects (AVSDs) were observed in embryos with compound
haploinsufficiency for Tbx5 and Osr1. Conditional compound haploinsufficiency for
Tbx5 and Osr1 resulted in a significant cell proliferation defect in the SHF,
which was associated with fewer cells in the G2 and M phases and a decreased
level of Cdk6 expression. Remarkably, genetically targeted disruption of Pten
expression in atrial septum progenitors rescued AVSDs caused by Tbx5 and Osr1
compound haploinsufficiency. There was a significant decrease in Smo expression, 
which is a Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway modulator, in the pSHF of Osr1
knockout embryos at E9.5, implying a role for Osr1 in regulating Hh signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Tbx5 and Osr1 interact to regulate posterior SHF cell cycle
progression for cardiac septation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4530064 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25986147  [PubMed - in process]


63. Nat Commun. 2015 May 18;6:6930. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7930.

PDGFRa demarcates the cardiogenic clonogenic Sca1+ stem/progenitor cell in adult 
murine myocardium.

Noseda M(1), Harada M(1), McSweeney S(1), Leja T(1), Belian E(1), Stuckey DJ(2), 
Abreu Paiva MS(1), Habib J(3), Macaulay I(4), de Smith AJ(5), al-Beidh F(1),
Sampson R(1), Lumbers RT(1), Rao P(6), Harding SE(1), Blakemore AI(7), Jacobsen
SE(4), Barahona M(8), Schneider MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. (2)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of
Research Excellence, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] National
Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [3] Centre 
for Advanced Biomedical Imaging (CABI), University College London, London WC1E
6DD, UK. (3)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [3] Department of Biomedical
Engineering, King's College London, London SE1 7EH, UK. (4)Haematopoietic Stem
Cell Biology, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK. (5)1] Department of Medicine, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
(6)1] Texas Children's Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 
77030, USA [2] Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. (7)Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London SW7 
2AZ, UK. (8)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] Department of Mathematics, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.

Cardiac progenitor/stem cells in adult hearts represent an attractive therapeutic
target for heart regeneration, though (inter)-relationships among reported cells 
remain obscure. Using single-cell qRT-PCR and clonal analyses, here we define
four subpopulations of cardiac progenitor/stem cells in adult mouse myocardium
all sharing stem cell antigen-1 (Sca1), based on side population (SP) phenotype, 
PECAM-1 (CD31) and platelet-derived growth factor receptor-a (PDGFRa) expression.
SP status predicts clonogenicity and cardiogenic gene expression (Gata4/6, Hand2 
and Tbx5/20), properties segregating more specifically to PDGFRa(+) cells. Clonal
progeny of single Sca1(+) SP cells show cardiomyocyte, endothelial and smooth
muscle lineage potential after cardiac grafting, augmenting cardiac function
although durable engraftment is rare. PDGFRa(-) cells are characterized by
Kdr/Flk1, Cdh5, CD31 and lack of clonogenicity. PDGFRa(+)/CD31(-) cells derive
from cells formerly expressing Mesp1, Nkx2-5, Isl1, Gata5 and Wt1, distinct from 
PDGFRa(-)/CD31(+) cells (Gata5 low; Flk1 and Tie2 high). Thus, PDGFRa demarcates 
the clonogenic cardiogenic Sca1(+) stem/progenitor cell.

PMCID: PMC4479024
PMID: 25980517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Jul;36(1):282-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2206. Epub 2015 May
11.

A novel TBX5 loss-of-function mutation associated with sporadic dilated
cardiomyopathy.

Zhou W(1), Zhao L(2), Jiang JQ(3), Jiang WF(4), Yang YQ(4), Qiu XB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200233, P.R. China. (2)Department of Cardiology,
Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai, Shandong 264001, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Emergency Medicine, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200030, P.R. China. (4)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) represents the most prevalent form of primary
cardiomyopathy, and is the most common reason for heart transplantation and a
major cause of congestive heart failure. Aggregating evidence demonstrates that
genetic defects are associated with DCM, and a great number of mutations in >50
genes have been linked to DCM. However, DCM is a genetically heterogeneous
disorder and the genetic components underpinning DCM in a significant proportion 
of patients remain unknown. In the present study, the coding exons and flanking
exon-intron boundaries of the T-Box 5 (TBX5) gene, which encodes a T-box
transcription factor required for normal cardiac development, were sequenced in
146 unrelated patients with sporadic DCM. The functional characteristics of the
mutant TBX5 were assayed in contrast to its wild-type counterpart by using a
dual-luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous TBX5
mutation, p.A143T, was identified in a patient with sporadic DCM. The missense
mutation, which was absent in 400 control chromosomes, altered the amino acid
that was completely conserved evolutionarily among species. Biological analyses
revealed that the A143T mutation of TBX5 was associated with significantly
decreased transcriptional activity on the promoter of the target gene atrial
natriuretic factor (ANF), when compared to its wild-type counterpart.
Furthermore, the A143T mutation abolished the synergistic activation of the ANF
promoter between TBX5 and GATA binding protein 4 (GATA4), another crucial
transcriptional factor for heart development. To the best of our knowledge, this 
is the first report on the association of a TBX5 loss-of-function mutation with
an enhanced susceptibility to sporadic DCM, providing novel insight into the
molecular mechanisms of the pathogenesis of DCM and suggesting potential
implications for the prenatal prophylaxis and personalized treatment of this
commonest primary myocardial disease.

PMID: 25963046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Aug;167A(8):1822-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37108. Epub 2015
Apr 30.

The diagnostic value of next generation sequencing in familial nonsyndromic
congenital heart defects.

Jia Y(1), Louw JJ(1,)(2), Breckpot J(1,)(3), Callewaert B(4), Barrea C(5),
Sznajer Y(6), Gewillig M(2), Souche E(1), Dehaspe L(1), Vermeesch JR(1),
Lambrechts D(7,)(8), Devriendt K(1), Corveleyn A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (2)Department of
Congenital and Pediatric Cardiology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. (3)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. (4)Center for Medical Genetics, University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Department of Congenital and Pediatric Cardiology, Universit, é, Catholique de
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (6)Center for Human Genetics, Université Catholique
de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (7)Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. (8)Vesalius Research Center, VIB, Leuven, Belgium.

To determine the diagnostic value of massive parallel sequencing of a panel of
known cardiac genes in familial nonsyndromic congenital heart defects (CHD),
targeted sequencing of the coding regions of 57 genes previously implicated in
CHD was performed in 36 patients from 13 nonsyndromic CHD families with probable 
autosomal dominant inheritance. Following variant analysis and Sanger validation,
we identified six potential disease causing variants in three genes (MYH6,
NOTCH1, and TBX5), which may explain the defects in six families. Several
problematic situations were encountered when performing genotype-phenotype
correlations in the families to confirm the causality of these variants. In
conclusion, by screening known CHD-associated genes in well-selected nonsyndromic
CHD families and cautious variant interpretation, potential causative variants
were identified in less than half of the families (6 out of 13; 46%). Variant
interpretation remains a major challenge reflecting the complex genetic cause of 
CHD.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25931334  [PubMed - in process]


66. Life Sci. 2015 Jul 1;132:68-76. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2015.04.001. Epub 2015 Apr 25.

Proliferation of rat cardiac stem cells is induced by 2, 3, 5,
4'-tetrahydroxystilbene-2-O-ß-D-glucoside in vitro.

Song F(1), Zhao J(1), Hua F(1), Nian L(1), Zhou XX(1), Yang Q(1), Xie YH(1), Tang
HF(1), Sun JY(2), Wang SW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Material Medical, School of Pharmacy, The Fourth Military Medical
University, No. 169, Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China; Collaborative
Innovation Center for Chinese Medicine in Qinba Moutains, The Fourth Military
Medical University, No. 169, Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China. (2)Institute
of Material Medical, School of Pharmacy, The Fourth Military Medical University, 
No. 169, Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China; Collaborative Innovation Center 
for Chinese Medicine in Qinba Moutains, The Fourth Military Medical University,
No. 169, Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China. Electronic address:
sunjiy@fmmu.edu.cn. (3)Institute of Material Medical, School of Pharmacy, The
Fourth Military Medical University, No. 169, Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032,
China; Collaborative Innovation Center for Chinese Medicine in Qinba Moutains,
The Fourth Military Medical University, No. 169, Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032,
China. Electronic address: wangsiw@fmmu.edu.cn.

AIM: To study the effects of 2, 3, 5, 4'-tetrahydroxystilbene-2-O-ß-d-glucoside
(THSG) on proliferation of rat cardiac stem cells (CSCs) in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: C-kit(+) cells were isolated from neonatal (1 day old)
Sprague-Dawley rats by using flow cytometry. Optimal THSG treatment times and
doses for growth of CSCs were analyzed. CSCs were treated with various THSG doses
(0, 1, 10, and 100 µM) for 12h.
RESULTS: Sorted c-kit(+) cells exhibited self-renewing and clonogenic
capabilities. Cell Counting Kit (CCK-8) and Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen
(PCNA) ELISA test positive cells were significantly increased in THSG-treated
groups compared with untreated controls. The percentage of S-phase cells also
increased after THSG treatment. Moreover, we show that some c-kit(+) cells
spontaneously express vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), T-box
transcription factor (Tbx5), hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated 
2 (HCN2), hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide gated 4 (HCN4), alpha
myosin heavy chain (aMHC), and beta myosin heavy chain (ßMHC) mRNA, and stem cell
antigen 1 (Sca-1), cardiac troponin-I, GATA-4, Nkx2.5, and connexin 43 protein
were also assessed in CSCs. However, their expression was significantly increased
with THSG treatment when compared to untreated controls.
CONCLUSION: THSG can increase proliferation of rat CSCs in vitro and thus, shows 
promise as a potential treatment strategy for stimulating endogenous stem cells
to help repair the injured heart after myocardial infarction in patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25916801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Dev Biol. 2015 Jul 1;403(1):22-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.04.011. Epub 2015 Apr
23.

Mesodermal expression of Moz is necessary for cardiac septum development.

Vanyai HK(1), Thomas T(2), Voss AK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne 3052, Victoria,
Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne 
3052, Victoria, Australia. (2)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne 3052, Victoria, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne 3052, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address:
tthomas@wehi.edu.au. (3)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Melbourne 3052, Victoria, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne 3052, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address:
avoss@wehi.edu.au.

Ventricular septal defects (VSDs) are the most commonly occurring congenital
heart defect. They are regularly associated with complex syndromes, including
DiGeorge syndrome and Holt-Oram syndrome, which are characterised by
haploinsufficiency for the T-box transcription factors TBX1 and TBX5,
respectively. The histone acetyltransferase monocytic leukaemia zinc finger
protein, MOZ (MYST3/KAT6A), is required for the expression of the Tbx1 and Tbx5
genes. Homozygous loss of MOZ results in DiGeorge syndrome-like defects including
VSD. The Moz gene is expressed in the ectodermal, mesodermal and endodermal
aspects of the developing pharyngeal apparatus and heart; however it is unclear
in which of these tissues MOZ is required for heart development. The role of MOZ 
in the activation of Tbx1 would suggest a requirement for MOZ in the mesoderm,
because deletion of Tbx1 in the mesoderm causes VSDs. Here, we investigated the
tissue-specific requirements for MOZ in the mesoderm. We demonstrate that
Mesp1-cre-mediated deletion of Moz results in high penetrance of VSDs and
overriding aorta and a significant decrease in MOZ-dependant Tbx1 and Tbx5
expression. Together, our data suggest that the molecular pathogenesis of VSDs in
Moz germline mutant mice is due to loss of MOZ-dependant activation of mesodermal
Tbx1 and Tbx5 expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25912687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Dent Res. 2015 Jul;94(7):913-20. doi: 10.1177/0022034515581643. Epub 2015 Apr
24.

Candidate Gene Analyses of Skeletal Variation in Malocclusion.

da Fontoura CS(1), Miller SF(1), Wehby GL(2), Amendt BA(3), Holton NE(4),
Southard TE(5), Allareddy V(6), Moreno Uribe LM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Dows Institute for Research, College of Dentistry, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA, USA. (2)Department of Health Management and Policy, College of Public
Health, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (3)Department of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(4)Dows Institute for Research, College of Dentistry, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA, USA Department of Orthodontics, College of Dentistry, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (5)Department of Orthodontics, College of Dentistry,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (6)Department of Oral Pathology-Radiology
and Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (7)Dows Institute for
Research, College of Dentistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA Department
of Orthodontics, College of Dentistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA
lina-moreno@uiowa.edu.

This study evaluated associations between craniofacial candidate genes and
skeletal variation in patients with malocclusion. Lateral cephalometric
radiographs of 269 untreated adults with skeletal classes I, II, and III
malocclusion were digitized with 14 landmarks. Two-dimensional coordinates were
analyzed using Procrustes fit and principal component (PC) analysis to generate
continuous malocclusion phenotypes. Skeletal class classifications (I, II, or
III) were used as a categorical phenotype. Individuals were genotyped for 198
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 71 craniofacial genes and loci.
Phenotype-genotype associations were tested via multivariate linear regression
for continuous phenotypes and multinomial logistic regression for skeletal
malocclusion class. PC analysis resulted in 4 principal components (PCs)
explaining 69% of the total skeletal facial variation. PC1 explained 32.7% of the
variation and depicted vertical discrepancies ranging from skeletal deep to open 
bites. PC1 was associated with a SNP near PAX5 (P = 0.01). PC2 explained 21.7%
and captured horizontal maxillomandibular discrepancies. PC2 was associated with 
SNPs upstream of SNAI3 (P = 0.0002) and MYO1H (P = 0.006). PC3 explained 8.2% and
captured variation in ramus height, body length, and anterior cranial base
orientation. PC3 was associated with TWIST1 (P = 0.000076). Finally, PC4
explained 6.6% and detected variation in condylar inclination as well as
symphysis projection. PC4 was associated with PAX7 (P = 0.007). Furthermore,
skeletal class II risk increased relative to class I with the minor alleles of
SNPs in FGFR2 (odds ratio [OR] = 2.1, P = 0.004) and declined with SNPs in EDN1
(OR = 0.5, P = 0.007). Conversely, skeletal class III risk increased versus class
I with SNPs in FGFR2 (OR 2.2, P = 0.005) and COL1A1 (OR = 2.1, P = 0.008) and
declined with SNPs in TBX5 (OR = 0.5, P = 0.014). PAX5, SNAI3, MYO1H, TWIST1, and
PAX7 are associated with craniofacial skeletal variation among patients with
malocclusion, while FGFR2, EDN1, TBX5, and COL1A1 are associated with type of
skeletal malocclusion.

© International & American Associations for Dental Research 2015.

PMCID: PMC4530344 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25910506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Anticancer Res. 2015 Apr;35(4):1835-42.

Characterization of the 12q amplicons in lipomatous soft tissue tumors by
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification-based copy number analysis.

Creytens D(1), Van Gorp J(2), Speel EJ(3), Ferdinande L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital,
Ghent, Belgium david.creytens@uzgent.be creytensdavid@hotmail.com. (2)Department 
of Pathology, Diakonessenhuis Hospital Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology,
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, the Netherlands. (4)Department 
of Pathology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Well-differentiated liposarcoma (WDLPS) and de-differentiated
liposarcoma (DDLPS) are characterized by amplified sequences derived from the
long arm of chromosome 12. The goal of the present study was to identify, besides
the well-known candidate genes, novel relevant genes in these large, complex 12q 
amplicons.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification,
genetic alterations in 19 different genes of 12q12-24 were evaluated in 77
lipomatous soft tissue tumors (including lipomas, WDLPS, DDLPS and pleomorphic
liposarcomas).
RESULTS: We recorded several amplified genes of 12q13-15, including miR-26a-2, a 
gene not well studied in liposarcoma, and the well-known and previously described
genes murine double minute 2 (MDM2), YEATS domain-containing protein 4 (YEATS4), 
high-mobility AT-hook 2 (HMGA2), cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) and tetraspanin
31 (TSPAN31). Interestingly, the amplification profiles of these six genes were
found to be significantly different between WDLPS and DDLPS, more frequently
having a high-level status in DDLPS than in WDLPS. In addition, DDLPS were found 
to have significantly higher mean amplification ratios compared to WDLPS.
Moreover, we identified additional genes exclusively amplified in DDLPS in 12q13,
12q21 and 12q24, including glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), mitogen
activated protein kinase kinase kinase 12 (MAP3K12), cyclin-dependent kinase 2
(CDK2), ALX homeobox 1 (ALX1) and T-box 5 (TBX5).
CONCLUSION: Differences in amplification profiles among WDLPS and DDLPS may be
related to progression/de-differentiation in liposarcomas and show how in the
future amplification profiles could provide an adjunctive tool in characterizing 
progression to DDLPS. In addition, we identified additional genes exclusively
amplified in DDLPS, which may play a role in liposarcomagenesis, particularly in 
the de-differentiation process.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25862836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Int J Nanomedicine. 2015 Mar 6;10:1841-54. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S75124. eCollection
2015.

Peptide-enhanced mRNA transfection in cultured mouse cardiac fibroblasts and
direct reprogramming towards cardiomyocyte-like cells.

Lee K(1), Yu P(2), Lingampalli N(3), Kim HJ(3), Tang R(3), Murthy N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA ; UC
Berkeley and UCSF Joint Graduate Program in Bioengineering, Berkeley/San
Francisco, CA, USA. (2)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San
Francisco, CA, USA. (3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California,
Berkeley, CA, USA.

The treatment of myocardial infarction is a major challenge in medicine due to
the inability of heart tissue to regenerate. Direct reprogramming of endogenous
cardiac fibroblasts into functional cardiomyocytes via the delivery of
transcription factor mRNAs has the potential to regenerate cardiac tissue and to 
treat heart failure. Even though mRNA delivery to cardiac fibroblasts has the
therapeutic potential, mRNA transfection in cardiac fibroblasts has been
challenging. Herein, we develop an efficient mRNA transfection in cultured mouse 
cardiac fibroblasts via a polyarginine-fused heart-targeting peptide and
lipofectamine complex, termed C-Lipo and demonstrate the partial direct
reprogramming of cardiac fibroblasts towards cardiomyocyte cells. C-Lipo enabled 
the mRNA-induced direct cardiac reprogramming due to its efficient transfection
with low toxicity, which allowed for multiple transfections of Gata4, Mef2c, and 
Tbx5 (GMT) mRNAs for a period of 2 weeks. The induced cardiomyocyte-like cells
had a-MHC promoter-driven GFP expression and striated cardiac muscle structure
from a-actinin immunohistochemistry. GMT mRNA transfection of cultured mouse
cardiac fibroblasts via C-Lipo significantly increased expression of the
cardiomyocyte marker genes, Actc1, Actn2, Gja1, Hand2, and Tnnt2, after 2 weeks
of transfection. Moreover, this study provides the first direct evidence that the
stoichiometry of the GMT reprogramming factors influence the expression of
cardiomyocyte marker genes. Our results demonstrate that mRNA delivery is a
potential approach for cardiomyocyte generation.

PMCID: PMC4358644
PMID: 25834424  [PubMed - in process]


71. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jun;1849(6):709-21. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.02.002.
Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Fbxo25 controls Tbx5 and Nkx2-5 transcriptional activity to regulate
cardiomyocyte development.

Jeong HS(1), Jung ES(1), Sim YJ(1), Kim SJ(1), Jang JW(2), Hong KS(2), Lee WY(3),
Chung HM(4), Park KT(5), Jung YS(6), Kim CH(7), Kim KS(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School of Biomedical Science and
Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea. (2)Department 
of Developmental Biology, CHA University, Seoul 135-907, Republic of Korea.
(3)Major of Animal Science, College of Natural Science, Konkuk University,
Chungju 380-701, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Stem Cell Biology, School of
Medicine, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea. (5)Center for
Cancer Research, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA. (6)College of Pharmacy, Ajou
University, Suwon 443-749, Republic of Korea. (7)Department of Biomedical
Science, Graduate School of Biomedical Science and Engineering, Hanyang
University, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
chakimster@gmail.com. (8)Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School of
Biomedical Science and Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Republic
of Korea. Electronic address: ks66kim@hanyang.ac.kr.

The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) plays an important role in protein quality 
control, cellular signalings, and cell differentiation through the regulated
turnover of key transcription factors in cardiac tissue. However, the molecular
mechanism underlying Fbxo25-mediated ubiquitination of cardiac transcription
factors remains elusive. We report that an Fbxo25-mediated SCF ubiquitination
pathway regulates the protein levels and activities of Tbx5 and Nkx2-5 based on
our studies using MG132, proteasome inhibitor, and the temperature sensitive
ubiquitin system in ts20 cells. Our data indicate that Fbxo25 directly interacts 
with Tbx5 and Nkx2-5 in vitro and in vivo. In support of our findings, a
dominant-negative mutant of Fbxo25, Fbxo251-236, prevents Tbx5 degradation and
increases Tbx5 transcriptional activity in a Tbx5 responsive luciferase assay.
Therefore, Fbxo25 facilitates Tbx5 degradation in an SCF-dependent manner. In
addition, the silencing of endogenous Fbxo25 increases Tbx5 and Nkx2-5 mRNA
levels and suppresses mESC-derived cardiomyocyte differentiation. Likewise, the
exogenous expression of FBXO25 downregulates NKX2-5 level in human ESC-derived
cardiomyocytes. In myocardial infarction model, Fbxo25 mRNA decreases, whereas
the mRNA and protein levels of Tbx5 and Nkx2-5 increase. The protein levels of
Tbx5 and Nkx2-5 are regulated negatively by Fbxo25-mediated SCF ubiquitination
pathway. Thus, our findings reveal a novel mechanism for regulation of
SCFFbox25-dependent Nkx2-5 and Tbx5 ubiquitination in cardiac development and
provide a new insight into the regulatory mechanism of Nkx2-5 and Tbx5
transcriptional activity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25725482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Mar 27;459(1):166-71. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.094. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

TBX5 loss-of-function mutation contributes to familial dilated cardiomyopathy.

Zhang XL(1), Qiu XB(2), Yuan F(2), Wang J(3), Zhao CM(3), Li RG(2), Xu L(2), Xu
YJ(2), Shi HY(2), Hou XM(2), Qu XK(2), Xu YW(4), Yang YQ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200072, China. (2)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai
Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China. (4)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Tenth
People's Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200072, China. 
Electronic address: xuyawei69@163.com. (5)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai
Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China; Department
of Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China; Department of Central Laboratory,
Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China.
Electronic address: dryyq@tongji.edu.cn.

The cardiac T-box transcription factor TBX5 is crucial for proper cardiovascular 
development, and mutations in TBX5 have been associated with various congenital
heart diseases and arrhythmias in humans. However, whether mutated TBX5
contributes to dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) remains unclear. In this study, the
coding exons and flanking introns of the TBX5 gene were sequenced in 190
unrelated patients with idiopathic DCM. The available family members of the index
patient carrying an identified mutation and 200 unrelated ethnically matched
healthy individuals used as controls were genotyped for TBX5. The functional
characteristics of the mutant TBX5 were explored in contrast to its wild-type
counterpart by using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, a
novel heterozygous TBX5 mutation, p.S154A, was identified in a family with DCM
inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which co-segregated with DCM in the
family with complete penetrance. The missense mutation was absent in 400 control 
chromosomes and the altered amino acid was completely conserved evolutionarily
across various species. Functional assays revealed that the mutant TBX5 had
significantly decreased transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the mutation
markedly diminished the synergistic activation of TBX5 with NKX2-5 or GATA4,
other two transcription factors causatively linked to DCM. This study firstly
associates TBX5 loss-of-function mutation with enhanced susceptibility to DCM,
providing novel insight into the molecular mechanisms of DCM, and suggesting the 
potential implications in the development of new treatment strategies for this
common form of myocardial disorder.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25725155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Thorac Dis. 2015 Feb;7(2):152-8. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2015.01.21.

The role of transcription factors in atrial fibrillation.

Zhou M(1), Liao Y(1), Tu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Ministry of Education, College of 
Life Science and Technology, Center for Human Genome Research, Cardio-X
Institute, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China ; 2
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Immunology, Institute of Cardiology, Union Hospital,
Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430000, China.

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a complex disease that results from genetic and
environmental factors and their interactions. In recent years, genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) and family-based linkage analysis have found amounts
of genetic variants associated with AF. Some of them lie in coding sequences and 
thus mediate the encoded proteins, some in non-coding regions and influence the
expression of adjacent genes. These variants exert influence on the development
of cardiovascular system and normal cardiac electrical activity in different
levels, and eventually contribute to the occurrence of AF. Among these affected
genes, as a crucial means of transcriptional regulation, several transcription
factors play important roles in the pathogenesis of AF. In this review, we will
focus on the potential role of PITX2, PRRX1, ZHFX3, TBX5, and NKX2.5 in AF.

PMCID: PMC4321073
PMID: 25713730  [PubMed]


74. Cardiovasc Res. 2015 Jun 1;106(3):520-9. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvv042. Epub 2015 Feb
17.

Role of common and rare variants in SCN10A: results from the Brugada syndrome QRS
locus gene discovery collaborative study.

Behr ER(1), Savio-Galimberti E(2), Barc J(3), Holst AG(4), Petropoulou E(5),
Prins BP(5), Jabbari J(6), Torchio M(7), Berthet M(8), Mizusawa Y(3), Yang T(2), 
Nannenberg EA(9), Dagradi F(7), Weeke P(2), Bastiaenan R(5), Ackerman MJ(10),
Haunso S(11), Leenhardt A(12), Kääb S(13), Probst V(14), Redon R(14), Sharma
S(5), Wilde A(15), Tfelt-Hansen J(11), Schwartz P(7), Roden DM(2), Bezzina CR(3),
Olesen M(16), Darbar D(2), Guicheney P(8), Crotti L(17); UK10K Consortium,
Jamshidi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Research Centre, ICCS, St George's University of London, London
SW17 0RE, UK yjamshid@sgul.ac.uk ebehr@sgul.ac.uk. (2)Divisions of Cardiovascular
Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, Netherlands. (4)Laboratory for Molecular Cardiology, The Heart Centre,
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark Danish National
Research Foundation Centre for Cardiac Arrhythmia, Copenhagen, Denmark Novo
Nordisk A/S, Denmark. (5)Human Genetics Research Centre, ICCS, St George's
University of London, London SW17 0RE, UK. (6)Laboratory for Molecular
Cardiology, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark Danish National Research Foundation Centre for Cardiac
Arrhythmia, Copenhagen, Denmark LEO Pharma A/S, Denmark. (7)IRCCS Istituto
Auxologico Italiano, Center for Cardiac Arrhythmias of Genetic Origin, Milan,
Italy. (8)Inserm, UMR S1166, Faculté de Médecine Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris,
France Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR S1166, Paris, France
Institute of Cardiometabolism & Nutrition, ICAN, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital,
Paris, France. (9)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam. (10)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Internal
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA Division of Pediatric Cardiology,
Department of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
(11)Laboratory for Molecular Cardiology, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark Danish National Research Foundation
Centre for Cardiac Arrhythmia, Copenhagen, Denmark Department of Medicine and
Surgery, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (12)AP-HP, Hôpital
Bichat, Service de Cardiologie et Centre de Référence des Maladies Cardiaques
Héréditaires, Paris, France. (13)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum
München, Neuherberg, Germany. (14)Inserm, UMR 1087, l'institut du Thorax, Nantes,
France CHU Nantes, l'institut du Thorax, Service de Cardiologie, Nantes, France. 
(15)Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands Princess Al-Jawhara Al-Brahim Centre of Excellence in
Research of Hereditary Disorders, Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. (16)Laboratory
for Molecular Cardiology, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark Danish National Research Foundation Centre for
Cardiac Arrhythmia, Copenhagen, Denmark. (17)IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, 
Center for Cardiac Arrhythmias of Genetic Origin, Milan, Italy Inserm, UMR 1087, 
l'institut du Thorax, Nantes, France Department of Molecular Medicine, University
of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2015 Jun 1;106(3):351-2.

AIMS: Brugada syndrome (BrS) remains genetically heterogeneous and is associated 
with slowed cardiac conduction. We aimed to identify genetic variation in BrS
cases at loci associated with QRS duration.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A multi-centre study sequenced seven candidate genes
(SCN10A, HAND1, PLN, CASQ2, TKT, TBX3, and TBX5) in 156 Caucasian SCN5A
mutation-negative BrS patients (80% male; mean age 48) with symptoms (64%) and/or
a family history of sudden death (47%) or BrS (18%). Forty-nine variants were
identified: 18 were rare (MAF <1%) and non-synonymous; and 11/18 (61.1%), mostly 
in SCN10A, were predicted as pathogenic using multiple bioinformatics tools.
Allele frequencies were compared with the Exome Sequencing and UK10K Projects.
SKAT methods tested rare variation in SCN10A finding no statistically significant
difference between cases and controls. Co-segregation analysis was possible for
four of seven probands carrying a novel pathogenic variant. Only one pedigree
(I671V/G1299A in SCN10A) showed co-segregation. The SCN10A SNP V1073 was,
however, associated strongly with BrS [66.9 vs. 40.1% (UK10K) OR (95% CI) = 3.02 
(2.35-3.87), P = 8.07 × 10-19]. Voltage-clamp experiments for NaV1.8 were
performed for SCN10A common variants V1073, A1073, and rare variants of interest:
A200V and I671V. V1073, A200V and I671V, demonstrated significant reductions in
peak INa compared with ancestral allele A1073 (rs6795970).
CONCLUSION: Rare variants in the screened QRS-associated genes (including SCN10A)
are not responsible for a significant proportion of SCN5A mutation negative BrS. 
The common SNP SCN10A V1073 was strongly associated with BrS and demonstrated
loss of NaV1.8 function, as did rare variants in isolated patients.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4447806 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25691538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2015 Jun;29(6):254-60. doi: 10.1002/jbt.21692. Epub 2015
Feb 18.

Influences of domoic Acid exposure on cardiac development and the expression of
cardiovascular relative genes in zebrafish (Daniorerio) embryos.

Hong Z(1,)(2), Zhang Y(3), Zuo Z(3), Zhu R(4), Gao Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and The State Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental
Science, Xiamen University, South Xiangan Road, Xiamen, 361102, People's Republic
of China. gaoyh@xmu.edu.cn. (2)Engineering Research Center of Marine Biological
Resource Comprehensive Utilization, The Third Institute of Oceanography (TIO),
State Oceanic Administration (SOA), 184 Daxue Road, Xiamen, 361005, China.
gaoyh@xmu.edu.cn. (3)School of Life Sciences and The State Key Laboratory of
Marine Environmental Science, Xiamen University, South Xiangan Road, Xiamen,
361102, People's Republic of China. (4)Engineering Research Center of Marine
Biological Resource Comprehensive Utilization, The Third Institute of
Oceanography (TIO), State Oceanic Administration (SOA), 184 Daxue Road, Xiamen,
361005, China.

Domoic acid (DA) is a highly toxic phycotoxin that is generated from marine
diatoms Pseudonitzschia spp. It has been found that bivalves or cephalopods can
accumulate DA to a high level through their feeding activities and cause illness 
or death in consumers. Zebrafish have been used as a model to investigate and
characterize the developmental toxicity of DA. However, there is no report about 
the relationship between DA and cardiac development in zebrafish. Here, zebrafish
embryos were exposed to DA with at the dose of 1, 10, 100, and 1000 ng/L. High
mortality and some developmental toxicity including pericardial and yolk sac
edema, dorsal curvature, and cardiac defects were observed in the DA-treated
larvae. We found that DA exposure not only disrupted normal cardiac development
but also altered the expression of some cardiac development correlated genes and 
calcium ion channels, such as Anf, Bnp, Atp2a2a, Atp2a2b, Ncx1h, Ryr2b, and Tbx5.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25691335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Gene. 2015 Apr 15;560(2):129-36. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.02.017. Epub 2015 Feb
11.

Molecular basis of the clinical features of Holt-Oram syndrome resulting from
missense and extended protein mutations of the TBX5 gene as well as TBX5
intragenic duplications.

Al-Qattan MM(1), Abou Al-Shaar H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plastic Surgery and Hand Surgery, King Saud University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia; College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Electronic address: moqattan@hotmail.com. (2)Division of Plastic Surgery and Hand
Surgery, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; College of Medicine,
Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

This paper reviews the molecular basis of the clinical features of Holt-Oram
syndrome resulting from missense and extended protein mutations of the TBX5 gene 
as well as TBX5 intragenic duplications. First, we review all previously reported
cases with these mutations, and then describe the pathogenesis of the clinical
features in the heart and upper limb. Special emphasis is given to 'non-classic' 
upper limb features which are known to occur with these mutations. Finally, the
molecular basis of other concurrent anomalies (chest wall, craniofacial,
vertebral, and lung anomalies) is reviewed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25680289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Mar 15;183:117-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.01.049. Epub
2015 Jan 27.

Signaling molecules, transcription growth factors and other regulators revealed
from in-vivo and in-vitro models for the regulation of cardiac development.

Meganathan K(1), Sotiriadou I(1), Natarajan K(1), Hescheler J(1), Sachinidis
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology and
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Germany.
(2)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology and
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Germany.
Electronic address: A.Sachinidis@uni-koeln.de.

Several in-vivo heart developmental models have been applied to decipher the
cardiac developmental patterning encompassing early, dorsal, cardiac and visceral
mesoderm as well as various transcription factors such as Gata, Hand, Tin, Dpp,
Pnr. The expression of cardiac specific transcription factors, such as Gata4,
Tbx5, Tbx20, Tbx2, Tbx3, Mef2c, Hey1 and Hand1 are of fundamental significance
for the in-vivo cardiac development. Not only the transcription factors, but also
the signaling molecules involved in cardiac development were conserved among
various species. Enrichment of the bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) in the
anterior lateral plate mesoderm is essential for the initiation of myocardial
differentiation and the cardiac developmental process. Moreover, the expression
of a number of cardiac transcription factors and structural genes initiate
cardiac differentiation in the medial mesoderm. Other signaling molecules such as
TGF-beta, IGF-1/2 and the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) play a significant role 
in cardiac repair/regeneration, ventricular heart development and specification
of early cardiac mesoderm, respectively. The role of the Wnt signaling in cardiac
development is still controversial discussed, as in-vitro results differ
dramatically in relation to the animal models. Embryonic stem cells (ESC) were
utilized as an important in-vitro model for the elucidation of the cardiac
developmental processes since they can be easily manipulated by numerous
signaling molecules, growth factors, small molecules and genetic manipulation.
Finally, in the present review the dynamic role of the long noncoding RNA and
miRNAs in the regulation of cardiac development are summarized and discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25662074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Aquat Toxicol. 2015 Apr;161:25-32. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2015.01.027. Epub 2015 
Jan 29.

Aryl organophosphate flame retardants induced cardiotoxicity during zebrafish
embryogenesis: by disturbing expression of the transcriptional regulators.

Du Z(1), Wang G(2), Gao S(3), Wang Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, School of the
Environment, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, PR China. Electronic address:
dzk77@163.com. (2)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse,
School of the Environment, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, PR China.
Electronic address: Wanggw@smail.nju.edu.cn. (3)State Key Laboratory of Pollution
Control and Resource Reuse, School of the Environment, Nanjing University,
Nanjing 210023, PR China. Electronic address: ecsxg@nju.edu.cn. (4)State Key
Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, School of the Environment,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, PR China. Electronic address:
wangzy@nju.edu.cn.

As a result of the ban on some brominated flame retardants (BFRs), the use of
organophosphate flame retardants (OPFRs) increases, and they are detected in
multi-environment media at higher frequency and concentrations. However, the
toxicity data of OPFRs, especially those on developmental toxicology are quite
limited, which prevents an accurate evaluation of their environmental and health 
risk. Because a previous study reported that two aryl-OPFRs induced
cardiotoxicity during zebrafish embryogenesis, we designed experiments to compare
the heart developmental toxicity of a series of aryl-OPFRs with alkyl-OPFRs and
explored possible internal mechanism. First, acute toxicity of 9 frequently used 
OPFRs were studied with zebrafish embryos (2-96 hpf). By comparing the LC50 and
EC50 (pericardium edema) data, two aryl-OPFRs, triphenyl phosphate (TPhP) and
cresyl diphenyl phosphate (CDP) showed greater heart developmental toxicity than 
the others. It was also found that the acute toxicity of OPFRs varied mainly
depending on their hydrophobicity. Further study on the cardiotoxicity of TPhP
and CDP showed that the cardiac looping progress can be impeded by 0.10mg/L TPhP 
or CDP exposure. Bradycardia and reduction of myocardium were also observed in
0.50 and 1.0mg/L TPhP groups and 0.10, 0.50, and 1.0mg/L CDP groups. 0-48 hpf is 
the vulnerable window of zebrafish cardiogenesis that can be easily affected by
TPhP and CDP. RT-qPCR measurement on the expressions of key transcriptional
regulators in cardiogenesis showed that BMP4, NKX2-5, and TBX5 were significantly
inhibited at the exposure points of 12 hpf and 24 hpf which may be the internal
factors related to the heart developmental toxicity. As zebrafish is a good model
organism for human health study, the present results call for a greater attention
to the health risk of fetus in pregnant women exposed to such OPFRs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25661707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 13;290(11):6844-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.634451. Epub 2015
Jan 25.

Novel exons in the tbx5 gene locus generate protein isoforms with distinct
expression domains and function.

Yamak A(1), Georges RO(2), Sheikh-Hassani M(1), Morin M(2), Komati H(1), Nemer
M(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Cardiac Regeneration, Department
of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario K1N 6N5 and. (2)the Graduate Program in Molecular Biology, Institut de
Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec
H2W 1R7, Canada. (3)From the Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Cardiac
Regeneration, Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1N 6N5 and the Graduate Program in
Molecular Biology, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM),
Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H2W 1R7, Canada mona.nemer@uottawa.ca.

TBX5 is the gene mutated in Holt-Oram syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder
with complex heart and limb deformities. Its protein product is a member of the
T-box family of transcription factors and an evolutionarily conserved
dosage-sensitive regulator of heart and limb development. Understanding TBX5
regulation is therefore of paramount importance. Here we uncover the existence of
novel exons and provide evidence that TBX5 activity may be extensively regulated 
through alternative splicing to produce protein isoforms with differing N- and
C-terminal domains. These isoforms are also present in human heart, indicative of
an evolutionarily conserved regulatory mechanism. The newly identified isoforms
have different transcriptional properties and can antagonize TBX5a target gene
activation. Droplet Digital PCR as well as immunohistochemistry with
isoform-specific antibodies reveal differential as well as overlapping expression
domains. In particular, we find that the predominant isoform in skeletal
myoblasts is Tbx5c, and we show that it is dramatically up-regulated in
differentiating myotubes and is essential for myotube formation. Mechanistically,
TBX5c antagonizes TBX5a activation of pro-proliferative signals such as IGF-1,
FGF-10, and BMP4. The results provide new insight into Tbx5 regulation and
function that will further our understanding of its role in health and disease.
The finding of new exons in the Tbx5 locus may also be relevant to mutational
screening especially in the 30% of Holt-Oram syndrome patients with no mutations 
in the known TBX5a exons.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4358110
PMID: 25623069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Feb 15;331(2):369-76. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.12.016. Epub
2015 Jan 6.

Silencing of nodal modulator 1 inhibits the differentiation of P19 cells into
cardiomyocytes.

Zhang H(1), Xu C(2), Yang R(3), Chen H(4), Kong X(1), Qian L(1), Sheng Y(1), Sun 
W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, No. 300, Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, China. (2)Department of
Cardiology, Yancheng City No. 1 People<U+05F3>s Hospital, Yancheng, Jiangsu 224001,
China. (3)Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, No. 300, Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, China. Electronic address:
yr@njmu.edu.cn. (4)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, No. 300, Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, China.
Electronic address: huanhuanchen@hotmail.com.

Nodal modulator 1 (NOMO1), a highly conserved transmembrane protein, has been
identified as a part of a protein complex that participates in the Nodal
signaling pathway, a critical determinant of heart and visceral organ formation. 
We previously found that the NOMO1 gene was substantially downregulated in human 
ventricular septal defect (VSD) myocardium and, thus, may be an important
molecular pathway in human heart development. In this study, we aimed to
investigate the effects of NOMO1 gene silencing by RNA interference (RNAi) during
early mouse cardiac differentiation using P19 cells as a model system. Our
results revealed that the differentiated P19 cell population exhibited
downregulated NOMO1 levels and expressed lower levels of Nodal signaling
mediators, such as Nodal, Cripto and Smad2, than the negative control. Similarly,
cardiomyocyte-specific sarcomeric markers, such as cardiac troponin T, as well as
expression of cardiogenesis-related transcriptional factors, such as Nkx2.5,
Gata4 and Tbx5 were found to be downregulated in P19 differentiated
cardiomyocytes in NOMO1-silenced cells when compared to controls. In conclusion, 
our results indicate that NOMO1 gene knockdown inhibits the differentiation of
P19 cells into cardiomyocytes, which highlights a potential role for NOMO1 in
early cardiogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25576386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cell Biol Int. 2015 May;39(5):600-10. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10431. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

Lineage specific expression of Polycomb Group Proteins in human embryonic stem
cells in vitro.

Pethe P(1), Pursani V, Bhartiya D.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Department, National Institute for Research in Reproductive 
Health (NIRRH), Jehangir Merwanji Street, Parel, Mumbai, 400012, India.

Human embryonic (hES) stem cells are an excellent model to study lineage
specification and differentiation into various cell types. Differentiation
necessitates repression of specific genes not required for a particular lineage. 
Polycomb Group (PcG) proteins are key histone modifiers, whose primary function
is gene repression. PcG proteins form complexes called Polycomb Repressive
Complexes (PRCs), which catalyze histone modifications such as H2AK119ub1,
H3K27me3, and H3K9me3. PcG proteins play a crucial role during differentiation of
stem cells. The expression of PcG transcripts during differentiation of hES cells
into endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm lineage is yet to be shown. In-house
derived hES cell line KIND1 was differentiated into endoderm, mesoderm, and
ectoderm lineages; followed by characterization using RT-PCR for HNF4A, CDX2,
MEF2C, TBX5, SOX1, and MAP2. qRT-PCR and western blotting was performed to
compare expression of PcG transcripts and proteins across all the three lineages.
We observed that cells differentiated into endoderm showed upregulation of
RING1B, BMI1, EZH2, and EED transcripts. Mesoderm differentiation was
characterized by significant downregulation of all PcG transcripts during later
stages. BMI1 and RING1B were upregulated while EZH2, SUZ12, and EED remained low 
during ectoderm differentiation. Western blotting also showed distinct expression
of BMI1 and EZH2 during differentiation into three germ layers. Our study shows
that hES cells differentiating into endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm lineages
show distinct PcG expression profile at transcript and protein level.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 25572667  [PubMed - in process]


82. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 13;290(11):7114-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.635250. Epub 2015
Jan 7.

Deficiency of the chromatin regulator BRPF1 causes abnormal brain development.

You L(1), Zou J(2), Zhao H(3), Bertos NR(3), Park M(4), Wang E(2), Yang XJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Research Center, Department of
Medicine, McGill University, Quebec H3A 1A3. (2)the National Research Council
Canada, Montreal, Quebec H4P 2R2, and. (3)From the Rosalind & Morris Goodman
Cancer Research Center. (4)From the Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Research
Center, Department of Medicine, McGill University, Quebec H3A 1A3, the Department
of Biochemistry, McGill University and McGill University Health Center, Montreal,
Quebec H3A 1A3, Canada. (5)From the Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Research
Center, Department of Medicine, McGill University, Quebec H3A 1A3, the Department
of Biochemistry, McGill University and McGill University Health Center, Montreal,
Quebec H3A 1A3, Canada xiang-jiao.yang@mcgill.ca.

Epigenetic mechanisms are important in different neurological disorders, and one 
such mechanism is histone acetylation. The multivalent chromatin regulator BRPF1 
(bromodomain- and plant homeodomain-linked (PHD) zinc finger-containing protein
1) recognizes different epigenetic marks and activates three histone
acetyltransferases, so it is both a reader and a co-writer of the epigenetic
language. The three histone acetyltransferases are MOZ, MORF, and HBO1, which are
also known as lysine acetyltransferase 6A (KAT6A), KAT6B, and KAT7, respectively.
The MORF gene is mutated in four neurodevelopmental disorders sharing the
characteristic of intellectual disability and frequently displaying callosal
agenesis. Here, we report that forebrain-specific inactivation of the mouse Brpf1
gene caused early postnatal lethality, neocortical abnormalities, and partial
callosal agenesis. With respect to the control, the mutant forebrain contained
fewer Tbr2-positive intermediate neuronal progenitors and displayed aberrant
neurogenesis. Molecularly, Brpf1 loss led to decreased transcription of multiple 
genes, such as Robo3 and Otx1, important for neocortical development.
Surprisingly, elevated expression of different Hox genes and various other
transcription factors, such as Lhx4, Foxa1, Tbx5, and Twist1, was also observed. 
These results thus identify an important role of Brpf1 in regulating forebrain
development and suggest that it acts as both an activator and a silencer of gene 
expression in vivo.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4358132
PMID: 25568313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mamm Genome. 2015 Feb;26(1-2):57-79. doi: 10.1007/s00335-014-9551-x. Epub 2015
Jan 1.

In-silico QTL mapping of postpubertal mammary ductal development in the mouse
uncovers potential human breast cancer risk loci.

Hadsell DL(1), Hadsell LA, Olea W, Rijnkels M, Creighton CJ, Smyth I, Short KM,
Cox LL, Cox TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, USDA/ARS Children's Nutrition Research Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, 1100 Bates St. Suite 10072, Mail Stop: BCM-320,
Houston, TX, 77030-2600, USA, dhadsell@bcm.edu.

Genetic background plays a dominant role in mammary gland development and breast 
cancer (BrCa). Despite this, the role of genetics is only partially understood.
This study used strain-dependent variation in an inbred mouse mapping panel, to
identify quantitative trait loci (QTL) underlying structural variation in mammary
ductal development, and determined if these QTL correlated with genomic intervals
conferring BrCa susceptibility in humans. For about half of the traits,
developmental variation among the complete set of strains in this study was
greater (P < 0.05) than that of previously studied strains, or strains in current
common use for mammary gland biology. Correlations were also detected with
previously reported variation in mammary tumor latency and metastasis. In-silico 
genome-wide association identified 20 mammary development QTL (Mdq). Of these,
five were syntenic with previously reported human BrCa loci. The most significant
(P = 1 × 10(-11)) association of the study was on MMU6 and contained the genes
Plxna4, Plxna4os1, and Chchd3. On MMU5, a QTL was detected (P = 8 × 10(-7)) that 
was syntenic to a human BrCa locus on h12q24.5 containing the genes Tbx3 and
Tbx5. Intersection of linked SNP (r(2) > 0.8) with genomic and epigenomic
features, and intersection of candidate genes with gene expression and survival
data from human BrCa highlighted several for further study. These results support
the conclusion that mammary tumorigenesis and normal ductal development are
influenced by common genetic factors and that further studies of genetically
diverse mice can improve our understanding of BrCa in humans.

PMCID: PMC4548818
PMID: 25552398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 18;9(12):e110752. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110752.
eCollection 2014.

Functional cardiomyocytes derived from Isl1 cardiac progenitors via Bmp4
stimulation.

Cagavi E(1), Bartulos O(2), Suh CY(3), Sun B(4), Yue Z(4), Jiang Z(2), Yue L(4), 
Qyang Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Section of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale School of Medicine, 
Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States of America; Department of Medical
Biology, School of Medicine, Istanbul Medipol University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Section of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale School of Medicine, 
Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States of America. (3)Yale Cardiovascular 
Research Center, Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New
Haven, CT, United States of America; Department of Genetics, Yale School of
Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States of America. (4)Department
of Cell Biology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT, United 
States of America. (5)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Section of
Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale Stem Cell Center, 
Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States of
America; Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United 
States of America; Vascular Biology and Therapeutics Program, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States of America.

As heart failure due to myocardial infarction remains a leading cause of
morbidity worldwide, cell-based cardiac regenerative therapy using cardiac
progenitor cells (CPCs) could provide a potential treatment for the repair of
injured myocardium. As adult CPCs may have limitations regarding tissue
accessibility and proliferative ability, CPCs derived from embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) could serve as an unlimited source of cells with high proliferative
ability. As one of the CPCs that can be derived from embryonic stem cells, Isl1
expressing cardiac progenitor cells (Isl1-CPCs) may serve as a valuable source of
cells for cardiac repair due to their high cardiac differentiation potential and 
authentic cardiac origin. In order to generate an unlimited number of Isl1-CPCs, 
we used a previously established an ESC line that allows for isolation of
Isl1-CPCs by green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression that is directed by the
mef2c gene, specifically expressed in the Isl1 domain of the anterior heart
field. To improve the efficiency of cardiac differentiation of Isl1-CPCs, we
studied the role of Bmp4 in cardiogenesis of Isl1-CPCs. We show an inductive role
of Bmp directly on cardiac progenitors and its enhancement on early cardiac
differentiation of CPCs. Upon induction of Bmp4 to Isl1-CPCs during
differentiation, the cTnT+ cardiomyocyte population was enhanced 2.8±0.4 fold for
Bmp4 treated CPC cultures compared to that detected for vehicle treated cultures.
Both Bmp4 treated and untreated cardiomyocytes exhibit proper
electrophysiological and calcium signaling properties. In addition, we observed a
significant increase in Tbx5 and Tbx20 expression in differentiation cultures
treated with Bmp4 compared to the untreated control, suggesting a link between
Bmp4 and Tbx genes which may contribute to the enhanced cardiac differentiation
in Bmp4 treated cultures. Collectively these findings suggest a cardiomyogenic
role for Bmp4 directly on a pure population of Isl1 expressing cardiac
progenitors, which could lead to enhancement of cardiac differentiation and
engraftment, holding a significant therapeutic value for cardiac repair in the
future.

PMCID: PMC4270687
PMID: 25522363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 16;111(50):17917-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1409913111. Epub 2014 Dec 2.

Regulatory modulation of the T-box gene Tbx5 links development, evolution, and
adaptation of the sternum.

Bickley SR(1), Logan MP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Medical Research Council-National Institute
for Medical Research, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom; and. (2)Division of
Developmental Biology, Medical Research Council-National Institute for Medical
Research, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom; and Randall Division of Cell and
Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, Guy's Campus, London SE1 1UL, United
Kingdom malcolm.logan@kcl.ac.uk.

The sternum bone lies at the ventral midline of the thorax where it provides a
critical attachment for the pectoral muscles that allow the forelimbs to raise
the body from the ground. Among tetrapods, sternum morphology is correlated with 
the mode of locomotion: Avians that fly have a ventral extension, or keel, on
their sterna, which provides an increased area for flight muscle attachment. The 
sternum is fused with the ribs attaching on either side; however, unlike the
ribs, the sternal precursors do not originate from the somites. Despite the
crucial role of the sternum in tetrapod locomotion, little attention has been
given to its acquisition, evolution, and embryological development. We
demonstrate an essential role for the T-box transcription factor gene Tbx5 in
sternum and forelimb formation and show that both structures share an
embryological origin within the lateral plate mesoderm. Consistent with this
shared origin and role of Tbx5, sternum defects are a characteristic feature of
Holt-Oram Syndrome (OMIM 142900) caused by mutations in TBX5. We demonstrate a
link between sternum size and forelimb use across avians and provide evidence
that modulation of Tbx5 expression underlies the reduction in sternum and wing
size in a flightless bird, the emu. We demonstrate that Tbx5 is a common node in 
the genetic pathways regulating forelimb and sternum development, enabling
specific adaptations of these features without affecting other skeletal elements 
and can also explain the linked adaptation of sternum and forelimb morphology
correlated with mode of locomotion.

PMCID: PMC4273354
PMID: 25468972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Rev Port Cardiol. 2014 Nov;33(11):737.e1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.repc.2014.06.005. Epub
2014 Nov 4.

Holt-Oram syndrome: a case report.

Chin J(1), Pereira S(2), Camacho A(2), Pessoa B(2), Bento D(2), Amado J(2),
Pereira J(3), de Jesus I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Department, Faro Hospital, Centro Hospitalar do Algarve, Faro,
Portugal. Electronic address: joanachin@yahoo.com. (2)Cardiology Department, Faro
Hospital, Centro Hospitalar do Algarve, Faro, Portugal. (3)Radiology Department, 
Faro Hospital, Centro Hospitalar do Algarve, Faro, Portugal.

Holt-Oram syndrome is clinically characterized by morphological abnormalities of 
the upper limbs and congenital cardiac defects. Although the disease is
congenital, the diagnosis may only be made later in life. It is a rare autosomal 
dominant disorder, caused by a mutation in the TBX5 gene located on chromosome
12, but sporadic cases have also been reported. We describe the case of a
75-year-old man with known morphological alterations of the upper limbs since
birth and congenital cardiac defect (atrial septal defect), who later in life
also manifested with advanced atrioventricular block.

Copyright © 2014 Sociedade Portuguesa de Cardiologia. Published by Elsevier
España. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25455949  [PubMed - in process]


87. Gastroenterology. 2015 Feb;148(2):367-78. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.10.041. Epub
2014 Nov 5.

Polymorphisms near TBX5 and GDF7 are associated with increased risk for Barrett's
esophagus.

Palles C(1), Chegwidden L(2), Li X(3), Findlay JM(4), Farnham G(2), Castro Giner 
F(4), Peppelenbosch MP(5), Kovac M(4), Adams CL(2), Prenen H(6), Briggs S(4),
Harrison R(7), Sanders S(8), MacDonald D(9), Haigh C(10), Tucker A(11), Love
S(12), Nanji M(13), deCaestecker J(14), Ferry D(15), Rathbone B(16), Hapeshi
J(17), Barr H(18), Moayyedi P(19), Watson P(20), Zietek B(13), Maroo N(13), Gay
L(13), Underwood T(21), Boulter L(21), McMurtry H(22), Monk D(23), Patel P(24),
Ragunath K(25), Al Dulaimi D(26), Murray I(27), Koss K(28), Veitch A(15),
Trudgill N(29), Nwokolo C(30), Rembacken B(31), Atherfold P(32), Green E(33), Ang
Y(34), Kuipers EJ(35), Chow W(36), Paterson S(37), Kadri S(16), Beales I(38),
Grimley C(39), Mullins P(40), Beckett C(41), Farrant M(42), Dixon A(43), Kelly
S(44), Johnson M(45), Wajed S(46), Dhar A(47), Sawyer E(48), Roylance R(49),
Onstad L(50), Gammon MD(51), Corley DA(52), Shaheen NJ(53), Bird NC(54), Hardie
LJ(55), Reid BJ(56), Ye W(57), Liu G(58), Romero Y(59), Bernstein L(60), Wu
AH(61), Casson AG(62), Fitzgerald R(63), Whiteman DC(64), Risch HA(65), Levine
DM(66), Vaughan TL(50), Verhaar AP(5), van den Brande J(67), Toxopeus EL(68),
Spaander MC(5), Wijnhoven BP(68), van der Laan LJ(68), Krishnadath K(69),
Wijmenga C(70), Trynka G(70), McManus R(71), Reynolds JV(72), O'Sullivan J(72),
MacMathuna P(73), McGarrigle SA(72), Kelleher D(74), Vermeire S(6), Cleynen I(6),
Bisschops R(6), Tomlinson I(75), Jankowski J(76).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
Electronic address: cpalles@well.ox.ac.uk. (2)Plymouth University Peninsula
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Plymouth, Devon, UK. (3)Centre of
Biostatistics, Bioinformatics and Biomarkers, Plymouth University Peninsula
Schools of Medicine and Dentistry, Plymouth, Devon, UK. (4)Wellcome Trust Centre 
for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (5)Department of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (6)Department of Digestive Oncology, University
Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium. (7)Department of Pathology, Leicester
Royal Infirmary, Leicester, UK. (8)Department of Cellular Pathology, Warwick
Hospital, Warwick, UK. (9)Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(10)Department of Gastroenterology, Wansbeck General Hospital, Ashington,
Northumberland, UK. (11)William Harvey Research Institute, The Ernest Cooke
Vascular & Microvascular Unit, Centre for Clinical Pharmacology, St Bartholomew's
Hospital, London, UK. (12)Centre for Statistics in Medicine and Oxford Clinical
Trials Research Unit, Oxford, UK. (13)Centre for Digestive Diseases, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK. (14)Department of Gastroenterology, Leicester
General Hospital, Leicester, UK. (15)Department of Oncology, New Cross Hospital, 
Royal Wolverhampton Hospitals NHS Trust, Wolverhampton, UK. (16)Department for
Gastroenterology, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester, UK. (17)Gloucestershire
Royal Hospital, Great Western Road, Gloucester, UK. (18)Department of Upper GI
Surgery, Gloucestershire, Royal Hospital, Gloucester, UK. (19)Department of
Medicine, McMaster HC, Hamilton Ontario, Canada. (20)School of Medicine,
Dentistry, and Biomedical Sciences, Centre for Public Health, Queens University
Belfast, NI. (21)University of Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, Tremona
Road, Southampton, UK. (22)Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Royal Preston Hospital, Lancashire, UK. (23)General Surgery, Countess of Chester 
Hospital, Chester, UK. (24)Southampton University Hospitals NHS Trust,
Southampton, UK. (25)Wolfson Digestive Diseases Centre, Queens Medical Centre,
Nottingham, UK. (26)Worcestershire Acute Hospitals NHS Trust, Alexandra Hospital,
Redditch, UK. (27)Department of Gastroenterology, Royal Cornwall Hospital, Truro,
Cornwall, UK. (28)Macclesfield General Hospital, Macclefield, Cheshire, UK.
(29)Department of Gastroenterology, Sandwell General Hospital, Lyndon, West
Bromwich, UK. (30)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital of
Coventry, Coventry, UK. (31)Department of Gastroenterology, Leeds General
Infirmary, Leeds, UK. (32)Department of Clinical Pharmacology University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK. (33)School of Biomedical & Healthcare Sciences, Plymouth
University Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry, Plymouth, UK.
(34)Gastroenterology, Royal Albert Edward Infirmary NHS Trust, Wigan, UK; GI
Science Centre, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, University of Manchester,
Salford, UK. (35)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of
Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre Rotterdam, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands. (36)Forth Valley Royal Hospital, Larbert, Scotland, UK.
(37)Norfolk and Norwich University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Norfolk and
Norwich University Hospital, Norwich, UK. (38)Burnley General Hospital, Burnley, 
Lancashire, UK. (39)Head of Gastroenterology, University Hospital of Northern BC,
Prince George, British Columbia, Canada. (40)Bradford Teaching Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Bradford Royal Infirmary, Bradford, UK. (41)Royal United
Hospital Bath NHS Trust, Royal United Hospital, Avon, Bath, Somerset, UK.
(42)Kettering General Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Kettering General Hospital, 
Rothwell Road, Kettering, Northants, UK. (43)York Teaching Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust, York, UK. (44)Luton and Dunstable University Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust, Luton, Bedfordshire, UK. (45)Department of Thoracic and Upper
Gastrointestinal Surgery, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter,
UK. (46)County and Durham and Darlington NHS Foundation Trust, Bishop Auckland,
County Durham, UK. (47)Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(48)Barts Cancer Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London, UK.
(49)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centre,
Seattle, Washington. (50)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina
School of Public Health, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (51)Division of Research
and San Francisco Medical Center, Kaiser Permanente Northern California,
California. (52)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, UNC School of
Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(53)Department of Oncology, The Medical School, University of Sheffield, UK.
(54)Division of Epidemiology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. (55)Division of
Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington.
(56)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina School of Public
Health, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; Department of Medical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (57)Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre, Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada. (58)Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. (59)Registry,
On behalf of the Romero; Department of Population Sciences, Beckman Research
Institute and City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte, California.
(60)Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California/Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, California. (61)Department of Surgery, 
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada. (62)MRC Cancer Cell Unit,
Hutchison-MRC Research Centre and University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(63)Cancer Control, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Queensland,
Australia. (64)Department of Chronic Disease Epidemiology, Yale School of Public 
Health, New Haven, Connecticut. (65)Department of Biostatistics, University of
Washington School of Public Health, Seattle, Washington. (66)Department of
Gastroenterology, Tergooi Hospital, Hilversum, The Netherlands. (67)Department of
Surgery, Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (68)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical 
Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (69)Department of Genetics, University
Medical Centre Groningen and University of Groningen, The Netherlands.
(70)Department of Clinical Medicine & Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity
Centre for Health Sciences, Trinity College Dublin, St James's Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland. (71)Department of Surgery, Trinity Centre for Health Sciences, Trinity
College Dublin, St. James' Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (72)Gastrointestinal Unit, 
Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, University College Dublin, Dublin,
Ireland. (73)Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, South Kensington
Campus, London, UK. (74)Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, South Kensington
Campus, London, UK. (75)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK. Electronic address: iant@well.ox.ac.uk. (76)University
Hospitals Coventry & Warwickshire NHS Trust, Warwickshire, England; Warwick
Medical School, University of Warwick, Warwickshire, England. Electronic address:
J.Jankowski@warwick.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Barrett's esophagus (BE) increases the risk of esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC). We found the risk to be BE has been associated with single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on chromosome 6p21 (within the HLA region) and on
16q23, where the closest protein-coding gene is FOXF1. Subsequently, the
Barrett's and Esophageal Adenocarcinoma Consortium (BEACON) identified risk loci 
for BE and esophageal adenocarcinoma near CRTC1 and BARX1, and within 100 kb of
FOXP1. We aimed to identify further SNPs that increased BE risk and to validate
previously reported associations.
METHODS: We performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) to identify variants
associated with BE and further analyzed promising variants identified by BEACON
by genotyping 10,158 patients with BE and 21,062 controls.
RESULTS: We identified 2 SNPs not previously associated with BE: rs3072 (2p24.1; 
odds ratio [OR] = 1.14; 95% CI: 1.09-1.18; P = 1.8 × 10(-11)) and rs2701108
(12q24.21; OR = 0.90; 95% CI: 0.86-0.93; P = 7.5 × 10(-9)). The closest
protein-coding genes were respectively GDF7 (rs3072), which encodes a ligand in
the bone morphogenetic protein pathway, and TBX5 (rs2701108), which encodes a
transcription factor that regulates esophageal and cardiac development. Our data 
also supported in BE cases 3 risk SNPs identified by BEACON (rs2687201,
rs11789015, and rs10423674). Meta-analysis of all data identified another SNP
associated with BE and esophageal adenocarcinoma: rs3784262, within ALDH1A2 (OR =
0.90; 95% CI: 0.87-0.93; P = 3.72 × 10(-9)).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified 2 loci associated with risk of BE and provided data to
support a further locus. The genes we found to be associated with risk for BE
encode transcription factors involved in thoracic, diaphragmatic, and esophageal 
development or proteins involved in the inflammatory response.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4315134
PMID: 25447851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2015 Jan;30(1):33-9. doi: 10.1097/HCO.0000000000000134.

Inherited progressive cardiac conduction disorders.

Baruteau AE(1), Probst V, Abriel H.

Author information: 
(1)aL'Institut du Thorax, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale (INSERM) Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 1087, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR 6291, French Reference Center for Inherited
Arrhythmias, Nantes University, Nantes bMarie Lannelongue Hospital, Department of
Pediatric and Congenital Cardiac Surgery, M3C - French Reference Center for
Complex Congenital Heart Diseases, Le Plessis Robinson/Paris Sud University, Le
Kremlin Bicêtre, Paris, France cDepartment of Clinical Research, Swiss National
Centre of Competence in Research (NCCR) TransCure, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Progressive cardiac conduction disorder (PCCD) is an inherited
cardiac disease that may present as a primary electrical disease or be associated
with structural heart disease. In this brief review, we present recent clinical, 
genetic, and molecular findings relating to PCCD.
RECENT FINDINGS: Inherited PCCD in structurally normal hearts has been found to
be linked to genetic variants in the ion channel genes SCN5A, SCN1B, SCN10A,
TRPM4, and KCNK17, as well as in genes coding for cardiac connexin proteins. In
addition, several SCN5A mutations lead to 'cardiac sodium channelopathy overlap
syndrome'. Other genes coding for cardiac transcription factors, such as NKX2.5
and TBX5, are involved in the development of the cardiac conduction system and in
the morphogenesis of the heart. Mutations in these two genes have been shown to
cause cardiac conduction disorders associated with various congenital heart
defects.
SUMMARY: PCCD is a hereditary syndrome, and genetic variants in multiple genes
have been described to date. Genetic screening and identification of the causal
mutation are crucial for risk stratification and family counselling.

PMID: 25426816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Circ Res. 2015 Jan 16;116(2):237-44. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.305547. Epub
2014 Nov 21.

Stoichiometry of Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5 influences the efficiency and quality of 
induced cardiac myocyte reprogramming.

Wang L(1), Liu Z(1), Yin C(1), Asfour H(1), Chen O(1), Li Y(1), Bursac N(1), Liu 
J(1), Qian L(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (L.W., Z.L., C.Y.,
O.C., J.L., L.Q.), McAllister Heart Institute (L.W., Z.L., C.Y., O.C., J.L.,
L.Q,), and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center (L.W., Z.L., C.Y., O.C., J.L., 
L.Q.), University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; and Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC (H.A., Y.L., N.B.). (2)From the
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (L.W., Z.L., C.Y., O.C., J.L.,
L.Q.), McAllister Heart Institute (L.W., Z.L., C.Y., O.C., J.L., L.Q,), and
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center (L.W., Z.L., C.Y., O.C., J.L., L.Q.),
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; and Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC (H.A., Y.L., N.B.). li_qian@med.unc.edu.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2015 Jan 16;116(2):216-8.

RATIONALE: Generation of induced cardiac myocytes (iCMs) directly from
fibroblasts offers great opportunities for cardiac disease modeling and cardiac
regeneration. A major challenge of iCM generation is the low conversion rate of
fibroblasts to fully reprogrammed iCMs, which could in part be attributed to
unbalanced expression of reprogramming factors Gata4 (G), Mef2c (M), and Tbx5 (T)
using the current gene delivery approach.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to establish a system to express distinct ratios of G, M, T
proteins in fibroblasts and determine the effect of G, M, T stoichiometry on iCM 
reprogramming.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We took advantage of the inherent feature of the
polycistronic system and generated all possible combinations of G, M, T with
identical 2A sequences in a single transgene. We demonstrated that each splicing 
order of G, M, T gave rise to distinct G, M, T protein expression levels.
Combinations that resulted in higher protein level of Mef2c with lower levels of 
Gata4 and Tbx5 significantly enhanced reprogramming efficiency compared with
separate G, M, T transduction. Importantly, after further optimization, the MGT
vector resulted in more than 10-fold increase in the number of mature beating iCM
loci. Molecular characterization revealed that more optimal G, M, T stoichiometry
correlated with higher expression of mature cardiac myocyte markers.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that stoichiometry of G, M, T protein
expression influences the efficiency and quality of iCM reprogramming. The
established optimal G, M, T expression condition will provide a valuable platform
for future iCM studies.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4299697
PMID: 25416133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015 Feb;11(2):90-100. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2014.185. Epub
2014 Nov 4.

Biology of upper-body and lower-body adipose tissue--link to whole-body
phenotypes.

Karpe F(1), Pinnick KE(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Radcliffe
Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Headington OX3 
7LE, UK. [2] NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, OUH Trust, Churchill
Hospital, Headington OX3 7LE, UK. (2)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Churchill
Hospital, Headington OX3 7LE, UK.

The distribution of adipose tissue in the body has wide-ranging and reproducible 
associations with health and disease. Accumulation of adipose tissue in the upper
body (abdominal obesity) is associated with the development of cardiovascular
disease, insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus and even all-cause
mortality. Conversely, accumulation of fat in the lower body (gluteofemoral
obesity) shows opposite associations with cardiovascular disease and type 2
diabetes mellitus when adjusted for overall fat mass. The abdominal depots are
characterized by rapid uptake of predominantly diet-derived fat and a high lipid 
turnover that is easily stimulated by adrenergic receptor activation. The
lower-body fat stores have a reduced lipid turnover with a capacity to
accommodate fat undergoing redistribution. Lower-body adipose tissue also seems
to retain the capacity to recruit additional adipocytes as a result of weight
gain and demonstrates fewer signs of inflammatory insult. New data suggest that
the profound functional differences between the upper-body and lower-body tissues
are controlled by site-specific sets of developmental genes, such as HOXA6,
HOXA5, HOXA3, IRX2 and TBX5 in subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue and HOTAIR, 
SHOX2 and HOXC11 in gluteofemoral adipose tissue, which are under epigenetic
control. This Review discusses the developmental and functional differences
between upper-body and lower-body fat depots and provides mechanistic insight
into the disease-protective effects of lower-body fat.

PMID: 25365922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc. 2015 Nov;90(4):1163-78. doi: 10.1111/brv.12150. Epub
2014 Oct 31.

How the pterosaur got its wings.

Tokita M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 16
Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, U.S.A.

Throughout the evolutionary history of life, only three vertebrate lineages took 
to the air by acquiring a body plan suitable for powered flight: birds, bats, and
pterosaurs. Because pterosaurs were the earliest vertebrate lineage capable of
powered flight and included the largest volant animal in the history of the
earth, understanding how they evolved their flight apparatus, the wing, is an
important issue in evolutionary biology. Herein, I speculate on the potential
basis of pterosaur wing evolution using recent advances in the developmental
biology of flying and non-flying vertebrates. The most significant morphological 
features of pterosaur wings are: (i) a disproportionately elongated fourth
finger, and (ii) a wing membrane called the brachiopatagium, which stretches from
the posterior surface of the arm and elongated fourth finger to the anterior
surface of the leg. At limb-forming stages of pterosaur embryos, the zone of
polarizing activity (ZPA) cells, from which the fourth finger eventually
differentiates, could up-regulate, restrict, and prolong expression of 5'-located
Homeobox D (Hoxd) genes (e.g. Hoxd11, Hoxd12, and Hoxd13) around the ZPA through 
pterosaur-specific exploitation of sonic hedgehog (SHH) signalling. 5'Hoxd genes 
could then influence downstream bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signalling to
facilitate chondrocyte proliferation in long bones. Potential expression of Fgf10
and Tbx3 in the primordium of the brachiopatagium formed posterior to the
forelimb bud might also facilitate elongation of the phalanges of the fourth
finger. To establish the flight-adapted musculoskeletal morphology shared by all 
volant vertebrates, pterosaurs probably underwent regulatory changes in the
expression of genes controlling forelimb and pectoral girdle musculoskeletal
development (e.g. Tbx5), as well as certain changes in the mode of cell-cell
interactions between muscular and connective tissues in the early phase of their 
evolution. Developmental data now accumulating for extant vertebrate taxa could
be helpful in understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms of body-plan
evolution in extinct vertebrates as well as extant vertebrates with unique
morphology whose embryonic materials are hard to obtain.

© 2014 The Author. Biological Reviews © 2014 Cambridge Philosophical Society.

PMID: 25361444  [PubMed - in process]


92. PLoS Genet. 2014 Oct 30;10(10):e1004604. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004604.
eCollection 2014.

Foxf genes integrate tbx5 and hedgehog pathways in the second heart field for
cardiac septation.

Hoffmann AD(1), Yang XH(1), Burnicka-Turek O(1), Bosman JD(1), Ren X(2), Steimle 
JD(1), Vokes SA(3), McMahon AP(4), Kalinichenko VV(2), Moskowitz IP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Pathology, and Human Genetics, The University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio,
United States of America. (3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for
Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas, United States
of America. (4)Department of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Biology,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America.

The Second Heart Field (SHF) has been implicated in several forms of congenital
heart disease (CHD), including atrioventricular septal defects (AVSDs).
Identifying the SHF gene regulatory networks required for atrioventricular
septation is therefore an essential goal for understanding the molecular basis of
AVSDs. We defined a SHF Hedgehog-dependent gene regulatory network using whole
genome transcriptional profiling and GLI-chromatin interaction studies. The
Forkhead box transcription factors Foxf1a and Foxf2 were identified as SHF
Hedgehog targets. Compound haploinsufficiency for Foxf1a and Foxf2 caused
atrioventricular septal defects, demonstrating the biological relevance of this
regulatory network. We identified a Foxf1a cis-regulatory element that bound the 
Hedgehog transcriptional regulators GLI1 and GLI3 and the T-box transcription
factor TBX5 in vivo. GLI1 and TBX5 synergistically activated transcription from
this cis-regulatory element in vitro. This enhancer drove reproducible expression
in vivo in the posterior SHF, the only region where Gli1 and Tbx5 expression
overlaps. Our findings implicate Foxf genes in atrioventricular septation,
describe the molecular underpinnings of the genetic interaction between Hedgehog 
signaling and Tbx5, and establish a molecular model for the selection of the SHF 
gene regulatory network for cardiac septation.

PMCID: PMC4214600
PMID: 25356765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Development. 2014 Nov;141(22):4267-78. doi: 10.1242/dev.114025. Epub 2014 Oct 24.

Induction of diverse cardiac cell types by reprogramming fibroblasts with cardiac
transcription factors.

Nam YJ(1), Lubczyk C(2), Bhakta M(2), Zang T(3), Fernandez-Perez A(2), McAnally
J(3), Bassel-Duby R(3), Olson EN(4), Munshi NV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390, USA Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine, Division of Cardiology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (4)Department of Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and
Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
eric.olson@utsouthwestern.edu nikhil.munshi@utsouthwestern.edu. (5)Department of 
Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, UT Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, 
UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
eric.olson@utsouthwestern.edu nikhil.munshi@utsouthwestern.edu.

Various combinations of cardiogenic transcription factors, including Gata4 (G),
Hand2 (H), Mef2c (M) and Tbx5 (T), can reprogram fibroblasts into induced
cardiac-like myocytes (iCLMs) in vitro and in vivo. Given that optimal cardiac
function relies on distinct yet functionally interconnected atrial, ventricular
and pacemaker (PM) cardiomyocytes (CMs), it remains to be seen which subtypes are
generated by direct reprogramming and whether this process can be harnessed to
produce a specific CM of interest. Here, we employ a PM-specific Hcn4-GFP
reporter mouse and a spectrum of CM subtype-specific markers to investigate the
range of cellular phenotypes generated by reprogramming of primary fibroblasts.
Unexpectedly, we find that a combination of four transcription factors (4F)
optimized for Hcn4-GFP expression does not generate beating PM cells due to
inadequate sarcomeric protein expression and organization. However, applying
strict single-cell criteria to GHMT-reprogrammed cells, we observe induction of
diverse cellular phenotypes, including those resembling immature forms of all
three major cardiac subtypes (i.e. atrial, ventricular and pacemaker). In
addition, we demonstrate that cells induced by GHMT are directly reprogrammed and
do not arise from an Nxk2.5(+) progenitor cell intermediate. Taken together, our 
results suggest a remarkable degree of plasticity inherent to GHMT reprogramming 
and provide a starting point for optimization of CM subtype-specific
reprogramming protocols.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4302916
PMID: 25344074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 16;5:e1469. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.444.

Identification and characterization of the novel Col10a1 regulatory mechanism
during chondrocyte hypertrophic differentiation.

Gu J(1), Lu Y(2), Li F(3), Qiao L(1), Wang Q(1), Li N(1), Borgia JA(4), Deng
Y(5), Lei G(6), Zheng Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Hematological Laboratory Science, School of
Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China.
(2)1] Department of Hematology and Hematological Laboratory Science, School of
Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China [2]
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL, USA. (3)Department of Pathophysiology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei,
China. (4)Department of Pathology and Department of Biochemistry, Rush University
Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA. (5)Department of Internal Medicine and
Biochemistry, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA. (6)Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China.

The majority of human skeleton develops through the endochondral pathway, in
which cartilage-forming chondrocytes proliferate and enlarge into hypertrophic
chondrocytes that eventually undergo apoptosis and are replaced by bone. Although
at a terminal differentiation stage, hypertrophic chondrocytes have been
implicated as the principal engine of bone growth. Abnormal chondrocyte
hypertrophy has been seen in many skeletal dysplasia and osteoarthritis.
Meanwhile, as a specific marker of hypertrophic chondrocytes, the type X collagen
gene (COL10A1) is also critical for endochondral bone formation, as mutation and 
altered COL10A1 expression are often accompanied by abnormal chondrocyte
hypertrophy in many skeletal diseases. However, how the type X collagen gene is
regulated during chondrocyte hypertrophy has not been fully elucidated. We have
recently demonstrated that Runx2 interaction with a 150-bp mouse Col10a1
cis-enhancer is required but not sufficient for its hypertrophic
chondrocyte-specific reporter expression in transgenic mice, suggesting
requirement of additional Col10a1 regulators. In this study, we report in silico 
sequence analysis of this 150-bp enhancer and identification of its multiple
binding factors, including AP1, MEF2, NFAT, Runx1 and TBX5. Using this enhancer
as bait, we performed yeast one-hybrid assay and identified multiple candidate
Col10a1-interacting genes, including cyclooxygenase 1 (Cox-1) and Cox-2. We have 
also performed mass spectrometry analysis and detected EF1-alpha, Fus, GdF7 and
Runx3 as components of the specific complex formed by the cis-enhancer and
nuclear extracts from hypertrophic MCT (mouse chondrocytes immortalized with
large T antigen) cells that express Col10a1 abundantly. Notably, some of the
candidate genes are differentially expressed in hypertrophic MCT cells and have
been associated with chondrocyte hypertrophy and Runx2, an indispensible Col10a1 
regulator. Intriguingly, we detected high-level Cox-2 expression in hypertrophic 
MCT cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays confirmed the interaction between Cox-2 and Col10a1 cis-enhancer,
supporting its role as a candidate Col10a1 regulator. Together, our data support 
a Cox-2-containing, Runx2-centered Col10a1 regulatory mechanism, during
chondrocyte hypertrophic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4649528
PMID: 25321476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Immunol. 2014 Nov 15;193(10):4945-51. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400066. Epub 2014 
Oct 15.

Epigenome analysis reveals TBX5 as a novel transcription factor involved in the
activation of rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts.

Karouzakis E(1), Trenkmann M(2), Gay RE(2), Michel BA(2), Gay S(2), Neidhart
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Experimental Rheumatology, University Hospital Zurich, CH-8952
Schlieren, Switzerland emmanuel.karouzakis@usz.ch. (2)Center of Experimental
Rheumatology, University Hospital Zurich, CH-8952 Schlieren, Switzerland.

In this study, we analyzed the methylation status of human promoters in
rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RASF). Differentially methylated genes
between RASF and osteoarthritis synovial fibroblasts (OASF) were identified by
methylated DNA immunoprecipitation and hybridization to human promoter tiling
arrays. The methylation status was confirmed by pyrosequencing. Gene and protein 
expression of differentially methylated genes was evaluated with real-time PCR,
Western blot, and immunohistochemistry. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was used to
measure the gene promoter-associated acetylation and methylation of histones.
Transcription factor-specific targets were identified with microarray and
luciferase assays. We found that the transcription factor T-box transcription
factor 5 (TBX5) was less methylated in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) synovium and
RASF than in osteoarthritis (OA) samples. Demethylation of the TBX5 promoter in
RASF and RA synovium was accompanied by higher TBX5 expression than in OASF and
OA synovium. In RA synovium, TBX5 expression was primarily localized to the
synovial lining. In addition, the TBX5 locus was enriched in activating chromatin
marks, such as histone 4 lysine 4 trimethylation and histone acetylation, in
RASF. In our functional studies, we observed that 790 genes were differentially
expressed by 2-6-fold after overexpression of TBX5 in OASF. Bioinformatic
analysis of these genes revealed that the chemokines IL-8, CXCL12, and CCL20 were
common targets of TBX5 in OASF. Taken together, our data show that TBX5 is a
novel inducer of important chemokines in RASF. Thus, we conclude that RASF
contribute to the inflammatory processes operating in the pathogenesis of RA via 
epigenetic control of TBX5.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25320281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014 Oct 14;3(5):e001271. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001271.

Rac1 signaling is critical to cardiomyocyte polarity and embryonic heart
development.

Leung C(1), Lu X(2), Liu M(3), Feng Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (C.L.,
X.L., Q.F.) Collaborative Program in Developmental Biology, The University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (C.L.). (2)Department of Physiology and 
Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, The University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (C.L., X.L., Q.F.). (3)Lawson Health
Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada
(M.L., Q.F.). (4)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of
Medicine and Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada (C.L., X.L., Q.F.) Department of Medicine, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (Q.F.)
Lawson Health Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London,
Ontario, Canada (M.L., Q.F.).

BACKGROUND: Defects in cardiac septation are the most common form of congenital
heart disease, but the mechanisms underlying these defects are still poorly
understood. The small GTPase Rac1 is implicated in planar cell polarity of
epithelial cells in Drosophila; however, its role in mammalian cardiomyocyte
polarity is not clear. We tested the hypothesis that Rac1 signaling in the second
heart field regulates cardiomyocyte polarity, chamber septation, and right
ventricle development during embryonic heart development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Mice with second heart field-specific deficiency of Rac1
(Rac1(SHF)) exhibited ventricular and atrial septal defects, a thinner right
ventricle myocardium, and a bifid cardiac apex. Fate-mapping analysis showed that
second heart field contribution to the interventricular septum and right
ventricle was deficient in Rac1(SHF) hearts. Notably, cardiomyocytes had a
spherical shape with disrupted F-actin filaments in Rac1(SHF) compared with
elongated and well-aligned cardiomyocytes in littermate controls. Expression of
Scrib, a core protein in planar cell polarity, was lost in Rac1(SHF) hearts with 
decreased expression of WAVE and Arp2/3, leading to decreased migratory ability. 
In addition, Rac1-deficient neonatal cardiomyocytes displayed defects in cell
projections, lamellipodia formation, and cell elongation. Furthermore, apoptosis 
was increased and the expression of Gata4, Tbx5, Nkx2.5, and Hand2 transcription 
factors was decreased in the Rac1(SHF) right ventricle myocardium.
CONCLUSIONS: Deficiency of Rac1 in the second heart field impairs elongation and 
cytoskeleton organization of cardiomyocytes and results in congenital septal
defects, thin right ventricle myocardium, and a bifid cardiac apex. Our study
suggests that Rac1 signaling is critical to cardiomyocyte polarity and embryonic 
heart development.

© 2014 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., 
by Wiley Blackwell.

PMCID: PMC4323834
PMID: 25315346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Sci Rep. 2014 Oct 14;4:6614. doi: 10.1038/srep06614.

Combined biophysical and soluble factor modulation induces cardiomyocyte
differentiation from human muscle derived stem cells.

Tchao J(1), Han L(2), Lin B(2), Yang L(2), Tobita K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (3)1]
Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA [2]
Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA [3] McGowan 
Institute of Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA.

Cellular cardiomyoplasty has emerged as a novel therapy to restore contractile
function of injured failing myocardium. Human multipotent muscle derived stem
cells (MDSC) can be a potential abundant, autologous cell source for cardiac
repair. However, robust conditions for cardiomyocyte (CM) differentiation are not
well established for this cell type. We have developed a new method for CM
differentiation from human MDSC that combines 3-dimensional artificial muscle
tissue (AMT) culture with temporally controlled biophysical cell aggregation and 
delivery of 4 soluble factors (microRNA-206 inhibitor, IWR-1, Lithium Chloride,
and BMP-4) (4F-AG-AMT). The 4F-AG-AMT displayed cardiac-like response to
ß-adrenergic stimulation and contractile properties. 4F-AG-AMT expressed major
cardiac (NKX2-5, GATA4, TBX5, MEF2C) transcription factors and structural
proteins. They also express cardiac gap-junction protein, connexin-43, similar to
CMs and synchronized spontaneous calcium transients. These results highlight the 
importance of temporal control of biophysical and soluble factors for CM
differentiation from MDSCs.

PMCID: PMC4196107
PMID: 25310989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Ann Med. 2014 Dec;46(8):640-52. doi: 10.3109/07853890.2014.959557. Epub 2014 Oct 
13.

Morphogenesis and molecular considerations on congenital cardiac septal defects.

Gittenberger-de Groot AC(1), Calkoen EE, Poelmann RE, Bartelings MM, Jongbloed
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center , Leiden , The
Netherlands.

The primary unseptated heart tube undergoes extensive remodeling including
septation at the atrial, atrioventricular, ventricular, and ventriculo-arterial
level. Alignment and fusion of the septal components is required to ensure full
septation of the heart. Deficiencies lead to septal defects at various levels.
Addition of myocardium and mesenchymal tissues from the second heart field (SHF) 
to the primary heart tube, as well as a population of neural crest cells,
provides the necessary cellular players. Surprisingly, the study of the molecular
background of these defects does not show a great diversity of responsible
transcription factors and downstream gene pathways. Epigenetic modulation and
mutations high up in several transcription factor pathways (e.g. NODAL and GATA4)
may lead to defects at all levels. Disturbance of modulating pathways, involving 
primarily the SHF-derived cell populations and the genes expressed therein,
results at the arterial pole (e.g. TBX1) in a spectrum of ventricular septal
defects located at the level of the outflow tract. At the venous pole (e.g.
TBX5), it can explain a variety of atrial septal defects. The various defects can
occur as isolated anomalies or within families. In this review developmental,
morphological, genetic, as well as epigenetic aspects of septal defects are
discussed.

PMID: 25307363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Pediatr Cardiol. 2015 Jan;36(1):244-7. doi: 10.1007/s00246-014-1028-x. Epub 2014 
Oct 2.

Novel TBX5 duplication in a Japanese family with Holt-Oram syndrome.

Kimura M(1), Kikuchi A, Ichinoi N, Kure S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1
Seiryocho, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, 980-8574, Japan, mkimura774@med.tohoku.ac.jp.

Holt-Oram syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by upper limb 
malformations in the preaxial radial ray and cardiac septation and/or a
conduction abnormality. It has been demonstrated that Holt-Oram syndrome is
caused by mutations in the T-box transcription factor gene TBX5. Numerous
germline mutations (more than 90) of this gene have been reported; however, TBX5 
mutations are only identified in up to 74% of typical Holt-Oram syndrome
patients. We report a Japanese family with 2 affected individuals with the
typical Holt-Oram syndrome phenotype, namely bilateral asymmetrical radial ray
deformities and an atrial septal defect. An array-based comparative genomic
hybridization study revealed an 11-kb duplication at 12q24.1. Moreover, a
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification study confirmed the duplication 
of exons 1-6 of TBX5. Although a small duplication in TBX5 (6 bases) has been
reported, a large duplication of this gene has not been described previously in
typical Holt-Oram syndrome patients. All typical Holt-Oram syndrome cases in
which a mutation is not identified should be screened for TBX5 exon duplications.

PMID: 25274398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Dec;164A(12):3100-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36783. Epub 2014 
Sep 26.

Identification of TBX5 mutations in a series of 94 patients with Tetralogy of
Fallot.

Baban A(1), Postma AV, Marini M, Trocchio G, Santilli A, Pelegrini M, Sirleto P, 
Lerone M, Albanese SB, Barnett P, Boogerd CJ, Dallapiccola B, Digilio MC,
Ravazzolo R, Pongiglione G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Cardiosurgery, Bambino Gesù Children
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) (OMIM #187500) is the most frequent conotruncal
congenital heart defect (CHD) with a range of intra- and extracardiac phenotypes.
TBX5 is a transcription factor with well-defined roles in heart and forelimb
development, and mutations in TBX5 are associated with Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS)
(OMIM#142900). Here we report on the screening of 94 TOF patients for mutations
in TBX5, NKX2.5 and GATA4 genes. We identified two heterozygous mutations in
TBX5. One mutation was detected in a Moroccan patient with TOF, a large ostium
secundum atrial septal defect and complete atrioventricular block, and features
of HOS including bilateral triphalangeal thumbs and fifth finger clinodactyly.
This patient carried a previously described de novo, stop codon mutation
(p.R279X) located in exon 8 causing a premature truncated protein. In a second
patient from Italy with TOF, ostium secundum atrial septal defect and progressive
arrhythmic changes on ECG, we identified a maternally inherited novel mutation in
exon 9, which caused a substitution of a serine with a leucine at amino acid
position 372 (p.S372L, c.1115C>T). The mother's clinical evaluation demonstrated 
frequent ventricular extrasystoles and an atrial septal aneurysm. Physical
examination and radiographs of the hands showed no apparent skeletal defects in
either child or mother. Molecular evaluation of the p.S372L mutation demonstrated
a gain-of-function phenotype. We also review the literature on the co-occurrence 
of TOF and HOS, highlighting its relevance. This is the first systematic
screening for TBX5 mutations in TOF patients which detected mutations in two of
94 (2.1%) patients.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25263169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2014 Sep;38(9):2396-402. doi: 10.1111/acer.12518.

Alcohol consumption during gestation causes histone3 lysine9 hyperacetylation and
an alternation of expression of heart development-related genes in mice.

Pan B(1), Zhu J, Lv T, Sun H, Huang X, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Developmental Disease in Childhood (Chongqing Medical
University), Ministry of Education, Chongqing, China; Key Laboratory of
Pediatrics in Chongqing, Chongqing, China; Chongqing International Science and
Technology Cooperation Center for Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing,
China; Heart Centre, The Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Alcohol abuse during gestation may cause congenital heart diseases
(CHDs). The underlying mechanisms of alcohol-induced cardiac deformities are
still not clear. Recent studies suggest that histone modification may play a
crucial role in this pathological process. Moreover, our previous studies
reported that ethanol could induce histone3 lysine9 (H3K9) hyperacetylation and
overexpression of heart development-related genes in vitro. The aim of this study
was to investigate the effect of alcohol consumption during gestation on the
imbalance of H3K9 acetylation and the alternation of the expression of heart
development-related genes during cardiogenesis.
METHODS: Pregnant mice were exposed to a single dose of alcohol (10 µl/g/d, 56%
alcohol) by gavage every day in the morning from embryo day 7.5 (E7.5) to E15.5. 
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was applied for observing the structure of
the embryonic hearts. Western blotting and quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction were used for detecting the level of H3K9 acetylation and gene
expression. Histone acetyltransferase (HAT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC)
activities were detected by colorimetric assay and fluorometric assay.
RESULTS: H&E staining of cardiac tissue showed abnormalities of embryonic hearts 
at E17.5. The level of H3K9 acetylation reached peak at E17.5 and decreased
sharply to a low level at birth and maintained at low level afterward. Alcohol
exposure increased H3K9 acetylation at E11.5, E14.5, E17.5, and E18.5,
respectively (p < 0.05), and enhanced the expression of Gata4 in the embryonic
hearts at E14.5 and E17.5, Mef2c at E14.5, and Nkx2.5 at E14.5 and E17.5, (p <
0.05) but not for Tbx5 (p > 0.05). On embryonic day 17.5, HAT activities of
embryonic hearts increased significantly, however alcohol exposure did not alter 
HDAC activities.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate a time course of H3K9 acetylation change during 
heart development and demonstrate that alcohol exposure in utero may induce an
increase of HAT activities, which results in H3K9 hyperacetylation and an
increase of the expression of heart development-related genes. These findings
reveal a novel epigenetic mechanism that connects the alcohol consumption during 
the pregnancy and the development of CHD in the fetus.

Copyright © 2014 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMID: 25257289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Feb 1;24(3):865-74. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu478. Epub 2014 Sep
23.

Genome-wide association study in Chinese identifies novel loci for blood pressure
and hypertension.

Lu X(1), Wang L(2), Lin X(3), Huang J(4), Charles Gu C(5), He M(6), Shen H(7), He
J(8), Zhu J(3), Li H(3), Hixson JE(9), Wu T(6), Dai J(7), Lu L(3), Shen C(10),
Chen S(1), He L(11), Mo Z(12), Hao Y(1), Mo X(1), Yang X(1), Li J(1), Cao J(1),
Chen J(1), Fan Z(13), Li Y(1), Zhao L(1), Li H(14), Lu F(15), Yao C(16), Yu
L(17), Xu L(18), Mu J(19), Wu X(20), Deng Y(20), Hu D(21), Zhang W(22), Ji X(23),
Guo D(24), Guo Z(25), Zhou Z(26), Yang Z(27), Wang R(28), Yang J(29), Zhou X(30),
Yan W(31), Sun N(32), Gao P(33), Gu D(34).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease Fuwai Hospital, National Center
for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100037, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular
Disease National Human Genome Center at Beijing, Beijing 100176, China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences and
Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(4)Hypertension Division Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100037, China. (5)Division of Biostatistics, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (6)MOE Key Lab of Environment and Health, 
School of Public Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, China. (7)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Ministry of Education Key Lab for Modern Toxicology School of
Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211166, China Section
of Clinical Epidemiology, Jiangsu Key Lab of Cancer Biomarkers, Prevention and
Treatment, Cancer Center, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029,
China. (8)Department of Epidemiology, Tulane University School of Public Health
and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (9)Department of Epidemiology,
University of Texas School of Public Health, Houston, TX 77025, USA.
(10)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Ministry of Education Key Lab
for Modern Toxicology School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 211166, China. (11)Bio-X Institutes, Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China. (12)Center for Genomic and
Personalized Medicine, Medical Scientific Research Center and Department of
Occupational Health and Environmental Health, School of Public Health, Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China. (13)Department of Cardiology,
Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100730, China. (14)National Human Genome Center at Beijing, Beijing
100176, China. (15)Cardio-Cerebrovascular Control and Research Center, Institute 
of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan, Shandong 250062, 
China. (16)School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 
211166, China. (17)Department of Cardiology, Fujian Provincial People's Hospital,
Fuzhou, Fujian 350004, China. (18)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital
of Beihua University, Beihua University, Jilin 132011, China. (19)Department of
Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, Shannxi 710061, China. (20)Center for Chronic and
Noncommunicable Disease Control and Prevention, Sichuan Center of Disease Control
and Prevention, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China. (21)School of Public Health,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450001, China School of Medicine, Shenzhen
University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518000, China. (22)School of Public Health,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450001, China. (23)Department of Internal 
Medicine, Xinle Red Cross Hospital, Xinle, Hebei 050700, China. (24)Department of
Internal Medicine, Yuxian Renmin Hospital, Yuxian, Shanxi 045100, China.
(25)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Medical College of
Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China. (26)Changshu Center of Disease
Control and Prevention, Changshu, Jiangsu 215501, China. (27)Nantong Center of
Disease Control and Prevention, Nantong, Jiangsu 226007, China. (28)Department of
Internal Medicine, Shijiazhuang Greatwall Hospital, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 052260,
China. (29)Department of Cardiology, Hanzhong People's Hospital, Hanzhong,
Shannxi 723000, China. (30)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan
University, Wuhan, Hubei 430060, China. (31)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, 
Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 200062, China. (32)Department
of Heart Center, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing 100044, China and. 
(33)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Shanghai Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. (34)State Key
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease Fuwai Hospital, National Center for
Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100037, China gudongfeng@vip.sina.com.

Hypertension is a common disorder and the leading risk factor for cardiovascular 
disease and premature deaths worldwide. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs)
in the European population have identified multiple chromosomal regions
associated with blood pressure, and the identified loci altogether explain only a
small fraction of the variance for blood pressure. The differences in
environmental exposures and genetic background between Chinese and European
populations might suggest potential different pathways of blood pressure
regulation. To identify novel genetic variants affecting blood pressure
variation, we conducted a meta-analysis of GWASs of blood pressure and
hypertension in 11 816 subjects followed by replication studies including 69 146 
additional individuals. We identified genome-wide significant (P < 5.0 × 10(-8)) 
associations with blood pressure, which included variants at three new loci
(CACNA1D, CYP21A2, and MED13L) and a newly discovered variant near SLC4A7. We
also replicated 14 previously reported loci, 8 (CASZ1, MOV10, FGF5, CYP17A1,
SOX6, ATP2B1, ALDH2, and JAG1) at genome-wide significance, and 6 (FIGN, ULK4,
GUCY1A3, HFE, TBX3-TBX5, and TBX3) at a suggestive level of P = 1.81 × 10(-3) to 
5.16 × 10(-8). These findings provide new mechanistic insights into the
regulation of blood pressure and potential targets for treatments.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4303798
PMID: 25249183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Circ Res. 2014 Oct 24;115(10):834-44. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.304379. Epub
2014 Sep 22.

Tbx5 is required for avian and Mammalian epicardial formation and coronary
vasculogenesis.

Diman NY(1), Brooks G(1), Kruithof BP(1), Elemento O(1), Seidman JG(1), Seidman
CE(1), Basson CT(2), Hatcher CJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Molecular Cardiology, Greenberg Division of Cardiology
(N.Y.S.-G.D., G.B., B.P.T.K., C.T.B., C.J.H.) and Department of Physiology and
Biophysics (O.E.), Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY; Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (J.G.S., C.E.S.); and Department of 
Bio-Medical Sciences, Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, PA (C.J.H.). 
(2)From the Center for Molecular Cardiology, Greenberg Division of Cardiology
(N.Y.S.-G.D., G.B., B.P.T.K., C.T.B., C.J.H.) and Department of Physiology and
Biophysics (O.E.), Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY; Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (J.G.S., C.E.S.); and Department of 
Bio-Medical Sciences, Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, PA (C.J.H.). 
cathyha@pcom.edu craig.basson@novartis.com.

RATIONALE: Holt-Oram syndrome is an autosomal dominant heart-hand syndrome caused
by mutations in the TBX5 gene. Overexpression of Tbx5 in the chick proepicardial 
organ impaired coronary blood vessel formation. However, the potential activity
of Tbx5 in the epicardium itself, and the role of Tbx5 in mammalian coronary
vasculogenesis, remains largely unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the consequences of altered Tbx5 gene dosage during
proepicardial organ and epicardial development in the embryonic chick and mouse.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Retroviral-mediated knockdown or upregulation of Tbx5
expression in the embryonic chick proepicardial organ and proepicardial-specific 
deletion of Tbx5 in the embryonic mouse (Tbx5(epi-/)) impaired normal
proepicardial organ cell development, inhibited epicardial and coronary blood
vessel formation, and altered developmental gene expression. The generation of
epicardial-derived cells and their migration into the myocardium were impaired
between embryonic day (E) 13.5 to 15.5 in mutant hearts because of delayed
epicardial attachment to the myocardium and subepicardial accumulation of
epicardial-derived cells. This caused defective coronary vasculogenesis
associated with impaired vascular smooth muscle cell recruitment and reduced
invasion of cardiac fibroblasts and endothelial cells into myocardium. In
contrast to wild-type hearts that exhibited an elaborate ventricular vascular
network, Tbx5(epi-/-) hearts displayed a marked decrease in vascular density that
was associated with myocardial hypoxia as exemplified by hypoxia inducible
factor-1a upregulation and increased binding of hypoxyprobe-1. Tbx5(epi-/-) mice 
with such myocardial hypoxia exhibited reduced exercise capacity when compared
with wild-type mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support a conserved Tbx5 dose-dependent requirement for
both proepicardial and epicardial progenitor cell development in chick and in
mouse coronary vascular formation.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4727243
PMID: 25245104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mech Dev. 2014 Nov;134:31-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2014.09.001. Epub 2014 Sep 21.

Carboxy terminus of GATA4 transcription factor is required for its cardiogenic
activity and interaction with CDK4.

Gallagher JM(1), Yamak A(2), Kirilenko P(1), Black S(1), Bochtler M(3), Lefebvre 
C(2), Nemer M(2), Latinkic BV(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom.
(2)Laboratory of Cardiac Development and Differentiation, Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada. (3)International Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Warsaw, Poland; Department of Bioinformatics, Institute of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Warsaw, Poland. (4)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom. Electronic address: LatinkicB@cardiff.ac.uk.

GATA4-6 transcription factors regulate numerous aspects of development and
homeostasis in multiple tissues of mesodermal and endodermal origin. In the
heart, the best studied of these factors, GATA4, has multiple distinct roles in
cardiac specification, differentiation, morphogenesis, hypertrophy and survival. 
To improve understanding of how GATA4 achieves its numerous roles in the heart,
here we have focused on the carboxy-terminal domain and the residues required for
interaction with cofactors FOG2 and Tbx5. We present evidence that the carboxy
terminal region composed of amino acids 362-400 is essential for mediating
cardiogenesis in Xenopus pluripotent explants and embryos. In contrast, the same 
region is not required for endoderm-inducing activity of GATA4. Further evidence 
is presented that the carboxy terminal cardiogenic region of GATA4 does not
operate as a generic transcriptional activator. Potential mechanism of action of 
the carboxy terminal end of GATA4 is provided by the results showing physical and
functional interaction with CDK4, including the enhancement of cardiogenic
activity of GATA4 by CDK4. These results establish CDK4 as a GATA4 partner in
cardiogenesis. The interactions of GATA4 with its other well described cofactors 
Tbx5 and FOG2 are known to be involved in heart morphogenesis, but their
requirement for cardiac differentiation is unknown. We report that the mutations 
that disrupt interactions of GATA4 with Tbx5 and FOG2, G295S and V217G,
respectively, do not impair cardiogenic activity of GATA4. These findings add
support to the view that distinct roles of GATA4 in the heart are mediated by
different determinants of the protein. Finally, we show that the rat GATA4 likely
induces cardiogenesis cell autonomously or directly as it does not require
activity of endodermal transcription factor Sox17, a GATA4 target gene that
induces cardiogenesis non-cell autonomously.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4259525
PMID: 25241353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Cardiol Young. 2015 Aug;25(6):1093-8. doi: 10.1017/S1047951114001656. Epub 2014
Sep 12.

Clinical and molecular characterisation of Holt-Oram syndrome focusing on cardiac
manifestations.

Jhang WK(1), Lee BH(1), Kim GH(2), Lee JO(2), Yoo HW(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pediatrics,Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital,University
of Ulsan College of Medicine,Seoul,Korea. (2)2Medical Genetic Center,Asan Medical
Center Children's Hospital,University of Ulsan College of Medicine,Seoul,Korea.

BACKGROUND: Holt-Oram syndrome is characterised by CHD and limb anomalies.
Mutations in TBX5 gene, encoding the T-box transcription factor, are responsible 
for the development of Holt-Oram syndrome, but such mutations are variably
detected in 30-75% of patients.
METHODS: Clinically diagnosed eight Holt-Oram syndrome patients from six families
were evaluated the clinical characteristics, focusing on the cardiac
manifestations, in particular, and molecular aetiologies. In addition to the
investigation of the mutation of TBX5, SALL4, NKX2.5, and GATA4 genes, which are 
known to regulate cardiac development by physically and functionally interacting 
with TBX5, were also analyzed. Multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification
analysis was performed to detect exonic deletion and duplication mutations in
these genes.
RESULTS: All included patients showed cardiac septal defects and upper-limb
anomalies. Of the eight patients, seven underwent cardiac surgery, and four
suffered from conduction abnormalities such as severe sinus bradycardia and
complete atrioventricular block. Although our patients showed typical clinical
findings of Holt-Oram syndrome, only three distinct TBX5 mutations were detected 
in three families: one nonsense, one splicing, and one missense mutation. No new 
mutations were identified by testing SALL4, NKX2.5, and GATA4 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: All Holt-Oram syndrome patients in this study showed cardiac septal 
anomalies. Half of them showed TBX5 gene mutations. To understand the genetic
causes for inherited CHD such as Holt-Oram syndrome is helpful to take care of
the patients and their families. Further efforts with large-scale genomic
research are required to identify genes responsible for cardiac manifestations or
genotype-phenotype relation in Holt-Oram syndrome.

PMID: 25216260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Nature. 2014 Sep 11;513(7517):195-201. doi: 10.1038/nature13679.

Gibbon genome and the fast karyotype evolution of small apes.

Carbone L(1), Harris RA(2), Gnerre S(3), Veeramah KR(4), Lorente-Galdos B(5),
Huddleston J(6), Meyer TJ(7), Herrero J(8), Roos C(9), Aken B(10), Anaclerio
F(11), Archidiacono N(11), Baker C(12), Barrell D(10), Batzer MA(13), Beal K(14),
Blancher A(15), Bohrson CL(16), Brameier M(9), Campbell MS(17), Capozzi O(11),
Casola C(18), Chiatante G(11), Cree A(19), Damert A(20), de Jong PJ(21), Dumas
L(22), Fernandez-Callejo M(5), Flicek P(14), Fuchs NV(23), Gut I(24), Gut M(24), 
Hahn MW(25), Hernandez-Rodriguez J(5), Hillier LW(26), Hubley R(27), Ianc B(20), 
Izsvák Z(23), Jablonski NG(28), Johnstone LM(29), Karimpour-Fard A(22), Konkel
MK(13), Kostka D(30), Lazar NH(31), Lee SL(19), Lewis LR(19), Liu Y(19), Locke
DP(32), Mallick S(33), Mendez FL(34), Muffato M(14), Nazareth LV(19), Nevonen
KA(35), O'Bleness M(22), Ochis C(20), Odom DT(36), Pollard KS(37), Quilez J(5),
Reich D(33), Rocchi M(11), Schumann GG(38), Searle S(39), Sikela JM(22), Skollar 
G(40), Smit A(26), Sonmez K(41), ten Hallers B(42), Terhune E(35), Thomas GW(25),
Ullmer B(43), Ventura M(11), Walker JA(13), Wall JD(44), Walter L(9), Ward
MC(45), Wheelan SJ(16), Whelan CW(46), White S(39), Wilhelm LJ(35), Woerner
AE(29), Yandell M(17), Zhu B(42), Hammer MF(29), Marques-Bonet T(47), Eichler
EE(6), Fulton L(26), Fronick C(26), Muzny DM(19), Warren WC(26), Worley KC(19),
Rogers J(19), Wilson RK(26), Gibbs RA(19).

Author information: 
(1)1] Oregon Health &Science University, Department of Behavioral Neuroscience,
3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA. [2] Oregon National
Primate Research Center, Division of Neuroscience, 505 NW 185th Avenue,
Beaverton, Oregon 97006, USA. [3] Oregon Health &Science University, Department
of Molecular &Medical Genetics, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, Oregon
97239, USA. [4] Oregon Health &Science University, Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology Division, Department of Medical Informatics &Clinical
Epidemiology, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.
(2)Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (3)Nabsys, 60 Clifford Street,
Providence, Rhode Island 02903, USA. (4)1] University of Arizona, ARL Division of
Biotechnology, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA. [2] Stony Brook University, Department
of Ecology and Evolution, Stony Brook, New York 11790, USA. (5)IBE, Institut de
Biologia Evolutiva (UPF-CSIC), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, PRBB, Doctor Aiguader,
88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. (6)1] Department of Genome Sciences, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. [2] Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute, 1705 NE Pacific Street, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.
(7)Oregon Health &Science University, Department of Behavioral Neuroscience, 3181
SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA. (8)1] European Molecular
Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome
Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK. [2] The Genome Analysis Centre, Norwich 
Research Park, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK. [3] Bill Lyons Informatics Center, UCL Cancer
Institute, University College London, London WC1E 6DD, UK (J.He); Seven Bridges
Genomics, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA (D.P.L.); Department of Genetics,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA (F.L.M.);
BioNano Genomics, San Diego, California 92121, USA (B.t.H.); University of
Chicago, Department of Human Genetics, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA (M.C.W.);
Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA (C.W.W.); The CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic
Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100101, China (B.Z.). (9)Leibniz Institute for Primate
Research, Gene Bank of Primates, German Primate Center, Göttingen 37077, Germany.
(10)1] European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK. [2] European
Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10
1SD, UK. (11)University of Bari, Department of Biology, Via Orabona 4, 70125,
Bari, Italy. (12)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School
of Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. (13)Louisiana State University,
Department of Biological Sciences, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803, USA.
(14)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute,
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK. (15)University of 
Paul Sabatier, Toulouse 31062, France. (16)The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Department of Oncology, Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA. (17)University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah
84112, USA. (18)Texas A&M University, Department of Ecosystem Science and
Management, College Station, Texas 77843, USA. (19)Human Genome Sequencing
Center, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
One Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (20)Babes-Bolyai-University,
Institute for Interdisciplinary Research in Bio-Nano-Sciences, Molecular Biology 
Center, Cluj-Napoca 400084, Romania. (21)Children's Hospital Oakland Research
Institute, BACPAC Resources, Oakland, California 94609, USA. (22)University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics,
Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. (23)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine,
Berlin 13125, Germany. (24)Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG), Parc
Científic de Barcelona, Barcelona 08028, Spain. (25)Indiana University, School of
Informatics and Computing, Bloomington, Indiana 47408, USA. (26)The Genome Center
at Washington University, Washington University School of Medicine, 4444 Forest
Park Avenue, Saint Louis, Missouri 63108, USA. (27)Institute for Systems Biology,
Seattle, Washington 98109-5234, USA. (28)The Pennsylvania State University,
Department of Anthropology, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.
(29)University of Arizona, ARL Division of Biotechnology, Tucson, Arizona 85721, 
USA. (30)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Department of Developmental
Biology, Department of Computational and Systems Biology, Pittsburg, Pennsylvania
15261, USA. (31)Oregon Health &Science University, Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology Division, Department of Medical Informatics &Clinical
Epidemiology, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA. (32)1] 
The Genome Center at Washington University, Washington University School of
Medicine, 4444 Forest Park Avenue, Saint Louis, Missouri 63108, USA. [2] Bill
Lyons Informatics Center, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London
WC1E 6DD, UK (J.He); Seven Bridges Genomics, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA 
(D.P.L.); Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California 94305, USA (F.L.M.); BioNano Genomics, San Diego, California
92121, USA (B.t.H.); University of Chicago, Department of Human Genetics,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA (M.C.W.); Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research,
Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA (C.W.W.); The CAS Key
Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China (B.Z.). (33)Harvard Medical
School, Department of Genetics, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (34)1]
University of Arizona, ARL Division of Biotechnology, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA.
[2] Bill Lyons Informatics Center, UCL Cancer Institute, University College
London, London WC1E 6DD, UK (J.He); Seven Bridges Genomics, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA (D.P.L.); Department of Genetics, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA (F.L.M.); BioNano Genomics,
San Diego, California 92121, USA (B.t.H.); University of Chicago, Department of
Human Genetics, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA (M.C.W.); Stanley Center for
Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA
(C.W.W.); The CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology,
Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China
(B.Z.). (35)Oregon National Primate Research Center, Division of Neuroscience,
505 NW 185th Avenue, Beaverton, Oregon 97006, USA. (36)1] European Bioinformatics
Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK. [2]
University of Cambridge, Cancer Research UK-Cambridge Institute, Cambridge CB2
0RE, UK. (37)1] University of California, Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco,
California 94158-226, USA. [2] Institute for Human Genetics, University of
California, San Francisco, California 94143-0794, USA. [3] Division of
Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, California 94143-0794,
USA. (38)Paul Ehrlich Institute, Division of Medical Biotechnology, 63225 Langen,
Germany. (39)European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,
Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK. (40)Gibbon Conservation Center, 19100 Esguerra
Rd, Santa Clarita, California 91350, USA. (41)1] Oregon Health &Science
University, Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Division, Department of
Medical Informatics &Clinical Epidemiology, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road,
Portland, Oregon 97239, USA. [2] Oregon Health &Science University, Center for
Spoken Language Understanding, Institute on Development and Disability, Portland,
Oregon 97239, USA. (42)1] Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, BACPAC 
Resources, Oakland, California 94609, USA. [2] Bill Lyons Informatics Center, UCL
Cancer Institute, University College London, London WC1E 6DD, UK (J.He); Seven
Bridges Genomics, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA (D.P.L.); Department of
Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA
(F.L.M.); BioNano Genomics, San Diego, California 92121, USA (B.t.H.); University
of Chicago, Department of Human Genetics, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA (M.C.W.); 
Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA (C.W.W.); The CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic
Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100101, China (B.Z.). (43)Louisiana State University, School of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803, USA.
(44)1] Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco,
California 94143-0794, USA. [2] Division of Biostatistics, University of
California, San Francisco, California 94143-0794, USA. (45)1] University of
Cambridge, Cancer Research UK-Cambridge Institute, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. [2]
Bill Lyons Informatics Center, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London,
London WC1E 6DD, UK (J.He); Seven Bridges Genomics, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02138, USA (D.P.L.); Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA (F.L.M.); BioNano Genomics, San Diego, 
California 92121, USA (B.t.H.); University of Chicago, Department of Human
Genetics, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA (M.C.W.); Stanley Center for Psychiatric
Research, Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA (C.W.W.); The CAS 
Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China (B.Z.). (46)1]
Oregon Health &Science University, Center for Spoken Language Understanding,
Institute on Development and Disability, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA. [2] Bill
Lyons Informatics Center, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London
WC1E 6DD, UK (J.He); Seven Bridges Genomics, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA 
(D.P.L.); Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California 94305, USA (F.L.M.); BioNano Genomics, San Diego, California
92121, USA (B.t.H.); University of Chicago, Department of Human Genetics,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA (M.C.W.); Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research,
Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA (C.W.W.); The CAS Key
Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China (B.Z.). (47)1] IBE, Institut
de Biologia Evolutiva (UPF-CSIC), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, PRBB, Doctor
Aiguader, 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. [2] Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico
(CNAG), Parc Científic de Barcelona, Barcelona 08028, Spain.

Comment in
    Nature. 2014 Sep 11;513(7517):174-5.

Gibbons are small arboreal apes that display an accelerated rate of evolutionary 
chromosomal rearrangement and occupy a key node in the primate phylogeny between 
Old World monkeys and great apes. Here we present the assembly and analysis of a 
northern white-cheeked gibbon (Nomascus leucogenys) genome. We describe the
propensity for a gibbon-specific retrotransposon (LAVA) to insert into chromosome
segregation genes and alter transcription by providing a premature termination
site, suggesting a possible molecular mechanism for the genome plasticity of the 
gibbon lineage. We further show that the gibbon genera (Nomascus, Hylobates,
Hoolock and Symphalangus) experienced a near-instantaneous radiation ~5 million
years ago, coincident with major geographical changes in southeast Asia that
caused cycles of habitat compression and expansion. Finally, we identify
signatures of positive selection in genes important for forelimb development
(TBX5) and connective tissues (COL1A1) that may have been involved in the
adaptation of gibbons to their arboreal habitat.

PMCID: PMC4249732
PMID: 25209798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cells Tissues Organs. 2014;199(2-3):103-16. doi: 10.1159/000363225. Epub 2014 Aug
21.

SSEA-4+ CD34- cells in the adult human heart show the molecular characteristics
of a novel cardiomyocyte progenitor population.

Sandstedt J(1), Jonsson M, Vukusic K, Dellgren G, Lindahl A, Jeppsson A, Asp J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Institute of
Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Stage-specific embryonic antigen (SSEA) expression is used to describe the
differentiation state of an embryonic stem cell (ESC). In human ESCs, SSEA-3 and 
SSEA-4 are highly expressed in undifferentiated cells and downregulated upon
differentiation. SSEA-4 has also been described as a marker for adult stem cells 
in various tissues, including human neonatal cardiac tissue. However, there is
currently little data on the expression of SSEAs in human adult cardiac tissue.
We obtained right and left atrial biopsies from patients undergoing cardiac
surgery. These were dissociated, stained for SSEAs and other cardiac stem cell
markers and analyzed by flow cytometry. Directly isolated cells expressed
variable levels of SSEA-1, SSEA-3 and SSEA-4. The SSEA-1+ population was
established as contaminating hematopoietic cells. The SSEA-4+ population, on the 
other hand, could be subdivided based on the endothelial progenitor marker CD34. 
The SSEA-4+ CD34- population in the right atrium had a high gene expression of
both early (TBX5, NKX2.5) and late (TNNT2) cardiomyocyte markers. The SSEA-4+
CD34+ population, on the other hand, overlapped with previously described C-kit+ 
CD45- cardiac stem cells. Primary monolayer-cultured cells retained expression of
SSEAs while the cardiomyogenic specification in the SSEA-4+ CD34- population was 
lost. In tissue sections, SSEA-4+ cells could be identified both within and
outside the myocardium. Within the myocardium, some SSEA-4+ cells coexpressed
cardiomyogenic markers. In conclusion, the results show that the adult human
heart expresses SSEAs and that there is a subpopulation of SSEA-4+ CD34- cells
that show features of a cardiomyocyte progenitor population.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25171543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cell Res. 2014 Oct;24(10):1201-13. doi: 10.1038/cr.2014.113. Epub 2014 Aug 22.

Baf250a orchestrates an epigenetic pathway to repress the Nkx2.5-directed
contractile cardiomyocyte program in the sinoatrial node.

Wu M(1), Peng S(1), Yang J(2), Tu Z(2), Cai X(3), Cai CL(3), Wang Z(4), Zhao
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA [2] Department of
Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One
Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA. (2)Department of Genetics and
Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy
Place, New York, NY 10029, USA. (3)1] Mindich Child Health and Development
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place,
New York, NY 10029, USA [2] Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(4)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Cardiovascular Research Center, University of
Michigan, 2800 Plymouth Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The sinoatrial node (SAN) is essential for rhythmic beating of the heart;
however, our understanding of what controls proper functioning of the SAN remains
primitive. To explore molecular control of SAN function, we specifically deleted 
Baf250a, a key regulatory component of the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling
complex SWI/SNF, in the SAN. Deletion of Baf250a in the SAN led to sinus
bradycardia. Time series analysis of dysregulated genes after deletion of Baf250a
reveals a transcriptional hierarchy maintaining pacemaker cell identity, i.e.,
Baf250a activates the expression of Tbx3, and Baf250a, Tbx3 and histone
deacetylase 3 coordinately repress the expression of Nkx2.5. Disruption of this
repressive pathway switches on expression of Nkx2.5, which stimulates expression 
of Gata4 and Tbx5. These three cardiac transcription factors further turn on a
contractile cardiomyocyte program in the SAN, which eventually leads to sick
sinus disease (SSD). Our study suggests that disruption of key genetic pathways
regulating cardiac lineage segregation may cause SSD and cardiac arrhythmias in
general.

PMCID: PMC4185344
PMID: 25145359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Circulation. 2014 Oct 7;130(15):1225-35. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.009892. 
Epub 2014 Aug 14.

Integrating genetic, transcriptional, and functional analyses to identify 5 novel
genes for atrial fibrillation.

Sinner MF, Tucker NR, Lunetta KL, Ozaki K, Smith JG, Trompet S, Bis JC, Lin H,
Chung MK, Nielsen JB, Lubitz SA, Krijthe BP, Magnani JW, Ye J, Gollob MH, Tsunoda
T, Müller-Nurasyid M, Lichtner P, Peters A, Dolmatova E, Kubo M, Smith JD, Psaty 
BM, Smith NL, Jukema JW, Chasman DI, Albert CM, Ebana Y, Furukawa T, Macfarlane
PW, Harris TB, Darbar D, Dörr M, Holst AG, Svendsen JH, Hofman A, Uitterlinden
AG, Gudnason V, Isobe M, Malik R, Dichgans M, Rosand J, Van Wagoner DR;
METASTROKE Consortium; AFGen Consortium, Benjamin EJ, Milan DJ, Melander O,
Heckbert SR, Ford I, Liu Y, Barnard J, Olesen MS, Stricker BH, Tanaka T, Kääb S, 
Ellinor PT.

BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation (AF) affects >30 million individuals worldwide
and is associated with an increased risk of stroke, heart failure, and death. AF 
is highly heritable, yet the genetic basis for the arrhythmia remains
incompletely understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To identify new AF-related genes, we used a multifaceted
approach, combining large-scale genotyping in 2 ethnically distinct populations, 
cis-eQTL (expression quantitative trait loci) mapping, and functional validation.
Four novel loci were identified in individuals of European descent near the genes
NEURL (rs12415501; relative risk [RR]=1.18; 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.13-1.23; P=6.5×10(-16)), GJA1 (rs13216675; RR=1.10; 95% CI, 1.06-1.14;
P=2.2×10(-8)), TBX5 (rs10507248; RR=1.12; 95% CI, 1.08-1.16; P=5.7×10(-11)), and 
CAND2 (rs4642101; RR=1.10; 95% CI, 1.06-1.14; P=9.8×10(-9)). In Japanese, novel
loci were identified near NEURL (rs6584555; RR=1.32; 95% CI, 1.26-1.39;
P=2.0×10(-25)) and CUX2 (rs6490029; RR=1.12; 95% CI, 1.08-1.16; P=3.9×10(-9)).
The top single-nucleotide polymorphisms or their proxies were identified as
cis-eQTLs for the genes CAND2 (P=2.6×10(-19)), GJA1 (P=2.66×10(-6)), and TBX5
(P=1.36×10(-5)). Knockdown of the zebrafish orthologs of NEURL and CAND2 resulted
in prolongation of the atrial action potential duration (17% and 45%,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified 5 novel loci for AF. Our results expand the
diversity of genetic pathways implicated in AF and provide novel molecular
targets for future biological and pharmacological investigation.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4190011
PMID: 25124494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Nov;164A(11):2732-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36703. Epub 2014 
Aug 5.

A mutation in the Kozak sequence of GATA4 hampers translation in a family with
atrial septal defects.

Mohan RA(1), van Engelen K, Stefanovic S, Barnett P, Ilgun A, Baars MJ, Bouma BJ,
Mulder BJ, Christoffels VM, Postma AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology & Physiology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Atrial septal defect (ASD) is the most common congenital heart defect clinically 
characterized by an opening in the atrial septum. Mutations in GATA4, TBX5, and
NKX2-5 underlie this phenotype. Here, we report on the identification of a novel 
-6 G>C mutation in the highly conserved Kozak sequence in the 5'UTR of GATA4 in a
small family presenting with two different forms of ASD. This is the first time a
mutation in the Kozak sequence has been linked to heart disease. Functional
assays demonstrate reduced GATA4 translation, though the GATA4 transcript levels 
remain normal. This leads to a reduction of GATA4 protein level, consequently
diminishing the ability of GATA4 to transactivate target genes, as demonstrated
by using the GATA4-driven Nppa (ANF) promoter. In conclusion, we identified a
mutation in the GATA4 Kozak sequence that likely contributes to the pathogenesis 
of ASD. In general, it points to the importance of accurate protein level
regulation during heart development and emphasizes the need to analyze the entire
transcribed region when screening for mutations.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25099673  [PubMed - in process]


111. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Jan 1;24(1):11-20. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0195.

Isolation of contractile cardiomyocytes from human pluripotent stem-cell-derived 
cardiomyogenic cultures using a human NCX1-EGFP reporter.

Ovchinnikov DA(1), Hidalgo A, Yang SK, Zhang X, Hudson J, Mazzone SB, Chen C,
Cooper-White JJ, Wolvetang EJ.

Author information: 
(1)1 Stem Cell Engineering Group, Australian Institute for Bioengineering and
Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland , St. Lucia, Australia .

The prospective isolation of defined contractile human pluripotent stem cell
(hPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes is advantageous for regenerative medicine and drug 
screening applications. Currently, enrichment of cardiomyocyte populations from
such cultures can be achieved by combinations of cell surface markers or the
labor-intensive genetic modification of cardiac developmental genes, such as
NKX2.5 or MYH6, with fluorescent reporters. To create a facile, portable method
for the isolation of contractile cardiomyocytes from cardiomyogenic hPSC
cultures, we employed a highly conserved cardiac enhancer sequence in the SLC8A1 
(NCX1) gene to generate a lentivirally deliverable, antibiotic-selectable
NCX1cp-EGFP reporter. We show that human embryonic stem cells (and induced
pluripotent stem cells) transduced with the NCX1cp-EGFP reporter cassette exhibit
enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) expression in cardiac progenitors from 
5 days into the directed cardiac hPSC differentiation protocol, with all
reporter-positive cells transitioning to spontaneously contracting foci 3 days
later. In subsequent stages of cardiomyocyte maturation, NCX1cp-EGFP expression
was exclusively limited to contractile cells expressing high levels of cardiac
troponin T (CTNT), MLC2a/v, and a-actinin proteins, and was not present in
CD90/THY1(+) cardiac stromal cells or CD31/PECAM(+) endothelial cells.
Flow-assisted cytometrically sorted EGFP(+) fractions of differentiated cultures 
were highly enriched in both early (NKX2.5 and TBX5) and late (CTNT/TNNI2, MYH6, 
MYH7, NPPA, and MYL2) cardiomyocyte markers, with a significant proportion of
cells displaying a ventricular-like action potential pattern in patch-clamp
recordings. We conclude that the use of the cardiac-specific promoter of the
human SLC8A1(NCX1) gene is an effective strategy to isolate contractile cardiac
cells and their progenitors from hPSC-derived cardiomyogenic cultures.

PMID: 25075536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Gene Expr Patterns. 2014 Sep;16(1):8-22. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2014.07.002. Epub
2014 Jul 21.

Transcriptome analysis in cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation of murine
embryonic stem cells reveals transcriptional regulation network.

Gan L(1), Schwengberg S(2), Denecke B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research Aachen (IZKF Aachen), RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. (2)Axiogenesis AG, Köln, Germany.
(3)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research Aachen (IZKF Aachen), RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. Electronic address:
bernd.denecke@rwth-aachen.de.

The differentiation to cardiomyocytes is a prerequisite and an important part of 
heart development. A good understanding of the complicated cardiomyocyte
differentiation process benefits cardiogenesis study. Embryonic stem cells
(ESCs), cell lines with infinite ability to proliferate and to be differentiated 
into all cell types of the adult body, are important research tools for
investigation of differentiation and meanwhile good models for developmental
research. In the current study, genome-wide gene expression of ESCs is profiled
through high throughput platform during cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation
and maturation. Gene expression patterns of undifferentiated ESCs and ESC-derived
cardiomyocytes provide a global overview of genes involved in
cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation, whereas marker gene expression profiles
of both ESC-related genes and cardiac-specific genes presented the expression
pattern shift during differentiation in a pure ESC-derived cardiomyocyte cell
culture system. The differentiation and maturation process was completed at day
19 after initiation of differentiation, according to our gene expression profile 
results. Functional analysis of regulated genes reveals over-represented
biological processes, molecular functions and pathways during the differentiation
and maturation process. Finally, transcription factor regulation networks were
engineered based on gene expression data. Within these networks, the number of
identified important regulators (Trim28, E2f4, Foxm1, Myc, Hdac1, Rara, Mef2c,
Nkx2-5, Gata4) and possible key co-regulation modules (Nkx2-5 - Gata4 - Tbx5, Myc
- E2F4) could be expanded. We demonstrate that a more comprehensive picture of
cardiomyocyte differentiation and its regulation can be achieved solely by
studying gene expression patterns. The results from our study contribute to a
better and more accurate understanding of the regulation mechanisms during
cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25058891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 1;20(17):4598-612. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-3380. 
Epub 2014 Jul 9.

Large-scale characterization of DNA methylation changes in human gastric
carcinomas with and without metastasis.

Liu Z(1), Zhang J(2), Gao Y(1), Pei L(3), Zhou J(1), Gu L(1), Zhang L(4), Zhu
B(5), Hattori N(6), Ji J(4), Yuasa Y(7), Kim W(8), Ushijima T(6), Shi H(9), Deng 
D(10).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Division of Etiology, Peking University Cancer Hospital and
Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Division of Etiology, Peking
University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, China. Shihezi
University School of Medicine, Shihezi, China. (3)GRU Cancer Center, Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. (4)Department of Surgery, Peking University
Cancer Hospital and Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, China. (5)Department of
Oncology, Peking University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, 
China. (6)Division of Epigenetics, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Molecular Oncology, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (8)Department of Pathology, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Jongno-gu, Seoul, Korea. (9)GRU Cancer
Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. dengdajun@bjmu.edu.cn
hshi@gru.edu. (10)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research
(Ministry of Education), Division of Etiology, Peking University Cancer Hospital 
and Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, China. dengdajun@bjmu.edu.cn hshi@gru.edu.

PURPOSE: Metastasis is the leading cause of death for gastric carcinoma. An
epigenetic biomarker panel for predicting gastric carcinoma metastasis could have
significant clinical impact on the care of patients with gastric carcinoma. The
main purpose of this study is to characterize the methylation differences between
gastric carcinomas with and without metastasis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Genome-wide DNA methylation profiles between 4 metastatic
and 4 nonmetastatic gastric carcinomas and their surgical margins (SM) were
analyzed using methylated-CpG island amplification with microarray. The
methylation states of 73 candidate genes were further analyzed in patients with
gastric carcinoma in a discovery cohort (n=108) using denatured high performance 
liquid chromatography, bisulfite-sequencing, and MethyLight. The predictive
values of potential metastasis-methylation biomarkers were validated in cohorts
of patients with gastric carcinoma in China (n=330), Japan (n=129), and Korea
(n=153).
RESULTS: The gastric carcinoma genome showed significantly higher proportions of 
hypomethylation in the promoter and exon-1 regions, as well as increased
hypermethylation of intragenic fragments when compared with SMs. Significant
differential methylation was validated in the CpG islands of 15 genes (P<0.05)
and confirmed using bisulfite sequencing. These genes included BMP3, BNIP3,
CDKN2A, ECEL1, ELK1, GFRA1, HOXD10, KCNH1, PSMD10, PTPRT, SIGIRR, SRF, TBX5,
TFPI2, and ZNF382. Methylation changes of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 resulted in up- 
or downregulation of their transcription. Most importantly, the prevalence of
GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 methylation alterations was consistently and coordinately 
associated with gastric carcinoma metastasis and the patients' overall survival
throughout discovery and validation cohorts in China, Japan, and Korea.
CONCLUSION: Methylation changes of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 may be a potential
biomarker set for prediction of gastric carcinoma metastasis.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4309661
PMID: 25009298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Circ Res. 2014 Aug 1;115(4):432-41. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.303591. Epub 2014
Jun 24.

A large permissive regulatory domain exclusively controls Tbx3 expression in the 
cardiac conduction system.

van Weerd JH(1), Badi I(1), van den Boogaard M(1), Stefanovic S(1), van de Werken
HJ(1), Gomez-Velazquez M(1), Badia-Careaga C(1), Manzanares M(1), de Laat W(1),
Barnett P(1), Christoffels VM(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology, Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (J.H.v.W., I.B., M.v.d.B., S.S., P.B.,
V.M.C.); Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands (H.J.G.v.d.W., W.d.L.); Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands (H.J.G.v.d.W.); and Cardiovascular
Development and Repair Department, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares, Madrid, Spain (M.G.-V., C.B.-C., M.M.). (2)From the Department 
of Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands (J.H.v.W., I.B., M.v.d.B., S.S., P.B., V.M.C.); Hubrecht
Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands
(H.J.G.v.d.W., W.d.L.); Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands (H.J.G.v.d.W.); and Cardiovascular Development and
Repair Department, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares, Madrid,
Spain (M.G.-V., C.B.-C., M.M.). v.m.christoffels@amc.uva.nl.

RATIONALE: The evolutionary conserved Tbx3/Tbx5 gene cluster encodes T-box
transcription factors that play crucial roles in the development and homeostasis 
of the cardiac conduction system in human and mouse. Both genes are expressed in 
overlapping patterns and function in strictly tissue-specific and dose-dependent 
manners, yet, their regulation is poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: To analyze the mechanism underlying the complex regulation of the
Tbx3/Tbx5 cluster.
METHODS AND RESULTS: By probing the 3-dimensional architecture of the Tbx3/Tbx5
cluster using high-resolution circular chromosome conformation capture sequencing
in vivo, we found that its regulatory landscape is in a preformed conformation
similar in embryonic heart, limbs, and brain. Tbx3 and its flanking gene desert
form a 1 Mbp loop between CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)-binding sites that is
separated from the neighboring Tbx5 loop. However, Ctcf inactivation did not
result in transcriptional regulatory interaction between Tbx3 and Tbx5. Multiple 
sites within the Tbx3 locus contact the promoter, including sites corresponding
to regions known to contain variations in the human genome influencing
conduction. We identified an atrioventricular-specific enhancer and a pan-cardiac
enhancer that contact the promoter and each other and synergize to activate
transcription in the atrioventricular conduction system.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide a high-resolution model of the 3-dimensional structure
and function of the Tbx3/Tbx5 locus and show that the locus is organized in a
preformed, permissive structure. The Tbx3 locus forms a CTCF-independent
autonomous regulatory domain with multiple combinatorial regulatory elements that
control the precise pattern of Tbx3 in the cardiac conduction system.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 24963028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Diabetes. 2014 Nov;63(11):3785-97. doi: 10.2337/db14-0385. Epub 2014 Jun 19.

Distinct developmental profile of lower-body adipose tissue defines resistance
against obesity-associated metabolic complications.

Pinnick KE(1), Nicholson G(2), Manolopoulos KN(3), McQuaid SE(4), Valet P(5),
Frayn KN(4), Denton N(4), Min JL(6), Zondervan KT(6), Fleckner J(7); MolPAGE
Consortium, McCarthy MI(8), Holmes CC(9), Karpe F(10).

Collaborators: Bell J, McCarthy M, Cardon L, Donnelly P, Southern E, Anson J,
Lathrop M, Gut I, Schuster M, Berlin K, Boel E, Fleckner J, Uhlén M, Bergman T,
Stich V, Brazma A, Sarkans U, Viksna J, Nicholson J, Bernardinelli L, Hoffmann S,
Inganas M, Spector T, Langin D, Ponten F, Langen H, Evers S.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford, U.K. katherine.pinnick@ocdem.ox.ac.uk
fredrik.karpe@ocdem.ox.ac.uk. (2)Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, U.K. Medical Research Council Harwell, Harwell Science and Innovation
Campus, Harwell, U.K. (3)Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, U.K. (4)Oxford Centre for Diabetes,
Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K. (5)Institut des 
Maladies Metaboliques et Cardiovasculaires, INSERM-Université Paul Sabatier,
Toulouse, France. (6)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of
Oxford, Oxford, U.K. (7)Novo Nordisk A/S, Novo Nordisk Park, Gentofte, Denmark.
(8)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford, U.K. Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of
Oxford, Oxford, U.K. National Institute for Health Research, Oxford Biomedical
Research Centre, Oxford University Hospitals Trust, Oxford, U.K. (9)Department of
Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K. (10)Oxford Centre for Diabetes,
Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K. National
Institute for Health Research, Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford
University Hospitals Trust, Oxford, U.K.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2014 Nov;63(11):3575-7.

Upper- and lower-body fat depots exhibit opposing associations with
obesity-related metabolic disease. We defined the relationship between
DEXA-quantified fat depots and diabetes/cardiovascular risk factors in a healthy 
population-based cohort (n = 3,399). Gynoid fat mass correlated negatively with
insulin resistance after total fat mass adjustment, whereas the opposite was seen
for abdominal fat. Paired transcriptomic analysis of gluteal subcutaneous adipose
tissue (GSAT) and abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue (ASAT) was performed
across the BMI spectrum (n = 49; 21.4-45.5 kg/m(2)). In both depots,
energy-generating metabolic genes were negatively associated and inflammatory
genes were positively associated with obesity. However, associations were
significantly weaker in GSAT. At the systemic level, arteriovenous release of the
proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (n = 34) was lower from GSAT than ASAT.
Isolated preadipocytes retained a depot-specific transcriptional "memory" of
embryonic developmental genes and exhibited differential promoter DNA methylation
of selected genes (HOTAIR, TBX5) between GSAT and ASAT. Short hairpin
RNA-mediated silencing identified TBX5 as a regulator of preadipocyte
proliferation and adipogenic differentiation in ASAT. In conclusion, intrinsic
differences in the expression of developmental genes in regional adipocytes
provide a mechanistic basis for diversity in adipose tissue (AT) function. The
less inflammatory nature of lower-body AT offers insight into the opposing
metabolic disease risk associations between upper- and lower-body obesity.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 24947352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. World J Cardiol. 2014 May 26;6(5):327-37. doi: 10.4330/wjc.v6.i5.327.

Elevated blood pressure: Our family's fault? The genetics of essential
hypertension.

Natekar A(1), Olds RL(1), Lau MW(1), Min K(1), Imoto K(1), Slavin TP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aniket Natekar, Randi L Olds, Meghann W Lau, Kathleen Min, Karra Imoto, Thomas
P Slavin, The John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu,
HI 96813, United States.

AIM: To provide an updated review on current genetic aspects possibly affecting
essential hypertension (EH), and to further elucidate their role in EH.
METHODS: We searched for genetic and epigenetic factors in major studies
associated with EH between Jan 2008-Oct 2013 using PubMed. We limited our search 
to reviews that discussed mostly human studies, and were accessible through the
university online resource. We found 11 genome wide association studies (GWAS),
as well as five methylation and three miRNA studies that fit our search criteria.
A distinction was not made between genes with protective effects or negative
effects, as this article is only meant to be a summary of genes associated with
any aspect of EH.
RESULTS: We found 130 genes from the studies that met our inclusion/exclusion
criteria. Of note, genes with multiple study references include: STK39, CYP17A1, 
MTHFR-NPPA, MTHFR-NPPB, ATP2B1, CSK, ZNF652, UMOD, CACNB2, PLEKHA7, SH2B3,
TBX3-TBX5, ULK4, CSK-ULK3, CYP1A2, NT5C2, CYP171A, PLCD3, SH2B3, ATXN2, CACNB2,
PLEKHA7, SH2B3, TBX3-TBX5, ULK4, and HFE. The following genes overlapped between 
the genetic studies and epigenetic studies: WNK4 and BDKRB2. Several of the
identified genes were found to have functions associated with EH. Many epigenetic
factors were also correlated with EH. Of the epigenetic factors, there were no
articles discussing siRNA and its effects on EH that met the search criteria,
thus the topic was not included in this review. Among the miRNA targets found to 
be associated with EH, many of the genes involved were also identified in the
GWAS studies.
CONCLUSION: Genetic hypertension risk algorithms could be developed in the future
but may be of limited benefit due to the multi-factorial nature of EH. With
emerging technologies, like next-generation sequencing, more direct causal
relationships between genetic and epigenetic factors affecting EH will likely be 
discovered creating a tremendous potential for personalized medicine using
pharmacogenomics.

PMCID: PMC4062117
PMID: 24944762  [PubMed]


117. Epigenetics. 2014 Aug;9(8):1138-48. doi: 10.4161/epi.29499. Epub 2014 Jun 17.

Development of a multiplex methylation specific PCR suitable for (early)
detection of non-small cell lung cancer.

Nawaz I(1), Qiu X(2), Wu H(2), Li Y(2), Fan Y(2), Hu LF(3), Zhou Q(2), Ernberg
I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology; Tumor and Cell Biology; Karolinska Institute;
Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Microbiology; Faculty of Life Sciences;
University of Balochistan; Quetta, Pakistan. (2)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Lung
Cancer Metastasis and Tumor Microenvironment; Tianjin Lung Cancer Institute;
Tianjin Medical University General Hospital; Tianjin, PR China. (3)Department of 
Microbiology; Tumor and Cell Biology; Karolinska Institute; Stockholm, Sweden.

Lung cancer is a worldwide health problem and a leading cause of cancer-related
deaths. Silencing of potential tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) by aberrant promoter
methylation is an early event in the initiation and development of cancer. Thus, 
methylated cancer type-specific TSGs in DNA can serve as useful biomarkers for
early cancer detection. We have now developed a "Multiplex Methylation Specific
PCR" (MMSP) assay for analysis of the methylation status of multiple potential
TSGs by a single PCR reaction. This method will be useful for early diagnosis and
treatment outcome studies of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Genome-wide CpG 
methylation and expression microarrays were performed on lung cancer tissues and 
matched distant non-cancerous tissues from three NSCLC patients from China.
Thirty-eight potential TSGs were selected and analyzed by methylation PCR on
bisulfite treated DNA. On the basis of sensitivity and specificity, six marker
genes, HOXA9, TBX5, PITX2, CALCA, RASSF1A, and DLEC1, were selected to establish 
the MMSP assay. This assay was then used to analyze lung cancer tissues and
matched distant non-cancerous tissues from 70 patients with NSCLC, as well as 24 
patients with benign pulmonary lesion as controls. The sensitivity of the assay
was 99% (69/70). HOXA9 and TBX5 were the 2 most sensitive marker genes: 87%
(61/70) and 84% (59/70), respectively. RASSF1A and DLEC1 showed the highest
specificity at 99% (69/70). Using the criterion of identifying at least any two
methylated marker genes, 61/70 cancer samples were positive, corresponding to a
sensitivity of 87% and a specificity of 94%. Early stage I or II NSCLC could even
be detected with a 100% specificity and 86% sensitivity. In conclusion, MMSP has 
the potential to be developed into a population-based screening tool and can be
useful for early diagnosis of NSCLC. It might also be suitable for monitoring
treatment outcome and recurrence.

PMCID: PMC4164499
PMID: 24937636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. EMBO J. 2014 Jul 17;33(14):1565-81. doi: 10.15252/embj.201387605. Epub 2014 Jun
11.

MiR-133 promotes cardiac reprogramming by directly repressing Snai1 and silencing
fibroblast signatures.

Muraoka N(1), Yamakawa H(1), Miyamoto K(1), Sadahiro T(1), Umei T(2), Isomi M(2),
Nakashima H(2), Akiyama M(2), Wada R(2), Inagawa K(1), Nishiyama T(1), Kaneda
R(1), Fukuda T(3), Takeda S(3), Tohyama S(4), Hashimoto H(4), Kawamura Y(5),
Goshima N(6), Aeba R(7), Yamagishi H(8), Fukuda K(4), Ieda M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Cardiovascular Research, Keio University 
School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku Tokyo, Japan Department of Cardiology, Keio
University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of
Clinical and Molecular Cardiovascular Research, Keio University School of
Medicine, Shinjuku-ku Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Bunkyo-ku Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of
Cardiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Japan Biological Informatics Consortium (JBiC), Koto-ku Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Molecular Profiling Research Center for Drug Discovery, National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Koto-ku Tokyo, Japan. (7)Division of 
Cardiovascular Surgery, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku Tokyo,
Japan. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine,
Shinjuku-ku Tokyo, Japan. (9)Department of Clinical and Molecular Cardiovascular 
Research, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku Tokyo, Japan Department
of Cardiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku Tokyo, Japan JST
CREST, Shinjuku-ku Tokyo, Japan mieda@z8.keio.jp.

Fibroblasts can be directly reprogrammed into cardiomyocyte-like cells (iCMs) by 
overexpression of cardiac transcription factors or microRNAs. However, induction 
of functional cardiomyocytes is inefficient, and molecular mechanisms of direct
reprogramming remain undefined. Here, we demonstrate that addition of miR-133a
(miR-133) to Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5 (GMT) or GMT plus Mesp1 and Myocd improved
cardiac reprogramming from mouse or human fibroblasts by directly repressing
Snai1, a master regulator of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. MiR-133
overexpression with GMT generated sevenfold more beating iCMs from mouse
embryonic fibroblasts and shortened the duration to induce beating cells from 30 
to 10 days, compared to GMT alone. Snai1 knockdown suppressed fibroblast genes,
upregulated cardiac gene expression, and induced more contracting iCMs with GMT
transduction, recapitulating the effects of miR-133 overexpression. In contrast, 
overexpression of Snai1 in GMT/miR-133-transduced cells maintained fibroblast
signatures and inhibited generation of beating iCMs. MiR-133-mediated Snai1
repression was also critical for cardiac reprogramming in adult mouse and human
cardiac fibroblasts. Thus, silencing fibroblast signatures, mediated by
miR-133/Snai1, is a key molecular roadblock during cardiac reprogramming.

© 2014 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4198052
PMID: 24920580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. BMC Evol Biol. 2014 May 14;14:75. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-14-75.

Reconstruction and in vivo analysis of the extinct tbx5 gene from ancient
wingless moa (Aves: Dinornithiformes).

Huynen L, Suzuki T, Ogura T, Watanabe Y, Millar CD, Hofreiter M, Smith C,
Mirmoeini S, Lambert DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Futures Centre, Griffith University, 170 Kessels Road, Nathan
Qld 4111, Australia. D.lambert@griffith.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: The forelimb-specific gene tbx5 is highly conserved and essential for
the development of forelimbs in zebrafish, mice, and humans. Amongst birds, a
single order, Dinornithiformes, comprising the extinct wingless moa of New
Zealand, are unique in having no skeletal evidence of forelimb-like structures.
RESULTS: To determine the sequence of tbx5 in moa, we used a range of PCR-based
techniques on ancient DNA to retrieve all nine tbx5 exons and splice sites from
the giant moa, Dinornis. Moa Tbx5 is identical to chicken Tbx5 in being able to
activate the downstream promotors of fgf10 and ANF. In addition we show that
missexpression of moa tbx5 in the hindlimb of chicken embryos results in the
formation of forelimb features, suggesting that Tbx5 was fully functional in
wingless moa. An alternatively spliced exon 1 for tbx5 that is expressed
specifically in the forelimb region was shown to be almost identical between moa 
and ostrich, suggesting that, as well as being fully functional, tbx5 is likely
to have been expressed normally in moa since divergence from their flighted
ancestors, approximately 60 mya.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggests that, as in mice, moa tbx5 is necessary for the
induction of forelimbs, but is not sufficient for their outgrowth. Moa Tbx5 may
have played an important role in the development of moa's remnant forelimb
girdle, and may be required for the formation of this structure. Our results
further show that genetic changes affecting genes other than tbx5 must be
responsible for the complete loss of forelimbs in moa.

PMCID: PMC4101845
PMID: 24885927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 18;450(1):81-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.068. Epub 2014 May 24.

Smad4 mediated BMP2 signal is essential for the regulation of GATA4 and Nkx2.5 by
affecting the histone H3 acetylation in H9c2 cells.

Si L(1), Shi J(1), Gao W(1), Zheng M(2), Liu L(3), Zhu J(3), Tian J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 136
Zhongshan 2nd Road, Yu Zhong District, Chongqing 400014, PR China; Ministry of
Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Key Laboratory of
Pediatrics in Chongqing, Chongqing International Science and Technology
Cooperation Center for Child Development and Disorders, 136 Zhongshan 2nd Road,
Yu Zhong District, Chongqing 400014, PR China. (2)Heart Centre, Children's
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 136 Zhongshan 2nd Road, Yu Zhong
District, Chongqing 400014, PR China. (3)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of 
Child Development and Disorders, Key Laboratory of Pediatrics in Chongqing,
Chongqing International Science and Technology Cooperation Center for Child
Development and Disorders, 136 Zhongshan 2nd Road, Yu Zhong District, Chongqing
400014, PR China. (4)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, 136 Zhongshan 2nd Road, Yu Zhong District, Chongqing 400014, PR
China. Electronic address: jietian@cqmu.edu.cn.

BMP2 signaling pathway plays critical roles during heart development, Smad4
encodes the only common Smad protein in mammals, which is a pivotal nuclear
mediator. Our previous studies showed that BMP2 enhanced the expression of
cardiac transcription factors in part by increasing histone H3 acetylation. In
the present study, we tested the hypothesis that Smad4 mediated BMP2 signaling
pathway is essential for the expression of cardiac core transcription factors by 
affecting the histone H3 acetylation. We successfully constructed a
lentivirus-mediated short hairpin RNA interference vector targeting Smad4
(Lv-Smad4) in rat H9c2 embryonic cardiac myocytes (H9c2 cells) and demonstrated
that it suppressed the expression of the Smad4 gene. Cultured H9c2 cells were
transfected with recombinant adenoviruses expressing human BMP2 (AdBMP2) with or 
without Lv-Smad4. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis showed that knocking
down of Smad4 substantially inhibited both AdBMP2-induced and basal expression
levels of cardiac transcription factors GATA4 and Nkx2.5, but not MEF2c and Tbx5.
Similarly, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis showed that knocking
down of Smad4 inhibited both AdBMP2-induced and basal histone H3 acetylation
levels in the promoter regions of GATA4 and Nkx2.5, but not of Tbx5 and MEF2c. In
addition, Lv-Smad4 selectively suppressed AdBMP2-induced expression of HAT p300, 
but not of HAT GCN5 in H9c2 cells. The data indicated that inhibition of Smad4
diminished both AdBMP2 induced and basal histone acetylation levels in the
promoter regions of GATA4 and Nkx2.5, suggesting that Smad4 mediated BMP2
signaling pathway was essential for the regulation of GATA4 and Nkx2.5 by
affecting the histone H3 acetylation in H9c2 cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24866243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Oct 1;23(19):5025-35. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu215. Epub 2014 May 
8.

Disruption of myocardial Gata4 and Tbx5 results in defects in cardiomyocyte
proliferation and atrioventricular septation.

Misra C(1), Chang SW(1), Basu M(1), Huang N(1), Garg V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research and The Heart Center,
Nationwide Children's Hospital. (2)Center for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary
Research and The Heart Center, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Department of
Pediatrics and Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43205, USA vidu.garg@nationwidechildrens.org.

Mutations in GATA4 and TBX5 are associated with congenital heart defects in
humans. Interaction between GATA4 and TBX5 is important for normal cardiac
septation, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are not well understood. Here,
we show that Gata4 and Tbx5 are co-expressed in the embryonic atria and
ventricle, but after E15.5, ventricular expression of Tbx5 decreases.
Co-localization and co-immunoprecipitation studies demonstrate an interaction of 
Gata4 and Tbx5 in the developing atria and ventricles, but the ventricular
interaction declines after E14.5. Gata4(+/-);Tbx5(+/-) mouse embryos display
decreased atrial and ventricular myocardial thickness at E11.5, prior to cardiac 
septation. To determine the cell lineage in which the interaction was
functionally significant in vivo, mice heterozygous for Gata4 in the myocardium
or endocardium and heterozygous for Tbx5 (Gata4(MyoDel/wt);Tbx5(+/-) and
Gata4(EndoDel/wt);Tbx5(+/-), respectively) were generated.
Gata4(MyoDel/wt);Tbx5(+/-) mice displayed embryonic lethality, thin myocardium
with reduced cell proliferation, and atrioventricular septation defects similar
to Gata4;Tbx5 compound heterozygotes while Gata4(EndoDel/wt);Tbx5(+/-) embryos
were normal. Cdk4 and Cdk2, cyclin-dependent kinases required for myocardial
development and septation were reduced in Gata4(+/-);Tbx5(+/-) hearts. Cdk4 is a 
known direct target of Gata4 and the regulation of Cdk2 in the developing heart
has not been studied. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and transactivation studies
demonstrate that Gata4 and Tbx5 directly regulate Cdk4 while only Tbx5 activates 
Cdk2 expression. These findings highlight the mechanisms by which disruption of
the Gata4 and Tbx5 interaction in the myocardium contributes to cardiac septation
defects in humans.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4159147
PMID: 24858909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2014 May;70(Pt 5):592-5. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X14006761. Epub 2014 Apr 15.

Crystallization and preliminary X-ray analysis of the cardiac transcription
factor complex of NKX2.5 and TBX5 with DNA.

Pradhan L(1), Gopal S(1), Nam HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX
75080, USA.

Heart development depends on timely expression of genes regulated by
combinatorial interactions of master cardiac transcription factors. To elucidate 
the molecular basis of their interactions, a ternary complex of cardiac
transcription factors, NKX2.5 and TBX5, and their target DNA was studied using
X-ray crystallography. Here, the purification, crystallization and preliminary
X-ray crystallographic analyses of the NKX2.5 homeodomain and TBX5 DNA-binding
domain complex with a DNA element from the -252 promoter region of the atrial
natriuretic factor are reported. The crystal diffracted to 2.88 Å resolution and 
belonged to space group P21, with unit-cell parameters a = 69.30, b = 77.78, c = 
77.60 Å, ß = 108.31°. Two sets of ternary complexes are present in an asymmetric 
unit with a solvent content of 54%.

PMCID: PMC4014325
PMID: 24817716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jun 20;289(25):17721-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.539908. Epub
2014 May 8.

Steroid receptor coactivator-2 is a dual regulator of cardiac transcription
factor function.

Reineke EL(1), Benham A(2), Soibam B(2), Stashi E(1), Taegtmeyer H(3), Entman
ML(4), Schwartz RJ(5), O'Malley BW(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030. (2)the Stem Cell Engineering Department, Texas
Heart Institute at St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Houston, Texas 77030. (3)the
Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, The University of Texas 
Medical School at Houston, Houston, Texas 77030. (4)the Department of Medicine,
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, and. (5)the Stem Cell Engineering Department, Texas Heart Institute at St.
Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Houston, Texas 77030, the Department of Biology and
Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77004. (6)From the Department
of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, berto@bcm.tmc.edu.

We have previously demonstrated the potential role of steroid receptor
coactivator-2 (SRC-2) as a co-regulator in the transcription of critical
molecules modulating cardiac function and metabolism in normal and stressed
hearts. The present study seeks to extend the previous information by
demonstrating SRC-2 fulfills this role by serving as a critical coactivator for
the transcription and activity of critical transcription factors known to control
cardiac growth and metabolism as well as in their downstream signaling. This
knowledge broadens our understanding of the mechanism by which SRC-2 acts in
normal and stressed hearts and allows further investigation of the
transcriptional modifications mediating different types and degrees of cardiac
stress. Moreover, the genetic manipulation of SRC-2 in this study is specific for
the heart and thereby eliminating potential indirect effects of SRC-2 deletion in
other organs. We have shown that SRC-2 is critical to transcriptional control
modulated by MEF2, GATA-4, and Tbx5, thereby enhancing gene expression associated
with cardiac growth. Additionally, we describe SRC-2 as a novel regulator of
PPARa expression, thus controlling critical steps in metabolic gene expression.
We conclude that through regulation of cardiac transcription factor expression
and activity, SRC-2 is a critical transcriptional regulator of genes important
for cardiac growth, structure, and metabolism, three of the main pathways altered
during the cardiac stress response.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4067206
PMID: 24811170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Stem Cells. 2014 Sep;32(9):2480-91. doi: 10.1002/stem.1741.

Erythropoietin responsive cardiomyogenic cells contribute to heart repair post
myocardial infarction.

Zafiriou MP(1), Noack C, Unsöld B, Didie M, Pavlova E, Fischer HJ, Reichardt HM, 
Bergmann MW, El-Armouche A, Zimmermann WH, Zelarayan LC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, University Medical Center, Georg-August-Universität
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

The role of erythropoietin (Epo) in myocardial repair after infarction remains
inconclusive. We observed high Epo receptor (EPOR) expression in cardiac
progenitor cells (CPCs). Therefore, we aimed to characterize these cells and
elucidate their contribution to myocardial regeneration on Epo stimulation. High 
EPOR expression was detected during murine embryonic heart development followed
by a marked decrease until adulthood. EPOR-positive cells in the adult heart were
identified in a CPC-enriched cell population and showed coexpression of stem,
mesenchymal, endothelial, and cardiomyogenic cell markers. We focused on the
population coexpressing early (TBX5, NKX2.5) and definitive (myosin heavy chain
[MHC], cardiac Troponin T [cTNT]) cardiomyocyte markers. Epo increased their
proliferation and thus were designated as Epo-responsive MHC expressing cells
(EMCs). In vitro, EMCs proliferated and partially differentiated toward
cardiomyocyte-like cells. Repetitive Epo administration in mice with myocardial
infarction (cumulative dose 4 IU/g) resulted in an increase in cardiac EMCs and
cTNT-positive cells in the infarcted area. This was further accompanied by a
significant preservation of cardiac function when compared with control mice. Our
study characterized an EPO-responsive MHC-expressing cell population in the adult
heart. Repetitive, moderate-dose Epo treatment enhanced the proliferation of EMCs
resulting in preservation of post-ischemic cardiac function.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24806289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Open Biol. 2014 Apr 23;4:140014. doi: 10.1098/rsob.140014.

Distinct tissue-specific requirements for the zebrafish tbx5 genes during heart, 
retina and pectoral fin development.

Pi-Roig A(1), Martin-Blanco E, Minguillon C.

Author information: 
(1)CSIC-Institut de Biologia Molecular de Barcelona, Department of Developmental 
Biology, Parc Científic de Barcelona, C/Baldiri Reixac, 10, Barcelona 08028,
Spain.

The transcription factor Tbx5 is expressed in the developing heart, eyes and
anterior appendages. Mutations in human TBX5 cause Holt-Oram syndrome, a
condition characterized by heart and upper limb malformations. Tbx5-knockout
mouse embryos have severely impaired forelimb and heart morphogenesis from the
earliest stages of their development. However, zebrafish embryos with compromised
tbx5 function show a complete absence of pectoral fins, while heart development
is disturbed at significantly later developmental stages and eye development
remains to be thoroughly analysed. We identified a novel tbx5 gene in
zebrafish--tbx5b--that is co-expressed with its paralogue, tbx5a, in the
developing eye and heart and hypothesized that functional redundancy could be
occurring in these organs in embryos with impaired tbx5a function. We have now
investigated the consequences of tbx5a and/or tbx5b downregulation in zebrafish
to reveal that tbx5 genes have essential roles in the establishment of cardiac
laterality, dorsoventral retina axis organization and pectoral fin development.
Our data show that distinct relationships between tbx5 paralogues are required in
a tissue-specific manner to ensure the proper morphogenesis of the three organs
in which they are expressed. Furthermore, we uncover a novel role for tbx5 genes 
in the establishment of correct heart asymmetry in zebrafish embryos.

PMCID: PMC4043114
PMID: 24759614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Oct;148(4):1656-1664.e2. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2014.03.033. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

"Triplet" polycistronic vectors encoding Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5 enhances
postinfarct ventricular functional improvement compared with singlet vectors.

Mathison M(1), Singh VP(1), Gersch RP(2), Ramirez MO(1), Cooney A(1), Kaminsky
SM(3), Chiuchiolo MJ(3), Nasser A(2), Yang J(4), Crystal RG(3), Rosengart TK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Tex. (2)Department of Surgery, Stony Brook
University Medical Center, Stony Brook, NY. (3)Department of Genetic Medicine,
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY. (4)Department of Pathology, Stony
Brook University Medical Center, Stony Brook, NY. (5)Division of Cardiothoracic
Surgery, Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Tex; Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Texas Heart Institute,
Houston, Tex. Electronic address: todd.rosengart@bcm.edu.

OBJECTIVE: The in situ reprogramming of cardiac fibroblasts into induced
cardiomyocytes by the administration of gene transfer vectors encoding Gata4 (G),
Mef2c (M), and Tbx5 (T) has been shown to improve ventricular function in
myocardial infarction models. The efficacy of this strategy could, however, be
limited by the need for fibroblast targets to be infected 3 times--once by each
of the 3 transgene vectors. We hypothesized that a polycistronic "triplet" vector
encoding all 3 transgenes would enhance postinfarct ventricular function compared
with use of "singlet" vectors.
METHODS: After validation of the polycistronic vector expression in vitro, adult 
male Fischer 344 rats (n=6) underwent coronary ligation with or without
intramyocardial administration of an adenovirus encoding all 3 major vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) isoforms (AdVEGF-All6A positive), followed 3
weeks later by the administration to AdVEGF-All6A-positive treated rats of
singlet lentivirus encoding G, M, or T (1×10(5) transducing units each) or the
same total dose of a GMT "triplet" lentivirus vector.
RESULTS: Western blots demonstrated that triplet and singlet vectors yielded
equivalent GMT transgene expression, and fluorescence activated cell sorting
demonstrated that triplet vectors were nearly twice as potent as singlet vectors 
in generating induced cardiomyocytes from cardiac fibroblasts. Echocardiography
demonstrated that GMT triplet vectors were more effective than the 3 combined
singlet vectors in enhancing ventricular function from postinfarct baselines
(triplet, 37%±10%; singlet, 13%±7%; negative control, 9%±5%; P<.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These data have confirmed that the in situ administration of G, M,
and T induces postinfarct ventricular functional improvement and that GMT
polycistronic vectors enhance the efficacy of this strategy.

Copyright © 2014 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24755332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Sep 1;23(17):2067-79. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0583. Epub 2014 
May 27.

Glucosamine-induced OGT activation mediates glucose production through cleaved
Notch1 and FoxO1, which coordinately contributed to the regulation of maintenance
of self-renewal in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Jeon JH(1), Suh HN, Kim MO, Ryu JM, Han HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University , Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

We aimed to study the relationship between glucosamine and FoxO1/Notch in
gluconeogenesis and maintenance of mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) self-renewal.
Glucosamine (GlcN) increased glucose production and gluconeogenic enzyme (G6Pase 
and PEPCK) expression. GlcN also increased the percentage of cells in S phase,
number of cells, and the protein expression of cell cycle regulatory proteins
that were blocked by 3-mercaptopicolinic acid (gluconeogenesis inhibitor) or
glucose transporter (GLUT) 1 neutralizing antibody. GlcN increased the O-GlcNAc
transferase (OGT)-dependent protein O-GlcNAc level. Moreover, inhibition of OGT
(by ST045849) decreased glucose production. GlcN enhanced the expression of
OGT-dependent O-GlcNAcylated Notch1 and then increased the translocation of
cleaved Notch1 to the nucleus. Moreover, GlcN stimulated the translocation of
O-GlcNAcylated FoxO1 to the nucleus. GlcN increased the binding between cleaved
Notch1 and FoxO1 with CSL, a transcription factor, which was blocked by L-685,458
(<U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor) or ST045849, respectively. Simultaneous blockage of
cleaved Notch1 and FoxO1 also decreased the expression of G6Pase and PEPCK more
significantly than that by inhibition of cleaved Notch1 alone or FoxO1 alone. In 
addition, GlcN maintained the undifferentiation status while depletion of Notch1 
and FoxO1 for 3 days decreased Oct4 and SSEA-1 expression and alkaline
phosphatase activity or increased the mRNA expression of GATA4, Tbx5, Cdx2, and
Fgf5. In conclusion, GlcN-induced OGT activation mediated glucose production
through cleaved Notch1 and FoxO1, which contributed to the regulation of
maintenance of self-renewal in mESCs.

PMCID: PMC4142796
PMID: 24730386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Pediatr Cardiol. 2014 Aug;35(6):1072-9. doi: 10.1007/s00246-014-0901-y. Epub 2014
Apr 9.

miR-10a and miR-10b target the 3'-untranslated region of TBX5 to repress its
expression.

Wang F(1), Yang XY, Zhao JY, Yu LW, Zhang P, Duan WY, Chong M, Gui YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 399 Wanyuan
Road, Shanghai, 201102, China.

As a well-known transcription factor, TBX5 is involved in embryonic cardiac
development. Although TBX5 functions in a dose-dependent manner, the
posttranscriptional regulation of human TBX5 is poorly understood. Thus, this
study aimed to identify microRNAs that modulate TBX5 expression. Luciferase
assays were used to screen miRNAs predicted to modulate TBX5 expression. Using
quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and Western blot
analysis, the authors found that miR-10a and miR-10b significantly repressed TBX5
expression and decreased TBX5 protein levels by targeting the TBX5
3'-untranslated region. In addition, miR-10a and miR-10b expression levels were
respectively 2.77 and 3.51 times higher in the heart tissues of congenital heart 
disease patients than in healthy control subjects, suggesting that they are
potential diagnostic biomarkers. In conclusion, the study results indicate that
miR-10a and miR-10b inhibit TBX5 expression at the level of translation. Higher
levels of miR-10a and miR-10b expression are associated with a higher risk of
congenital heart defects.

PMID: 24714979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Stem Cells. 2014 Aug;32(8):2072-83. doi: 10.1002/stem.1713.

Pax3 and Tbx5 specify whether PDGFRa+ cells assume skeletal or cardiac muscle
fate in differentiating embryonic stem cells.

Magli A(1), Schnettler E, Swanson SA, Borges L, Hoffman K, Stewart R, Thomson JA,
Keirstead SA, Perlingeiro RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) represent an ideal model to study how lineage
decisions are established during embryonic development. Using a
doxycycline-inducible mouse ESC line, we have previously shown that expression of
the transcriptional activator Pax3 in early mesodermal cells leads to the robust 
generation of paraxial mesoderm progenitors that ultimately differentiate into
skeletal muscle precursors. Here, we show that the ability of this transcription 
factor to induce the skeletal myogenic cell fate occurs at the expenses of the
cardiac lineage. Our results show that the PDGFRa+FLK1--subfraction represents
the main population affected by Pax3, through downregulation of several
transcripts encoding for proteins involved in cardiac development. We demonstrate
that although Nkx2-5, Tbx5, and Gata4 negatively affect Pax3 skeletal myogenic
activity, the cardiac potential of embryoid body-derived cultures is restored
solely by forced expression of Tbx5. Taking advantage of this model, we used an
unbiased genome-wide approach to identify genes whose expression is rescued by
Tbx5, and which could represent important regulators of cardiac development.
These findings elucidate mechanisms regulating the commitment of mesodermal cells
in the early embryo and identify the Tbx5 cardiac transcriptome.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4107161
PMID: 24677751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 May;164A(5):1304-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36447. Epub 2014
Mar 24.

Phenotype of a patient with contiguous deletion of TBX5 and TBX3: expanding the
disease spectrum.

Bogarapu S(1), Bleyl SB, Calhoun A, Viskochil D, Saarel EV, Everitt MD, Frank DU.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The important roles that T-box genes play in the morphogenesis of the heart and
its conduction system has long been established, and a number of disorders are
linked to mutations in these T-box genes. Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), the classic
heart and hand syndrome, is clinically typified by radial ray upper limb
abnormalities and cardiac malformations, and is caused by mutations involving
TBX5. Another member of the T-box gene family, TBX3, is found in close proximity 
to TBX5 on chromosome 12q24. Mutations in TBX3 cause ulnar-mammary syndrome
(UMS), which is distinguished by upper limb malformations affecting the ulnar
ray, apocrine, and mammary gland hypoplasia, and genital defects. While disorders
involving isolated mutations of TBX5 and TBX3 have been well described,
contiguous deletions of these T-box genes remain exceptional. We report on a
patient with features of both HOS and UMS consisting of bilateral symmetric limb 
malformations, congenital cardiac defects, and rapidly progressive cardiac
conduction disease.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24664963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jun;164A(6):1419-24. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36459. Epub 2014 
Mar 24.

Holt-Oram syndrome with intermediate atrioventricular canal defect, and aortic
coarctation: functional characterization of a de novo TBX5 mutation.

Baban A(1), Pitto L, Pulignani S, Cresci M, Mariani L, Gambacciani C, Digilio MC,
Pongiglione G, Albanese S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery, Bambino Gesù
Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by
upper limb defects and congenital heart defects (CHD), which are often simple
septal and conduction defects, less frequently complex CHDs. We report on a 9
year-old boy with clinical and radiologic features of HOS consisting of bilateral
asymmetric hypoplastic thumbs, generalized brachydactyly, limited supination due 
to radioulnar synostosis, and sloping shoulders, and intermediate
atrioventricular canal defect (AVCD) with aortic coarctation. A de novo,
previously described mutation, (Arg279ter) was identified in the TBX5 gene.
Molecular characterization of this mutation was carried out due to the atypical
CHD. In order to investigate whether the mutated transcript of TBX5 was able to
escape the post-transcriptional surveillance mechanism and to produce a truncated
TBX5 protein, we analyzed the TBX5 transcript, and protein pattern in HOS, and WT
cardiac tissues. Our results demonstrate that the mutant TBX5 transcript is
cleared by the cellular mechanism of surveillance. This data provides some
support for the hypothesis that a dominant negative mutation, which strongly
impairs the WT allele, might be too hazardous to be maintained. The literature
suggests that HOS is relatively common among syndromes associated with AVCD.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24664498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS Genet. 2014 Mar 20;10(3):e1004245. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004245.
eCollection 2014.

A combination of activation and repression by a colinear Hox code controls
forelimb-restricted expression of Tbx5 and reveals Hox protein specificity.

Nishimoto S(1), Minguillon C(2), Wood S(3), Logan MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC-National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London, United Kingdom; Randall Division of Cell and
Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, London, United Kingdom. (2)Division 
of Developmental Biology, MRC-National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill,
London, United Kingdom; CSIC-Institut de Biologia Molecular de Barcelona, Parc
Científic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (3)Procedural Services Section,
MRC-National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London, United Kingdom.

Tight control over gene expression is essential for precision in embryonic
development and acquisition of the regulatory elements responsible is the
predominant driver for evolution of new structures. Tbx5 and Tbx4, two genes
expressed in forelimb and hindlimb-forming regions respectively, play crucial
roles in the initiation of limb outgrowth. Evolution of regulatory elements that 
activate Tbx5 in rostral LPM was essential for the acquisition of forelimbs in
vertebrates. We identified such a regulatory element for Tbx5 and demonstrated
Hox genes are essential, direct regulators. While the importance of Hox genes in 
regulating embryonic development is clear, Hox targets and the ways in which each
protein executes its specific function are not known. We reveal how nested Hox
expression along the rostro-caudal axis restricts Tbx5 expression to forelimb. We
demonstrate that Hoxc9, which is expressed in caudal LPM where Tbx5 is not
expressed, can form a repressive complex on the Tbx5 forelimb regulatory element.
This repressive capacity is limited to Hox proteins expressed in caudal LPM and
carried out by two separate protein domains in Hoxc9. Forelimb-restricted
expression of Tbx5 and ultimately forelimb formation is therefore achieved
through co-option of two characteristics of Hox genes; their colinear expression 
along the body axis and the functional specificity of different paralogs. Active 
complexes can be formed by Hox PG proteins present throughout the rostral-caudal 
LPM while restriction of Tbx5 expression is achieved by superimposing a dominant 
repressive (Hoxc9) complex that determines the caudal boundary of Tbx5
expression. Our results reveal the regulatory mechanism that ensures emergence of
the forelimbs at the correct position along the body. Acquisition of this
regulatory element would have been critical for the evolution of limbs in
vertebrates and modulation of the factors we have identified can be molecular
drivers of the diversity in limb morphology.

PMCID: PMC3961185
PMID: 24651482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Science. 2014 Mar 14;343(6176):1253-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1248228.

Vertebrate limb bud formation is initiated by localized epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition.

Gros J(1), Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Vertebrate limbs first emerge as small buds at specific locations along the
trunk. Although a fair amount is known about the molecular regulation of limb
initiation and outgrowth, the cellular events underlying these processes have
remained less clear. We show that the mesenchymal limb progenitors arise through 
localized epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of the coelomic epithelium
specifically within the presumptive limb fields. This EMT is regulated at least
in part by Tbx5 and Fgf10, two genes known to control limb initiation. This work 
shows that limb buds initiate earlier than previously thought, as a result of
localized EMT rather than differential proliferation rates.

PMCID: PMC4097009
PMID: 24626928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 26;9(2):e89678. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089678. eCollection
2014.

Inhibition of TGFß signaling increases direct conversion of fibroblasts to
induced cardiomyocytes.

Ifkovits JL(1), Addis RC(1), Epstein JA(1), Gearhart JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute for Regenerative
Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Recent studies have been successful at utilizing ectopic expression of
transcription factors to generate induced cardiomyocytes (iCMs) from fibroblasts,
albeit at a low frequency in vitro. This work investigates the influence of small
molecules that have been previously reported to improve differentiation to
cardiomyocytes as well as reprogramming to iPSCs in conjunction with ectopic
expression of the transcription factors Hand2, Nkx2.5, Gata4, Mef2C, and Tbx5 on 
the conversion to functional iCMs. We utilized a reporter system in which the
calcium indicator GCaMP is driven by the cardiac Troponin T promoter to quantify 
iCM yield. The TGFß inhibitor, SB431542 (SB), was identified as a small molecule 
capable of increasing the conversion of both mouse embryonic fibroblasts and
adult cardiac fibroblasts to iCMs up to ~5 fold. Further characterization
revealed that inhibition of TGFß by SB early in the reprogramming process led to 
the greatest increase in conversion of fibroblasts to iCMs in a dose-responsive
manner. Global transcriptional analysis at Day 3 post-induction of the
transcription factors revealed an increased expression of genes associated with
the development of cardiac muscle in the presence of SB compared to the vehicle
control. Incorporation of SB in the reprogramming process increases the
efficiency of iCM generation, one of the major goals necessary to enable the use 
of iCMs for discovery-based applications and for the clinic.

PMCID: PMC3935923
PMID: 24586958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 May;50:82-92. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.02.007.
Epub 2014 Feb 26.

Potentiation of Tbx5-mediated transactivation by SUMO conjugation and protein
inhibitor of activated STAT 1 (PIAS1).

Beketaev I(1), Kim EY(1), Zhang Y(2), Yu W(3), Qian L(1), Wang J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell Engineering, Department of Basic Research Laboratories,
Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital, 6770 Bertner Avenue, MC
2-255, Houston, TX 77030, United States. (2)In Vitro Fertilization Center,
Affiliated Hospital of Hainan Medical University, 31 Long-Hua Road, Haikou,
Hainan, 570102, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, United States.
(4)Center for Stem Cell Engineering, Department of Basic Research Laboratories,
Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital, 6770 Bertner Avenue, MC
2-255, Houston, TX 77030, United States. Electronic address:
junwang@heart.thi.tmc.edu.

The role of the T-box transcription factor Tbx5 in heart and limb development has
been well documented; however, how posttranslational modification is involved in 
mediating its activity is unknown. Here we report that Tbx5 is a novel target by 
SUMO conjugation, a posttranslational modification that is involved in a variety 
of cellular events. Sumoylation potentiated the transcriptional activity of Tbx5,
and PIAS family members, a group of SUMO E3 ligase, differentially mediated
sumoylation and function of Tbx5. PIAS1 potently stimulated SUMO conjugation to
Tbx5, and the physical association of Tbx5 with PIAS1 was required for its full
sumoylation. PIAS1 also enhanced the functional cooperation between Tbx5 and its 
interaction partners. Overlapping expression pattern and colocalization of PIAS1 
and Tbx5 in the mouse embryonic hearts and on the native target gene promoter
were observed, pointing to a potential functional interaction of these two
factors in vivo. These findings provide novel insights into how the
transcriptional activity of a cardiac-specific factor, Tbx5, is regulated both
directly and indirectly via posttranslational modification by a
non-tissue-specific factor, PIAS1.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24582888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jul 15;23(14):3801-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu093. Epub 2014 Feb 
23.

Histone deacetylase 3 modulates Tbx5 activity to regulate early cardiogenesis.

Lewandowski SL(1), Janardhan HP(1), Smee KM(1), Bachman M(2), Sun Z(3), Lazar
MA(3), Trivedi CM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Medicine and Department of Medicine, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (2)Cardiovascular
Medicine and. (3)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism, Department of
Medicine and The Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism, Perelman School
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(4)Cardiovascular Medicine and Department of Medicine, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA,
chinmay.trivedi@umassmed.edu.

Congenital heart defects often result from improper differentiation of cardiac
progenitor cells. Although transcription factors involved in cardiac progenitor
cell differentiation have been described, the associated chromatin modifiers in
this process remain largely unknown. Here we show that mouse embryos lacking the 
chromatin-modifying enzyme histone deacetylase 3 (Hdac3) in cardiac progenitor
cells exhibit precocious cardiomyocyte differentiation, severe cardiac
developmental defects, upregulation of Tbx5 target genes and embryonic lethality.
Hdac3 physically interacts with Tbx5 and modulates its acetylation to repress
Tbx5-dependent activation of cardiomyocyte lineage-specific genes. These findings
reveal that Hdac3 plays a critical role in cardiac progenitor cells to regulate
early cardiogenesis.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4065153
PMID: 24565863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Gene. 2013 Oct 26. pii: S0378-1119(13)01423-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.10.028.
[Epub ahead of print]

A novel mutation of GATA4 (K319E) is responsible for familial atrial septal
defect and pulmonary valve stenosis.

Xiang R(1), Fan LL(2), Huang H(2), Cao BB(2), Li XP(3), Peng DQ(4), Xia K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, Central South
University,Changsha 410013, China; State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics,
Central South University, Changsha 410078, China; Department of Cardiology, the
Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, 410011, China.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, Central South
University,Changsha 410013, China. (3)Department of Cardiology, the Second
Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, 410011, China.
(4)Department of Cardiology, the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, 410011, China. Electronic address: pengdq@hotmail.com.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, Central South
University,Changsha 410013, China; State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics,
Central South University, Changsha 410078, China. Electronic address:
xiakun@sklmg.edu.cn.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defect in humans, and the
etiology of most CHD remains to be elusive. Atrial septal defect (ASD) makes up
30-40% of all adult CHDs and is thought to be genetically heterogeneous. Previous
studies have demonstrated that mutations in transcription factors e.g. NKX2.5,
GATA4, and TBX5 contribute to congenital ASD. In this study, we investigate a
family of three generations with seven patients with ASD and pulmonary valve
stenosis (PS). A novel GATA4 mutation, c.955A>G (p.K319E), was identified and
co-segregated with the affected patients in this family. This mutation was
predicted to be deleterious by three different bioinformatics programs (The
polyphen2, SIFT and MutationTaster). Our finding expands the spectrum of GATA4
mutations and provides additional support that GATA4 plays important roles in
cardiac development.

© 2013.

PMID: 24513334  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


138. Gene. 2014 Jan 25;534(2):320-3.

A novel mutation of GATA4 (K319E) is responsible for familial atrial septal
defect and pulmonary valve stenosis.

Xiang R, Fan LL, Huang H, Cao BB, Li XP, Peng DQ, Xia K.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defect in humans, and the
etiology of most CHD remains to be elusive. Atrial septal defect (ASD) makes up
3040% of all adult CHDs and is thought to be genetically heterogeneous. Previous
studies have demonstrated that mutations in transcription factors e.g. NKX2.5,
GATA4, and TBX5 contribute to congenital ASD. In this study, we investigate a
family of three generations with seven patients with ASD and pulmonary valve
stenosis (PS). A novel GATA4 mutation, c.955ANG (p.K319E), was identified and
co-segregated with the affected patients in this family. This mutation was
predicted to be deleterious by three different bioinformatics programs (The
polyphen2, SIFT and MutationTaster). Our finding expands the spectrum of GATA4
mutations and provides additional support that GATA4 plays important roles in
cardiac development.

PMID: 24498650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Transl Med. 2014 Jan 31;12:31. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-12-31.

Association of promoter methylation statuses of congenital heart defect candidate
genes with Tetralogy of Fallot.

Sheng W, Qian Y, Zhang P, Wu Y, Wang H, Ma X, Chen L(1), Ma D, Huang G.

Author information: 
(1)Children Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 201102, China.
chenlong@shmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Although a lower methylation level of whole genome has been
demonstrated in Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) patients, little is known regarding
changes in specific gene DNA methylation profiles and the possible associations
with TOF. In current study, the promoter methylation statuses of congenital heart
defect (CHD) candidate genes were measured in order to further understand
epigenetic mechanisms that may play a role in the development of TOF.
METHODS: The methylation levels of CHD candidate genes were measured using the
Sequenom MassARRAY platform. QRT-PCR was used to analyze the mRNA levels of CHD
candidate genes in the right ventricular myocardium of TOF cases and normal
controls.
RESULTS: Methylation status analysis was performed on the promoter regions of 71 
CHD candidate genes (113 amplicons). We found significant differences in
methylation status, between TOF cases and controls, in 26 amplicons (26 genes) (p
< 0.05). Of the 26 amplicons, 17 were up regulated and 9 were down regulated.
Additionally, 14 of them were located in the CpG islands, 7 were located in the
CpG island shores, and 5 were covering the regions near the transcription start
site (TSS). The methylation status was subsequently confirmed and mRNA levels
were measured for 7 represented candidate genes, including EGFR, EVC2, NFATC2,
NR2F2, TBX5, CFC1B and GJA5. The methylation values of EGFR, EVC2, TBX5 and CFC1B
were significantly correlated with their mRNA levels (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant promoter methylation statuses of CHD candidate genes
presented in TOF cases may contribute to the TOF development and have potential
prognostic and therapeutic significance for TOF disease.

PMCID: PMC3915623
PMID: 24479926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Autophagy. 2014 Apr;10(4):572-87. doi: 10.4161/auto.27649. Epub 2014 Jan 14.

Autophagy is essential for cardiac morphogenesis during vertebrate development.

Lee E(1), Koo Y(2), Ng A(3), Wei Y(4), Luby-Phelps K(5), Juraszek A(6), Xavier
RJ(3), Cleaver O(2), Levine B(7), Amatruda JF(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine; University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center; Dallas, TX USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biology; University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA. (3)Center for Computational &
Integrative Biology; Massachusetts General Hospital; Boston, MA USA;
Gastrointestinal Unit; Massachusetts General Hospital; Boston, MA USA; Broad
Institute of Harvard and MIT; Cambridge, MA USA. (4)Department of Internal
Medicine; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA; Center
for Autophagy Research; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, 
TX USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute; University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center; Dallas, TX USA. (5)Department of Cell Biology; UT Southwestern Medical
Center; Dallas, TX USA. (6)Department of Pediatrics; University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA. (7)Department of Internal Medicine; 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA; Center for
Autophagy Research; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX
USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute; University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center; Dallas, TX USA; Department of Microbiology; University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA. (8)Department of Internal Medicine; 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX USA; Department of
Molecular Biology; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center; Dallas, TX
USA; Department of Pediatrics; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center;
Dallas, TX USA.

Genetic analyses indicate that autophagy, an evolutionarily conserved lysosomal
degradation pathway, is essential for eukaryotic differentiation and development.
However, little is known about whether autophagy contributes to morphogenesis
during embryogenesis. To address this question, we examined the role of autophagy
in the early development of zebrafish, a model organism for studying vertebrate
tissue and organ morphogenesis. Using zebrafish that transgenically express the
fluorescent autophagy reporter protein, GFP-LC3, we found that autophagy is
active in multiple tissues, including the heart, during the embryonic period.
Inhibition of autophagy by morpholino knockdown of essential autophagy genes
(including atg5, atg7, and becn1) resulted in defects in morphogenesis, increased
numbers of dead cells, abnormal heart structure, and reduced organismal survival.
Further analyses of cardiac development in autophagy-deficient zebrafish revealed
defects in cardiac looping, abnormal chamber morphology, aberrant valve
development, and ectopic expression of critical transcription factors including
foxn4, tbx5, and tbx2. Consistent with these results, Atg5-deficient mice
displayed abnormal Tbx2 expression and defects in valve development and chamber
septation. Thus, autophagy plays an essential, conserved role in cardiac
morphogenesis during vertebrate development.

PMCID: PMC4091146
PMID: 24441423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3153. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4153.

Kctd10 regulates heart morphogenesis by repressing the transcriptional activity
of Tbx5a in zebrafish.

Tong X(1), Zu Y(1), Li Z(2), Li W(3), Ying L(3), Yang J(3), Wang X(3), He S(3),
Liu D(3), Zhu Z(3), Chen J(4), Lin S(5), Zhang B(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of Ministry of
Education, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, PR China 
[2]. (2)1] State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Marine Genetic Resources, Third 
Institute of Oceanography, State Oceanic Administration, 184 University Road,
Xiamen 361005, Fujian Province, PR China [2]. (3)Key Laboratory of Cell
Proliferation and Differentiation of Ministry of Education, College of Life
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, PR China. (4)State Key Laboratory
Breeding Base of Marine Genetic Resources, Third Institute of Oceanography, State
Oceanic Administration, 184 University Road, Xiamen 361005, Fujian Province, PR
China. (5)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095-1606, USA.

The T-box transcription factor Tbx5 (Tbx5a in zebrafish) plays a crucial role in 
the formation of cardiac chambers in a dose-dependent manner. Its deregulation
leads to congenital heart disease. However, little is known regarding its
regulation. Here we isolate a zebrafish mutant with heart malformations, called
34c. The affected gene is identified as kctd10, a member of the potassium channel
tetramerization domain (KCTD)-containing family. In the mutant, the expressions
of the atrioventricular canal marker genes, such as tbx2b, hyaluronan synthase 2 
(has2), notch1b and bmp4, are changed. The knockdown of tbx5 rescues the ectopic 
expression of has2, and knockdown of either tbx5a or has2 alleviates the heart
defects. We show that Kctd10 directly binds to Tbx5 to repress its
transcriptional activity. Our results reveal a new essential factor for cardiac
development and suggest that KCTD10 could be considered as a new causative gene
of congenital heart disease.

PMID: 24430697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Bonekey Rep. 2013 Sep 11;2:430. doi: 10.1038/bonekey.2013.164. eCollection 2013.

TBX5 identified as a candidate gene responsible for osteochondrosis in pigs.

[No authors listed]

PMCID: PMC3789225
PMID: 24422130  [PubMed]


143. J Trop Pediatr. 2014 Jun;60(3):257-9. doi: 10.1093/tropej/fmt109. Epub 2014 Jan
9.

A new mutation in the TBX5 gene in Holt-Oram syndrome: two cases in the same
family and prenatal diagnosis.

Atik T(1), Dervisoglu H(2), Onay H(3), Ozkinay F(4), Cogulu O(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Division of Pediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics,
Ege University, Izmir, Turkey tahiratik@yahoo.com. (2)Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Pediatrics, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey. (3)Faculty of Medicine, 
Department of Medical Genetics, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey. (4)Faculty of
Medicine, Division of Pediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Ege
University, Izmir, TurkeyFaculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Ege
University, Izmir, TurkeyFaculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Ege
University, Izmir, Turkey. (5)Faculty of Medicine, Division of Pediatric
Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey.

Holt-Oram Syndrome (HOS) is a rare autosomal dominant condition characterized by 
anomalies of the upper extremity and cardiac malformations. Mutations in the TBX5
gene are what cause HOS. The proband is an 8-year-old male who presented with
upper-extremity abnormalities and a chest deformity. He was born to a
nonconsanguineous marriage at full term. He has a history of ventricular septal
defect. His mother presented with deformation in both hands and forearms, and was
9 weeks' pregnant. Mutation analysis for TBX5 gene revealed heterozygous
p.L65Qfs*10 in both the patient and his mother. Molecular analysis of the fetus
was normal for TBX5 gene in the 13th week of pregnancy. In conclusion, our case
supports the fact that the HOS presents differently, case by case, even within
the same family. The novel mutation reported here and phenotypic findings in the 
affected members may contribute to the phenotype-genotype correlation.

© The Author [2014]. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24408148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Anesth Essays Res. 2014 Jan-Apr;8(1):83-5. doi: 10.4103/0259-1162.128917.

Anesthetic management of a patient with Holt-Oram syndrome undergoing right
radial head excision.

Shetti AN(1), Dhulkhed VK(1), Panchgar V(1), Prakash L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology, Krishna Institute of Medical Sciences, Karad,
Maharashtra, India.

Holt-Oram syndrome also known as heart and hand syndrome, first reported in 1960.
It is a rare, inherited, an autosomal dominant disorder with mutation in TBX5. As
the name suggests, the feature involves skeletal abnormality mainly involving
upper limb, that is, upper-extremity malformations involving radial, thenar, or
carpal bones; congenital heart diseases like, atrial-septal defect and
ventricular septal defect and conduction problems. This syndrome may also involve
other part of skeletal structure. We hereby report a case of a patient who was
suffering from this syndrome scheduled for right radial head excision.

PMCID: PMC4173574
PMID: 25886110  [PubMed]


145. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Mar;12(2):323-37. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.11.008. Epub 2013
Nov 28.

Cardiomyogenesis is controlled by the miR-99a/let-7c cluster and epigenetic
modifications.

Coppola A(1), Romito A(2), Borel C(3), Gehrig C(3), Gagnebin M(3), Falconnet
E(3), Izzo A(4), Altucci L(1), Banfi S(5), Antonarakis SE(3), Minchiotti G(6),
Cobellis G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Biochemistry and General Pathology, Seconda
Università di Napoli, 80138 Napoli, Italy. (2)Telethon Institute of Genetics and 
Medicine (TIGEM), 80131 Napoli, Italy. (3)Department of Genetic Medicine and
Development, University of Geneva Medical School, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Biotechnology, Università Federico II,
80131 Napoli, Italy. (5)Department of Biophysics, Biochemistry and General
Pathology, Seconda Università di Napoli, 80138 Napoli, Italy; Telethon Institute 
of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), 80131 Napoli, Italy. (6)Institute of Genetics
and Biophysics "A. Buzzati-Traverso", CNR, 80131 Napoli, Italy. (7)Department of 
Biophysics, Biochemistry and General Pathology, Seconda Università di Napoli,
80138 Napoli, Italy. Electronic address: g.cobellis@unina2.it.

Understanding the molecular basis of cardiomyocyte development is critical for
understanding the pathogenesis of pre- and post-natal cardiac disease. MicroRNAs 
(miRNAs) are post-transcriptional modulators of gene expression that play an
important role in many developmental processes. Here, we show that the
miR-99a/let-7c cluster, mapping on human chromosome 21, is involved in the
control of cardiomyogenesis by altering epigenetic factors. By perturbing miRNA
expression in mouse embryonic stem cells, we find that let-7c promotes
cardiomyogenesis by upregulating genes involved in mesoderm specification (T/Bra 
and Nodal) and cardiac differentiation (Mesp1, Nkx2.5 and Tbx5). The action of
let-7c is restricted to the early phase of mesoderm formation at the expense of
endoderm and its late activation redirects cells toward other mesodermal
derivatives. The Polycomb complex group protein Ezh2 is a direct target of
let-7c, which promotes cardiac differentiation by modifying the H3K27me3 marks
from the promoters of crucial cardiac transcription factors (Nkx2.5, Mef2c,
Tbx5). In contrast, miR-99a represses cardiac differentiation via the
nucleosome-remodeling factor Smarca5, attenuating the Nodal/Smad2 signaling. We
demonstrated that the identified targets are underexpressed in human Down
syndrome fetal heart specimens. By perturbing the expression levels of these
miRNAs in embryonic stem cells, we were able to demonstrate that these miRNAs
control lineage- and stage-specific transcription factors, working in concert
with chromatin modifiers to direct cardiomyogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24365598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Genet Mol Res. 2013 Dec 2;12(4):6032-9. doi: 10.4238/2013.December.2.1.

HMGB3 characterization in gastric cancer.

Gong Y(1), Cao Y, Song L, Zhou J, Wang C, Wu B.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Department of Southern Building, PLA General Hospital,
Beijing, China.

Gastric cancer is a major health problem worldwide; it is the second most common 
cause of cancer death in the world. Recent studies indicate that the
high-mobility group (HMG) of chromosomal proteins is associated with cancer
progression. However, HMGB3 has been little studied. We analyzed the
co-expression network between HMGB3 and differentially-expressed genes in the
GSE17187 database, identifying the relevant transcription factors, and the
conserved domain of HMGB3 to understand the underlying regulation mechanisms
involved in gastric cancer. Thirty-one relationships between 11
differentially-expressed genes were included in a co-expression network; many of 
these genes have been identified as related to cancer, including TBX5 and TFR2.
Further analysis identified nine transcription factors, these being GATA3, MZF1, 
GATA1, GATA2, SRY, REL, NFYB, NFYC, and NFYA, which could interact with HMGB3 to 
regulate target gene expression and consequently regulate gastric cancer cell
proliferation, migration and invasion. The HMG-box domain was very similar in
various species, with only a few amino acid changes, indicating conserved
functions in HMG-box. This information helps to provide insight into the
molecular mechanisms of HMGB3 in human gastric cancer.

PMID: 24338397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Aug 22;1(3):235-47. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.07.005.
eCollection 2013.

Direct reprogramming of human fibroblasts toward a cardiomyocyte-like state.

Fu JD(1), Stone NR, Liu L, Spencer CI, Qian L, Hayashi Y, Delgado-Olguin P, Ding 
S, Bruneau BG, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA ; 
Roddenberry Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA ; Department of Pediatrics, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA ; Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158,
USA.

Direct reprogramming of adult somatic cells into alternative cell types has been 
shown for several lineages. We previously showed that GATA4, MEF2C, and TBX5
(GMT) directly reprogrammed nonmyocyte mouse heart cells into induced
cardiomyocyte-like cells (iCMs) in vitro and in vivo. However, GMT alone appears 
insufficient in human fibroblasts, at least in vitro. Here, we show that GMT plus
ESRRG and MESP1 induced global cardiac gene-expression and phenotypic shifts in
human fibroblasts derived from embryonic stem cells, fetal heart, and neonatal
skin. Adding Myocardin and ZFPM2 enhanced reprogramming, including sarcomere
formation, calcium transients, and action potentials, although the efficiency
remained low. Human iCM reprogramming was epigenetically stable. Furthermore, we 
found that transforming growth factor ß signaling was important for, and improved
the efficiency of, human iCM reprogramming. These findings demonstrate that human
fibroblasts can be directly reprogrammed toward the cardiac lineage, and lay the 
foundation for future refinements in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3849259
PMID: 24319660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. BMC Biol. 2013 Nov 25;11:117. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-11-117.

Lung mesenchymal expression of Sox9 plays a critical role in tracheal
development.

Turcatel G, Rubin N, Menke DB, Martin G, Shi W, Warburton D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine Program, Saban Research
Institute, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School of Medicine and Ostrow
School of Dentistry, University of Southern California, 4661 Sunset Boulevard,
Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA. dwarburton@chla.usc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Embryonic lung development is instructed by crosstalk between
mesenchyme and epithelia, which results in activation of transcriptional factors,
such as Sox9, in a temporospatial manner. Sox9 is expressed in both distal lung
epithelium and proximal lung mesenchyme. Here, we investigated the effect of lung
mesenchyme-specific inducible deletion of Sox9 during murine lung development.
RESULTS: Transgenic mice lacking Sox9 expression were unable to breathe and died 
at birth, with noticeable tracheal defects. Cartilage rings were missing, and the
tracheal lumen was collapsed in the mutant trachea. In situ hybridization showed 
an altered expression pattern of Tbx4, Tbx5 and Fgf10 genes and marked reduction 
of Collagen2 expression in the tracheal mesenchyme. The tracheal phenotype was
increasingly severe, with longer duration of deletion. Lymphatic vasculature was 
underdeveloped in the mutant trachea: Prox1, Lyve1, and Vegfr3 were decreased
after Sox9 knockout. We also found that compared with normal tracheal epithelium,
the mutant tracheal epithelium had an altered morphology with fewer P63-positive 
cells and more CC10-positive cells, fewer goblet cells, and downregulation of
surfactant proteins A and C.
CONCLUSION: The appropriate temporospatial expression of Sox9 in lung mesenchyme 
is necessary for appropriate tracheal cartilage formation, lymphatic vasculature 
system development, and epithelial differentiation. We uncovered a novel
mechanism of lung epithelium differentiation: tracheal cartilage rings instruct
the tracheal epithelium to differentiate properly during embryonic development.
Thus, besides having a mechanical function, tracheal cartilage also appears to be
a local signaling structure in the embryonic lung.

PMCID: PMC4222279
PMID: 24274029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Genes Dev. 2013 Nov 1;27(21):2332-44. doi: 10.1101/gad.225144.113.

Coordinate Nodal and BMP inhibition directs Baf60c-dependent cardiomyocyte
commitment.

Cai W(1), Albini S, Wei K, Willems E, Guzzo RM, Tsuda M, Giordani L, Spiering S, 
Kurian L, Yeo GW, Puri PL, Mercola M.

Author information: 
(1)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA;

A critical but molecularly uncharacterized step in heart formation and
regeneration is the process that commits progenitor cells to differentiate into
cardiomyocytes. Here, we show that the endoderm-derived dual Nodal/bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) antagonist Cerberus-1 (Cer1) in embryonic stem cell
cultures orchestrates two signaling pathways that direct the SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complex to cardiomyogenic loci in multipotent (KDR/Flk1+) progenitors,
activating lineage-specific transcription. Transient inhibition of Nodal by Cer1 
induces Brahma-associated factor 60c (Baf60c), one of three Baf60 variants (a, b,
and c) that are mutually exclusively assembled into SWI/SNF. Blocking Nodal and
BMP also induces lineage-specific transcription factors Gata4 and Tbx5, which
interact with Baf60c. siRNA to Cer1, Baf60c, or the catalytic SWI/SNF subunit
Brg1 prevented the developmental opening of chromatin surrounding the Nkx2.5
early cardiac enhancer and cardiomyocyte differentiation. Overexpression of
Baf60c fully rescued these deficits, positioning Baf60c and SWI/SNF function
downstream from Cer1. Thus, antagonism of Nodal and BMP coordinates induction of 
the myogenic Baf60c variant and interacting transcription factors to program the 
developmental opening of cardiomyocyte-specific loci in chromatin. This is the
first demonstration that cues from the progenitor cell environment direct the
subunit variant composition of SWI/SNF to remodel the transcriptional landscape
for lineage-specific differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3828519
PMID: 24186978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2014 Mar-Apr;23(2):85-91. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2013.09.003. 
Epub 2013 Oct 4.

SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complexes in cardiovascular development and disease.

Bevilacqua A(1), Willis MS(2), Bultman SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA. (2)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; McAllister Heart Institute,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. Electronic address:
monte_willis@med.unc.edu. (3)Department of Genetics, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. Electronic address:
Scott_Bultman@med.unc.edu.

Our understanding of congenital heart defects has been recently advanced by whole
exome sequencing projects, which have identified de novo mutations in many genes 
encoding epigenetic regulators. Notably, multiple subunits of switching
defective/sucrose non-fermenting (SWI/SNF) chromatin-remodeling complexes have
been identified as strong candidates underlying these defects because they
physically and functionally interact with cardiogenic transcription factors
critical to cardiac development, such as TBX5, GATA-4, and NKX2-5. While these
studies indicate a critical role of SWI/SNF complexes in cardiac development and 
congenital heart disease, many exciting new discoveries have identified their
critical role in the adult heart in both physiological and pathological
conditions involving multiple cell types in the heart, including cardiomyocytes, 
vascular endothelial cells, pericytes, and neural crest cells. This review
summarizes the role of SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complexes in cardiac
development, congenital heart disease, cardiac hypertrophy, and vascular
endothelial cell survival. Although the clinical relevance of SWI/SNF mutations
has traditionally been focused primarily on their role in tumor suppression,
these recent studies illustrate their critical role in the heart whereby they
regulate cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis of cardiac derived
cell lines.

© 2014.

PMCID: PMC3946279
PMID: 24183004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 17;8(10):e77690. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077690.
eCollection 2013.

Islet-1 may function as an assistant factor for histone acetylation and
regulation of cardiac development-related transcription factor Mef2c expression.

Yu Z(1), Kong J, Pan B, Sun H, Lv T, Zhu J, Huang G, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
PR China ; Key Laboratory of Developmental Disease in Childhood (Chongqing
Medical University), Ministry of Education, Chongqing, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Islet-1 is an important transcription factor for cardiac development
through mediating extensive interactions between DNA and proteins. The present
study was to investigate the role of Islet-1 in regulating the expression of
cardiac development-related transcription factors and mechanism.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The expression of Islet-1 and histone acetylases (HATs)
subtype p300 was determined in newborn mouse hearts and mouse embryonic hearts at
different development stages using Western blot. The expression of Islet-1 and
cardiac development-related transcription factors Mef2c, GATA4 and Tbx5 as well
as histone H3 acetylation level were determined in cardiac progenitor cells with 
and without transfection of Islet-1 interference RNA (RNAi) in lentivirus using
PCR and Western blot. Islet-1 peak expression occurred on day E14.5 in mouse
embryonic heart, and was present in the promoter regions of Mef2c, GATA4 and Tbx5
that were precipitated with p300 antibody. When Islet-1 was inhibited with
specific RNAi in cardiac progenitor cells, the expression of Mef2c and Tbx5, but 
not GATA4, was significantly suppressed along with selective reduction in histone
H3 acetylation in the promoter region of Mef2c, but not GATA4 and Tbx5. The level
of Mef2c DNA, not GATA4 and Tbx5, in the complex associated with p300 was
significantly decreased in the cells with Islet-1 knockdown.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggested that Islet-1 might function as an assistant
factor that was involved in the regulation of histone acetylation and Mef2c
expression via assisting p300 on specifically targeting the promoter of Mef2c.

PMCID: PMC3798409
PMID: 24147056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Dev Dyn. 2014 Feb;243(2):324-38. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24062. Epub 2013 Nov 13.

Heterochrony in the regulation of the developing marsupial limb.

Chew KY(1), Shaw G, Yu H, Pask AJ, Renfree MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: At birth, marsupial neonates have precociously developed forelimbs.
The development of the tammar wallaby (Macropus eugenii) hindlimbs lags
significantly behind that of the forelimbs. This differs from the grey
short-tailed opossum, Monodelphis domestica, which has relatively similar fore-
and hindlimbs at birth. This study examines the expression of the key patterning 
genes TBX4, TBX5, PITX1, FGF8, and SHH in developing limb buds in the tammar
wallaby.
RESULTS: All genes examined were highly conserved with orthologues from opossum
and mouse. TBX4 expression appeared earlier in development than in the mouse, but
later than in the opossum. SHH expression is restricted to the zone of polarising
activity, while TBX5 (forelimb) and PITX1 (hindlimb) showed diffuse mRNA
expression. FGF8 is specifically localised to the apical ectodermal ridge, which 
is more prominent than in the opossum.
CONCLUSIONS: The most marked divergence in limb size in marsupials occurs in the 
kangaroos and wallabies. The faster development of the fore limb compared to that
of the hind limb correlates with the early timing of the expression of the key
patterning genes in these limbs.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24115631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Biomaterials. 2014 Jan;35(1):92-104. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.09.058.
Epub 2013 Oct 4.

The effect of bioartificial constructs that mimic myocardial structure and
biomechanical properties on stem cell commitment towards cardiac lineage.

Cristallini C(1), Cibrario Rocchietti E, Accomasso L, Folino A, Gallina C,
Muratori L, Pagliaro P, Rastaldo R, Raimondo S, Saviozzi S, Sprio AE, Gagliardi
M, Barbani N, Giachino C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Composite and Biomedical Materials, C.N.R., o.u. Pisa, Pisa,
Italy. Electronic address: caterina.cristallini@diccism.unipi.it.

Despite the enormous progress in the treatment of coronary artery diseases, they 
remain the most common cause of heart failure in the Western countries. New
translational therapeutic approaches explore cardiomyogenic differentiation of
various types of stem cells in combination with tissue-engineered scaffolds. In
this study we fabricated PHBHV/gelatin constructs mimicking myocardial structural
properties. Chemical structure and molecular interaction between material
components induced specific properties to the substrate in terms of
hydrophilicity degree, porosity and mechanical characteristics. Viability and
proliferation assays demonstrated that these constructs allow adhesion and growth
of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and cardiac resident non myocytic cells (NMCs). 
Immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated that stem cells cultured on these
constructs adopt a distribution mimicking the three-dimensional cell alignment of
myocardium. qPCR and immunofluorescence analyses showed the ability of this
construct to direct initial MSC and NMC lineage specification towards
cardiomyogenesis: both MSCs and NMCs showed the expression of the cardiac
transcription factor GATA-4, fundamental for early cardiac commitment. Moreover
NMCs also acquired the expression of the cardiac transcription factors Nkx2.5 and
TBX5 and produced sarcomeric proteins. This work may represent a new approach to 
induce both resident and non-resident stem cells to cardiac commitment in a 3-D
structure, without using additional stimuli.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24099712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2013 Sep 10;67:950-7. doi:
10.5604/17322693.1066060.

[Morphological and molecular bases of cardiac development].

[Article in Polish]

Kobylinska J(1), Dworzanski W, Cendrowska-Pinkosz M, Dworzanska A,
Hermanowicz-Dryka T, Kiszka J, Staroslawska E, Burdan F.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Zaklad Anatomii Prawidlowej Czlowieka Uniwersytet Medyczny w
Lublinie.

The heart is a mesoderm-derived organ, whose formation is regulated by various
genes. Initially, the most important is expression of Nkx2.5, CR1, pitx2, anf and
mhc2a, which are responsible for differentiation of cardiomyocytes. In a later
phase activation of mhc2b, pitx2c, mesp1, pcmf1, vmhc, xin, mcl2v, mlc2a, mlc2a, 
mef2, hand1 and hand2 was revealed. Their expression is regulated by various
molecules, including transcription (XIN, GATA, MEF, Tbx5, Baf60c, PECAM, tie-2,
MEF2) and growth (VEGF, FGF, PDGF) factors, as well as proteins (i.e.,
dickkopf-1, cerberus, cytotactin, fibrillin, nodal, thrombomodulin, Wnt, bone
morphometric ones - BMP2, BMP 4, BMP5, BMP7) and other substances, such as
retinoid and folic acid. Crucial steps in cardiac organogenesis are development
of the ventricle and atrial formation, as well as septation and valve formation. 
Any disturbances of such processes may lead to various congenital heart diseases 
and defects that could be initiated by various genetic, epigenetic or
environmental factors. The most common heart malformations are: stenosis
(coarctation) of the aorta and pulmonary trunk, bicuspid aortic valve, atrial
and/or ventricular septal defect, persistent truncus arteriosus (Botallo duct),
transposition of the great vessels, tricuspid atresia, hypoplastic left and right
heart, as well as syndrome of Lutembachera, Cantrell, Ebstein, Eisenmenger and
Shone and trilogy, tetralogy, pentalogy of Fallot.

PMID: 24088538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Rep Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 Oct;2(1):52-5.

A genetic assay of three patients in the same family with Holt-Oram syndrome; a
case report.

Ebrahimzadeh-Vesal R(1), Hosseini SK(2), Rezakhanlu F(2), Derakhshandeh-Peykar
P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Sciences, University of Tehran, Iran. 
(2)Tehran Heart Center, Medical Sciences, University of Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Sciences, University of Tehran, Iran ;
Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum (MGZ), Munich, Germany.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a developmental disorder inherited in an
autosomal-dominant pattern. Affected organs are the heart and forelimbs with
upper extremity skeletal defects and congenital heart malformation. In this study
we present three cases of HOS in the same family. In one of these three
individuals we detected a transition of C to T (CTG-GTT, V205V) in exon 7 of the 
TBX5 gene. This nucleotide change causes no amino acid change and potential
pathologic effects remain unknown.

PMCID: PMC4757068
PMID: 26989721  [PubMed]


156. Hum Mutat. 2013 Dec;34(12):1662-71. doi: 10.1002/humu.22434. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

GATA4 loss-of-function mutations underlie familial tetralogy of fallot.

Yang YQ(1), Gharibeh L, Li RG, Xin YF, Wang J, Liu ZM, Qiu XB, Xu YJ, Xu L, Qu
XK, Liu X, Fang WY, Huang RT, Xue S, Nemer G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Research, Shanghai Chest Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) represents the most common form of cyanotic congenital 
heart disease and accounts for significant morbidity and mortality in humans.
Emerging evidence has implicated genetic defects in the pathogenesis of TOF.
However, TOF is genetically heterogeneous and the genetic basis for TOF in most
patients remains unclear. In this study, the GATA4 gene were sequenced in 52
probands with familial TOF, and three novel heterozygous mutations, including A9P
and L51V both located in the putative first transactivational domain and N285S in
the C-terminal zinc finger, were identified in three probands, respectively.
Genetic analysis of the pedigrees demonstrated that in each family the mutation
cosegregated with TOF with complete penetrance. The missense mutations were
absent in 800 control chromosomes and the altered amino acids were highly
conserved evolutionarily. Functional analysis showed that the GATA4 mutants were 
consistently associated with diminished DNA-binding affinity and decreased
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the N285S mutation completely disrupted
the physical interaction between GATA4 and TBX5. To our knowledge, this report
associates GATA4 loss-of-function mutations with familial TOF for the first time,
providing novel insight into the molecular mechanism involved in TOF and
suggesting potential implications for the early prophylaxis and allele-specific
therapy of TOF.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMID: 24000169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Pediatr Res. 2013 Nov;74(5):494-502. doi: 10.1038/pr.2013.147. Epub 2013 Sep 2.

Heterotaxy-spectrum heart defects in Zic3 hypomorphic mice.

Haaning AM(1), Quinn ME, Ware SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in Zinc Finger Protein of the Cerebellum 3 (ZIC3) cause
X-linked heterotaxy and isolated cardiovascular malformations. Recent data
suggest a potential cell-autonomous role for Zic3 in myocardium via regulation of
Nppa and Tbx5. We sought to develop a hypomorphic Zic3 mouse to model human
heterotaxy and investigate developmental mechanisms underlying variability in
cardiac phenotypes.
METHODS: Zic3 hypomorphic mice were created by targeted insertion of a neomycin
cassette and investigated by gross, histologic, and molecular methods.
RESULTS: Low-level Zic3 expression is sufficient for partial rescue of viability 
as compared with Zic3 null mice. Concordance of early left-right molecular marker
abnormalities and later anatomic abnormalities suggests that the primary effect
of Zic3 in heart development occurs during left-right patterning.
Cardiac-specific gene expression of Nppa (atrial natriuretic factor) and Tbx5
marked the proper morphological locations in the heart regardless of looping
abnormalities.
CONCLUSION: Zic3 hypomorphic mice are useful models to investigate the variable
cardiac defects resulting from a single genetic defect. Low-level Zic3 expression
rescues the left pulmonary isomerism identified in Zic3 null embryos. Our data do
not support a direct role for Zic3 in the myocardium via regulation of Nppa and
Tbx5 and suggest that the primary effect of Zic3 on cardiac development occurs
during left-right patterning.

PMCID: PMC4176930
PMID: 23999067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Case Rep Urol. 2013;2013:405343. doi: 10.1155/2013/405343. Epub 2013 Aug 5.

Prostate Cancer in a Male with Holt-Oram Syndrome: First Clinical Association of 
the TBX5 Mutation.

Aherne NJ(1), Rangaswamy G, Thirion P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, North Coast Cancer Institute, Coffs Harbour,
NSW 2450, Australia.

Holt-Oram syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder which is caused by mutations
of TBX5 and is characterised by cardiac and skeletal abnormalities. TBX5 is part 
of the T-box gene family and is thought to upregulate tumour cell proliferation
and metastasis when mutated. We report the first clinical case of prostate cancer
in an individual with Holt Oram syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3748406
PMID: 23984174  [PubMed]


159. Brief Funct Genomics. 2014 Jan;13(1):28-38. doi: 10.1093/bfgp/elt031. Epub 2013
Aug 22.

Gene regulatory elements of the cardiac conduction system.

van Duijvenboden K(1), Ruijter JM, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology & Physiology, Academic Medical Centre,
L2-108, Meibergdreef 15, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Tel.: + 31 20
5667821; Fax: + 31 20 6976177; v.m.christoffels@amc.uva.nl.

The coordinated contraction of the heart relies on the generation and conduction 
of the electrical impulse. Aberrations of the function of the cardiac conduction 
system have been associated with various arrhythmogenic disorders and increased
risk of sudden cardiac death. The genetics underlying conduction system function 
have been investigated using functional studies and genome-wide association
studies. Both methods point towards the involvement of ion channel genes and the 
transcription factors that govern their activity. A large fraction of disease-
and trait-associated sequence variants lie within non-coding sequences, enriched 
with epigenetic marks indicative of regulatory DNA. Although sequence
conservation as a result of functional constraint has been a useful property to
identify transcriptional enhancers, this identification process has been advanced
through the development of techniques such as ChIP-seq and chromatin conformation
capture technologies. The role of variation in gene regulatory elements in the
cardiac conduction system has recently been demonstrated by studies on enhancers 
of SCN5A/SCN10A and TBX5. In both studies, a region harbouring a functionally
implicated single-nucleotide polymorphism was shown to drive reproducible cardiac
expression in a reporter gene assay. Furthermore, the risk variant of the allele 
abrogated enhancer function in both cases. Functional studies on regulatory DNA
will likely receive a boost through recent developments in genome modification
technologies.

PMID: 23969024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Aquat Toxicol. 2013 Oct 15;142-143:26-32. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2013.07.014.
Epub 2013 Jul 29.

Phenanthrene exposure causes cardiac arrhythmia in embryonic zebrafish via
perturbing calcium handling.

Zhang Y(1), Huang L, Zuo Z, Chen Y, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, PR China.

Phenanthrene (Phe) is one of the most abundant and ubiquitous polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons in the aquatic environment. It is known that Phe has cardiotoxic
effects, but knowledge concerning the mechanism of cardiac dysfunction caused by 
Phe is still limited. In this study, zebrafish embryos were exposed to
environmentally relevant concentrations of Phe, and an increase of an irregular
rhythm was observed in Phe treated embryos. Disordered calcium (Ca(2+)) handling 
characterized by impaired sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) uptake, and obvious
Ca(2+) accumulation in the cytoplasm was observed in rat embryonic cardiac
myoblasts (H9C2) exposed to Phe. The mRNA level as well as protein expression of 
the SERCA2a Ca(2+) pump in zebrafish hearts or H9C2 cells was significantly
decreased by Phe exposure. The activity of Ca(2+)-ATPase in H9C2 cells was
inhibited by Phe. Both the mRNA and protein levels of TBX5, a direct regulator of
SERCA2a, were significantly decreased by Phe exposure. These results suggested
that exposure to Phe could lead to arrhythmia in zebrafish embryos via perturbing
the calcium handling pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23948075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Ecotoxicology. 2013 Oct;22(8):1200-7. doi: 10.1007/s10646-013-1107-4. Epub 2013
Aug 1.

Effects of low-level hexabromocyclododecane (HBCD) exposure on cardiac
development in zebrafish embryos.

Wu M(1), Zuo Z, Li B, Huang L, Chen M, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, People's Republic of China.

Hexabromocyclododecane (HBCD) is one of the most widely used brominated flame
retardants. In the present study, zebrafish embryos were exposed to HBCD at the
low concentrations of 0, 2, 20 and 200 nM. The results showed HBCD exposure
resulted in an increase in heart rate and cardiac arrhythmia after exposure for
72 h, though the survival rate and the whole malformation rate were not
significantly affected. These results demonstrated that the heart might be a
target of HBCD. Low-level HBCD exposure may not share the same mechanisms as
exposure to high concentrations, since no obvious increase of apoptotic cells
around the heart was observed in the HBCD-treated groups. It was observed that
the expression of Tbx5 and Nkx2.5 was significantly elevated by HBCD treatment in
a dose-dependent manner using real-time quantitative PCR, which may be mainly
responsible for the alteration of heart rate, given that Tbx5 and Nkx2.5 are two 
factors regulating ventricle conduction. The mRNA expression of RyR2 and Atp2a2b 
(SERCA2a) was up-regulated in the exposure group, which may be one of reasons to 
affect the normal heart rate, since SERCA2a and RyR2 play an important role in
calcium ion transport of cadiomyocytes. However, HBCD exposure did not
significantly change the expression of Actc1l, Tnnt2, and Myh6, which are mainly 
muscle contractile genes that play key roles in the formation of cardiac
structure. These results were consistent with the lack of effect seen on the
other measurements of cardiac function, end diastolic volume, end-systolic
volume, stroke volume, and cardiac output.

PMID: 23903933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2013 Aug;6(4):362-71. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.113.000133. Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Weighted gene coexpression network analysis of human left atrial tissue
identifies gene modules associated with atrial fibrillation.

Tan N(1), Chung MK, Smith JD, Hsu J, Serre D, Newton DW, Castel L, Soltesz E,
Pettersson G, Gillinov AM, Van Wagoner DR, Barnard J.

Author information: 
(1)Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
tann@ccf.org

BACKGROUND: Genetic mechanisms of atrial fibrillation (AF) remain incompletely
understood. Previous differential expression studies in AF were limited by small 
sample size and provided limited understanding of global gene networks, prompting
the need for larger-scale, network-based analyses.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Left atrial tissues from Cleveland Clinic patients who
underwent cardiac surgery were assayed using Illumina Human HT-12 mRNA
microarrays. The data set included 3 groups based on cardiovascular
comorbidities: mitral valve (MV) disease without coronary artery disease (n=64), 
coronary artery disease without MV disease (n=57), and lone AF (n=35). Weighted
gene coexpression network analysis was performed in the MV group to detect
modules of correlated genes. Module preservation was assessed in the other 2
groups. Module eigengenes were regressed on AF severity or atrial rhythm at
surgery. Modules whose eigengenes correlated with either AF phenotype were
analyzed for gene content. A total of 14 modules were detected in the MV group;
all were preserved in the other 2 groups. One module (124 genes) was associated
with AF severity and atrial rhythm across all groups. Its top hub gene, RCAN1, is
implicated in calcineurin-dependent signaling and cardiac hypertrophy. Another
module (679 genes) was associated with atrial rhythm in the MV and coronary
artery disease groups. It was enriched with cell signaling genes and contained
cardiovascular developmental genes including TBX5.
CONCLUSIONS: Our network-based approach found 2 modules strongly associated with 
AF. Further analysis of these modules may yield insight into AF pathogenesis by
providing novel targets for functional studies.

PMCID: PMC3955718
PMID: 23863953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 30;110(31):12667-72. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1304053110. Epub 2013 Jul 16.

Induction of human cardiomyocyte-like cells from fibroblasts by defined factors.

Wada R(1), Muraoka N, Inagawa K, Yamakawa H, Miyamoto K, Sadahiro T, Umei T,
Kaneda R, Suzuki T, Kamiya K, Tohyama S, Yuasa S, Kokaji K, Aeba R, Yozu R,
Yamagishi H, Kitamura T, Fukuda K, Ieda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Cardiovascular Research, School of
Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Heart disease remains a leading cause of death worldwide. Owing to the limited
regenerative capacity of heart tissue, cardiac regenerative therapy has emerged
as an attractive approach. Direct reprogramming of human cardiac fibroblasts
(HCFs) into cardiomyocytes may hold great potential for this purpose. We reported
previously that induced cardiomyocyte-like cells (iCMs) can be directly generated
from mouse cardiac fibroblasts in vitro and vivo by transduction of three
transcription factors: Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5, collectively termed GMT. In the
present study, we sought to determine whether human fibroblasts also could be
converted to iCMs by defined factors. Our initial finding that GMT was not
sufficient for cardiac induction in HCFs prompted us to screen for additional
factors to promote cardiac reprogramming by analyzing multiple cardiac-specific
gene induction with quantitative RT-PCR. The addition of Mesp1 and Myocd to GMT
up-regulated a broader spectrum of cardiac genes in HCFs more efficiently
compared with GMT alone. The HCFs and human dermal fibroblasts transduced with
GMT, Mesp1, and Myocd (GMTMM) changed the cell morphology from a spindle shape to
a rod-like or polygonal shape, expressed multiple cardiac-specific proteins,
increased a broad range of cardiac genes and concomitantly suppressed fibroblast 
genes, and exhibited spontaneous Ca(2+) oscillations. Moreover, the cells matured
to exhibit action potentials and contract synchronously in coculture with murine 
cardiomyocytes. A 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine assay revealed that the iCMs thus
generated do not pass through a mitotic cell state. These findings demonstrate
that human fibroblasts can be directly converted to iCMs by defined factors,
which may facilitate future applications in regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC3732928
PMID: 23861494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;14(8):529-41. doi: 10.1038/nrm3619. Epub 2013 Jul
10.

Mending broken hearts: cardiac development as a basis for adult heart
regeneration and repair.

Xin M(1), Olson EN, Bassel-Duby R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

As the adult mammalian heart has limited potential for regeneration and repair,
the loss of cardiomyocytes during injury and disease can result in heart failure 
and death. The cellular processes and regulatory mechanisms involved in heart
growth and development can be exploited to repair the injured adult heart through
'reawakening' pathways that are active during embryogenesis. Heart function has
been restored in rodents by reprogramming non-myocytes into cardiomyocytes, by
expressing transcription factors (GATA4, HAND2, myocyte-specific enhancer factor 
2C (MEF2C) and T-box 5 (TBX5)) and microRNAs (miR-1, miR-133, miR-208 and
miR-499) that control cardiomyocyte identity. Stimulating cardiomyocyte
dedifferentiation and proliferation by activating mitotic signalling pathways
involved in embryonic heart growth represents a complementary approach for heart 
regeneration and repair. Recent advances in understanding the mechanistic basis
of heart development offer exciting opportunities for effective therapies for
heart failure.

PMCID: PMC3757945
PMID: 23839576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Zebrafish. 2013 Sep;10(3):389-400. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2013.0875. Epub 2013 Jul 9.

Impaired cardiovascular function caused by different stressors elicits a common
pathological and transcriptional response in zebrafish embryos.

Chen J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China.
jc2417@fjnu.edu.cn

Erratum in
    Zebrafish. 2014 Oct;11(5):498.

Zebrafish embryos have been widely used to study the genes and processes needed
for normal vertebrate heart development. We recently observed that exposure to
2,3,7,8-tetra-chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) or retinoic acid (RA) produces very
similar signs of heart failure in developing zebrafish via divergent molecular
pathways. The fact that diverse stressors and mutations cause severe pericardial 
edema and circulatory collapse in developing zebrafish has been largely
unexplored. We hypothesized that unrelated chemicals can trigger a common
pathological response leading to the same end-stage heart failure. To test this
hypothesis, we compared the effects of TCDD, RA, carbaryl, valproic acid, and
morpholino oligonucleotide (MO) knockdown of TBX5 on the developing heart in
zebrafish embryos. These model stressors have all been previously reported to
affect zebrafish heart development, and elicited very similar signs of embryonic 
heart failure. Microarray analysis showed that one cluster of 92 transcripts
affected by these different treatments was significantly downregulated by all
treatments. This gene cluster is composed of transcripts required for chromosome 
assembly, DNA replication, and cell cycle progression. We refer to this cluster
as the cell cycle gene cluster (CCGC). Immunohistochemistry revealed that
downregulation of the CCGC precedes a halt in cardiomyocyte proliferation in the 
hearts of zebrafish exposed to any of the treatments. Previous work has shown
that the initial response to TCDD is a decrease in cardiac output. Since this
precedes the signs of edema, heart failure, and fall in CCGC expression, we
postulated that any factor that decreases cardiac output will produce the same
syndrome of heart failure responses. To test this, we used MO knockdown of
cardiac troponin T2 (TNNT2) to specifically block contractility. The TNNT2-MO
produced exactly the same signs of cardiotoxicity as the other treatments,
including downregulation of the signature CCGC. Our results indicate that agents 
altering cardiac output can have amplified consequences during specific periods
in development.

PMCID: PMC3760051
PMID: 23837677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cardiovasc Res. 2013 Oct 1;100(1):105-13. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvt167. Epub 2013 Jun 
20.

Accelerated direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocyte-like cells
with the MyoD transactivation domain.

Hirai H(1), Katoku-Kikyo N, Keirstead SA, Kikyo N.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Institute, MTRF Room 2-216, University of Minnesota, 2001 6th St SE,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

AIMS: Fibroblasts can be directly reprogrammed to cardiomyocyte-like cells by
introducing defined genes. However, the reprogramming efficiency remains low,
delaying the clinical application of this strategy to regenerative cardiology. We
previously showed that fusion of the MyoD transactivation domain to the
pluripotency transcription factor Oct4 facilitated the transcriptional activity
of Oct4, resulting in highly efficient production of induced pluripotent stem
cells. We examined whether the same approach can be applied to cardiac
transcription factors to facilitate cardiac reprogramming.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We fused the MyoD domain to Mef2c, Gata4, Hand2, and Tbx5
and transduced these genes in various combinations into mouse non-cardiac
fibroblasts. Transduction of the chimeric Mef2c with the wild-types of the other 
three genes produced much larger beating clusters of cardiomyocyte-like cells
faster than the combination of the four wild-type genes, with an efficiency of
3.5%, >15-fold greater than the wild-type genes.
CONCLUSION: Fusion of a powerful transactivation domain to heterologous factors
can increase the efficiency of direct reprogramming of fibroblasts to
cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC3778960
PMID: 23794713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Nov 1;22(21):2915-26. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0123. Epub 2013 
Jul 26.

Shox2 regulates the pacemaker gene program in embryoid bodies.

Hashem SI(1), Lam ML, Mihardja SS, White SM, Lee RJ, Claycomb WC.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center , New Orleans, Louisiana.

The pacemaker tissues of the heart are a complex set of specialized cells that
initiate the rhythmic heartbeat. The sinoatrial node (SAN) serves as the primary 
pacemaker, whereas the atrioventricular node can serve as a subsidiary pacemaker 
in cases of SAN failure or block. The elucidation of genetic networks regulating 
the development of these tissues is crucial for understanding the mechanisms
underlying arrhythmias and for the design of targeted therapies. Here we report
temporal and spatial self-organized formation of the pacemaker and contracting
tissues in three-dimensional aggregate cultures of mouse embryonic stem cells
termed embryoid bodies (EBs). Using genetic marker expression and
electrophysiological analyses we demonstrate that in EBs the pacemaker potential 
originates from a localized population of cells and propagates into the adjacent 
contracting region forming a functional syncytium. When Shox2, a major
determinant of the SAN genetic pathway, was ablated we observed substantial
slowing of spontaneous contraction rates and an altered gene expression pattern
including downregulation of HCN4, Cx45, Tbx2, Tbx3, and bone morphogenetic
protein 4 (BMP4); and upregulation of Cx40, Cx43, Nkx2.5, and Tbx5. This
phenotype could be rescued by adding BMP4 to Shox2 knockout EBs in culture from
days 6 to 16 of differentiation. When wild-type EBs were treated with Noggin, a
potent BMP4 inhibitor, we observed a phenotype consistent with the Shox2 knockout
EB. Altogether, we have generated a reproducible in vitro model that will be an
invaluable tool for studying the molecular pathways regulating the development of
cardiac pacemaker tissues.

PMID: 23767866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Dev Cell. 2013 May 28;25(4):417-26. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.04.017.

Atrial identity is determined by a COUP-TFII regulatory network.

Wu SP(1), Cheng CM, Lanz RB, Wang T, Respress JL, Ather S, Chen W, Tsai SJ,
Wehrens XH, Tsai MJ, Tsai SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Atria and ventricles exhibit distinct molecular profiles that produce structural 
and functional differences between the two cardiac compartments. However, the
factors that determine these differences remain largely undefined.
Cardiomyocyte-specific COUP-TFII ablation produces ventricularized atria that
exhibit ventricle-like action potentials, increased cardiomyocyte size, and
development of extensive T tubules. Changes in atrial characteristics are
accompanied by alterations of 2,584 genes, of which 81% were differentially
expressed between atria and ventricles, suggesting that a major function of
myocardial COUP-TFII is to determine atrial identity. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays using E13.5 atria identified classic
atrial-ventricular identity genes Tbx5, Hey2, Irx4, MLC2v, MLC2a, and MLC1a,
among many other cardiac genes, as potential COUP-TFII direct targets.
Collectively, our results reveal that COUP-TFII confers atrial identity through
direct binding and by modulating expression of a broad spectrum of genes that
have an impact on atrial development and function.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3687546
PMID: 23725765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Nat Protoc. 2013 Jun;8(6):1204-15. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2013.067. Epub 2013 May 30.

Reprogramming of mouse fibroblasts into cardiomyocyte-like cells in vitro.

Qian L(1), Berry EC, Fu JD, Ieda M, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Cardiac fibroblasts can be reprogrammed to cardiomyocyte-like cells by the
introduction of three transcription factors: Gata4, Mef2c and Tbx5 (collectively 
referred to here as GMT). Resident cardiac fibroblasts can be converted in vivo
into induced cardiomyocyte-like cells (iCMs) that closely resemble endogenous
cardiomyocytes and electrically integrate with the host myocardium. In contrast, 
in vitro reprogramming yields many partially reprogrammed iCMs, with a few that
reprogram fully into contracting myocytes (~3 out of 10,000 GMT-transduced
cells). iCMs can be observed as early as 3 d after viral infection, and they
continue to mature over 2 months before beating is observed. Despite the success 
of multiple groups, the inefficiency of in vitro reprogramming has made it
challenging for others. However, given the advantages of in vitro iCMs for
performing mechanistic studies and, if refined, for testing drugs or small
molecules for personalized medicine and modeling cardiac disease in a dish, it is
important to standardize the protocol to improve reproducibility and enhance the 
technology further. Here we describe a detailed step-by-step protocol for in
vitro cardiac reprogramming using retroviruses encoding GMT.

PMID: 23722259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. PLoS One. 2013 May 24;8(5):e64966. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064966. Print 2013.

SNP rs3825214 in TBX5 is associated with lone atrial fibrillation in Chinese Han 
population.

Zang X(1), Zhang S, Xia Y, Li S, Fu F, Li X, Wang F, Zhang R, Tian X, Gao L,
Zhang J, Yang Y, Tu X, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China.

BACKGROUND: A prolonged PR interval is a sign of increased risk of cardiac
arrhythmia. Recent genome-wide association studies found that the
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs3825214 in T-box 5 (TBX5) was positively
associated with PR interval, QRS duration, QT interval, and common arrhythmia
disorders such as atrial fibrillation (AF) and advanced atrioventricular block.
However, other independent replication studies are required to validate the
result. This study assessed associations between rs3825214 and ECG parameters,
AF, and ventricular tachycardia (VT) in a Chinese Han population.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To assess the association between rs3825214 and
AF and VT, we carried out case-control association studies with 692 AF patients
(including 275 lone AF patients), 235 VT patients, and 856 controls. Genotyping
was performed using a Rotor-Gene TM 6000 High Resolution Melt system. Statistical
analyses of associations were adjusted for potential confounding factors. A
moderate association was detected between rs3825214 and AF (P(adj)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.036,
OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.79) and a highly significant association was detected between the G allele
of rs3825214 and lone AF (P(adj)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.65; genotypic P<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.75×10<U+207B>4 with
a dominant model). We also found that rs3825214 showed a significant association 
with atrial-ventricular block (AVB; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.028; P(adj)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.035, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.494).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that rs3825214 conferred a significant risk of 
lone AF in this Chinese Han population.

PMCID: PMC3663751
PMID: 23717681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jul;161A(7):1797-802. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36054. Epub 2013
May 24.

Contiguous gene deletion of TBX5 and TBX3 leads to a varible phenotype with
combined features of Holt-Oram and ulnar-mammary syndromes.

Alby C(1), Bessieres B, Bieth E, Attie-Bitach T, Fermont L, Citony I, Razavi F,
Vekemans M, Escande F, Manouvrier S, Malan V, Amiel J.

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, Hôpital Necker-Enfant Malades, AP-HP,
Paris, France.

We report on a combination of congenital malformations in a mother and her fetus 
harboring a heterozygous deletion encompassing the TBX5 and TBX3 genes, which are
disease-causing in Holt-Oram and ulnar-mammary syndromes, respectively. This
contiguous gene syndrome is reminiscent of Okihiro syndrome and emphasizes the
importance of array-CGH as a diagnostic tool in atypical syndromic presentations 
with intrafamilial variability.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23713051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. PLoS One. 2013 May 21;8(5):e63577. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063577. Print 2013.

Transcription factors MYOCD, SRF, Mesp1 and SMARCD3 enhance the cardio-inducing
effect of GATA4, TBX5, and MEF2C during direct cellular reprogramming.

Christoforou N(1), Chellappan M, Adler AF, Kirkton RD, Wu T, Addis RC, Bursac N, 
Leong KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina,
United States of America.

Transient overexpression of defined combinations of master regulator genes can
effectively induce cellular reprogramming: the acquisition of an alternative
predicted phenotype from a differentiated cell lineage. This can be of particular
importance in cardiac regenerative medicine wherein the heart lacks the capacity 
to heal itself, but simultaneously contains a large pool of fibroblasts. In this 
study we determined the cardio-inducing capacity of ten transcription factors to 
actuate cellular reprogramming of mouse embryonic fibroblasts into
cardiomyocyte-like cells. Overexpression of transcription factors MYOCD and SRF
alone or in conjunction with Mesp1 and SMARCD3 enhanced the basal but necessary
cardio-inducing effect of the previously reported GATA4, TBX5, and MEF2C. In
particular, combinations of five or seven transcription factors enhanced the
activation of cardiac reporter vectors, and induced an upregulation of
cardiac-specific genes. Global gene expression analysis also demonstrated a
significantly greater cardio-inducing effect when the transcription factors MYOCD
and SRF were used. Detection of cross-striated cells was highly dependent on the 
cell culture conditions and was enhanced by the addition of valproic acid and JAK
inhibitor. Although we detected Ca(2+) transient oscillations in the reprogrammed
cells, we did not detect significant changes in resting membrane potential or
spontaneously contracting cells. This study further elucidates the
cardio-inducing effect of the transcriptional networks involved in cardiac
cellular reprogramming, contributing to the ongoing rational design of a robust
protocol required for cardiac regenerative therapies.

PMCID: PMC3660533
PMID: 23704920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Front Genet. 2013 May 10;4:78. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00078. eCollection 2013.

Genome-Wide Association Identifies TBX5 as Candidate Gene for Osteochondrosis
Providing a Functional Link to Cartilage Perfusion as Initial Factor.

Rangkasenee N(1), Murani E, Brunner RM, Schellander K, Cinar MU, Luther H, Hofer 
A, Stoll M, Witten A, Ponsuksili S, Wimmers K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genome Biology, Leibniz Institute for Farm Animal Biology
Dummerstorf, Germany.

Osteochondrosis (OC) is an orthopedic syndrome of the joints that occurs in
children and adolescents and domestic animals, particularly pigs, horses, and
dogs. OC is the most frequent cause of leg weakness in rapidly growing pigs
causing animal welfare issues and economic losses. In this study, a genome-wide
association study (GWAS) was performed using the Porcine 60k SNPChip in animals
of the breed Large White (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>298) to identify chromosome regions and candidate
genes associated with OC lesion scores. A total of 19 SNPs on chromosomes (SSC)
3, 5, 8, 10, 14, and 18 were significantly associated with OC lesion scores
(p-values<U+2009>=<U+2009>10(-5)). The SNPs MARC0098684, MARC00840086, MARC0093124, and
ASGA0062794 at SSC14 36.1-38.2<U+2009>Mb encompass a region of six linkage
disequilibrium (LD) blocks. The most significant SNP ASGA0062794 is located in a 
LD block spanning 465<U+2009>kb and covering the gene encoding T-box transcription
factor 5 (TBX5). A SNP (c.54T<U+2009>><U+2009>C) identified in TBX5 was significantly
associated with OC lesion scores in a single-marker analysis. TBX5 c.54T<U+2009>><U+2009>C
showed highest LD with ASGA00627974 (r (2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.96) and superior association with 
OC lesion scores over other SNPs when included in the genome scan, whereas its
treatment as an additional fixed effect in the GWAS statistical model led to a
drop of significance of nearby markers. Moreover, real-time PCR showed different 
transcript abundance of TBX5 in healthy and defect cartilage. The results imply
that the association signal obtained on SCC14 is largely attributable to TBX5
c.54T<U+2009>><U+2009>C likely to be in LD with a regulatory polymorphism of TBX5. The
transcription factor TBX5 interacts with GJA5 and MEF2C both being involved in
vascularization. This study provides evidence for epistatic interaction of TBX5
and MEF2C, thus supporting deficiency of blood supply to growth cartilage as
being fundamental for the initiation of OC.

PMCID: PMC3650520
PMID: 23675383  [PubMed]


174. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2013 Dec;13(4):316-22. doi: 10.1007/s12012-013-9212-4.

p300-mediated histone acetylation is essential for the regulation of GATA4 and
MEF2C by BMP2 in H9c2 cells.

Zheng M(1), Zhu J, Lu T, Liu L, Sun H, Liu Z, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
136 Zhongshan 2nd Road, Yu Zhong District, Chongqing, 400014, People's Republic
of China, zhengmin626@126.com.

Histone acetylase (HAT) p300 plays an important role in the regulation of cardiac
gene expression. During cardiac development, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-2
induces the expression of cardiac transcription factors. However, the underlying 
molecular mechanism(s) is not clear. In the present study, we tested the
hypothesis that p300-mediated histone acetylation was essential for the
regulation of cardiac transcription factors by BMP2. Cultured rat H9c2 embryonic 
cardiac myocytes (H9c2 cells) were transfected with recombinant adenoviruses
expressing human BMP2 (AdBMP2) with or without curcumin, a specific p300-HAT
inhibitor. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis showed that curcumin
substantially inhibited both AdBMP2-induced and basal expression levels of
cardiac transcription factors GATA4 and MEF2C, but not Tbx5. Similarly, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis showed that curcumin inhibited both
AdBMP2-induced and basal histone H3 acetylation levels in the promoter regions of
GATA4 and MEF2C, but not of Tbx5. In addition, curcumin selectively suppressed
AdBMP2-induced expression of HAT p300, but not HAT GCN5 in H9c2 cells. The data
indicated that inhibition of histone H3 acetylation with curcumin diminished
BMP2-induced expression of GATA4 and MEF2C, suggesting that p300-mediated histone
acetylation was essential for the regulation of GATA4 and MEF2C by BMP2 in H9c2
cells.

PMID: 23632743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e62138. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062138. Print 2013.

Identification of functional mutations in GATA4 in patients with congenital heart
disease.

Wang E(1), Sun S, Qiao B, Duan W, Huang G, An Y, Xu S, Zheng Y, Su Z, Gu X, Jin
L, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences and Max Planck Society (CAS-MPG) Partner Institute for
Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is one of the most prevalent developmental
anomalies and the leading cause of noninfectious morbidity and mortality in
newborns. Despite its prevalence and clinical significance, the etiology of CHD
remains largely unknown. GATA4 is a highly conserved transcription factor that
regulates a variety of physiological processes and has been extensively studied, 
particularly on its role in heart development. With the combination of TBX5 and
MEF2C, GATA4 can reprogram postnatal fibroblasts into functional cardiomyocytes
directly. In the past decade, a variety of GATA4 mutations were identified and
these findings originally came from familial CHD pedigree studies. Given that
familial and sporadic CHD cases allegedly share a basic genetic basis, we explore
the GATA4 mutations in different types of CHD. In this study, via direct
sequencing of the GATA4 coding region and exon-intron boundaries in 384 sporadic 
Chinese CHD patients, we identified 12 heterozygous non-synonymous mutations,
among which 8 mutations were only found in CHD patients when compared with 957
controls. Six of these non-synonymous mutations have not been previously
reported. Subsequent functional analyses revealed that the transcriptional
activity, subcellular localization and DNA binding affinity of some mutant GATA4 
proteins were significantly altered. Our results expand the spectrum of GATA4
mutations linked to cardiac defects. Together with the newly reported mutations, 
approximately 110 non-synonymous mutations have currently been identified in
GATA4. Our future analysis will explore why the evolutionarily conserved GATA4
appears to be hypermutable.

PMCID: PMC3633926
PMID: 23626780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2014 Apr;472(4):1101-5. doi: 10.1007/s11999-013-3008-5.

Review of the molecular development of the thumb: digit primera.

Oberg KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Human Anatomy, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, 
CA, 92313, USA, koberg@llu.edu.

Erratum in
    Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2013 Aug;471(8):2729.

BACKGROUND: The thumb, or digit 1, is not a typical digit. In addition to its
unusual mobility and function, its formation is also unusual. It is the last
digit to form and the most commonly targeted when limb development is disrupted. 
The thumb domain is defined by the overlapping expression of HOXA13, TBX5, GLI3R,
and HOXD13 and, importantly, by an absence of other distal HOXD transcription
factors. This brief review, combining developmental biology and clinical
genetics, discusses the current understanding of how the thumb domain is
established.

PMCID: PMC3940735
PMID: 23619737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2013 Jul;60:129-41. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.04.015. Epub
2013 Apr 22.

Increased susceptibility of HIF-1a heterozygous-null mice to cardiovascular
malformations associated with maternal diabetes.

Bohuslavova R(1), Skvorova L, Sedmera D, Semenza GL, Pavlinkova G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology AS CR, Prague, Czech Republic.

Cardiovascular malformations are the most common manifestation of diabetic
embryopathy. The molecular mechanisms underlying the teratogenic effect of
maternal diabetes have not been fully elucidated. Using genome-wide expression
profiling, we previously demonstrated that exposure to maternal diabetes resulted
in dysregulation of the hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) pathway in the
developing embryo. We thus considered a possible link between HIF-1-regulated
pathways and the development of congenital malformations. HIF-1a
heterozygous-null (Hif1a(+/-)) and wild type (Wt) littermate embryos were exposed
to the intrauterine environment of a diabetic mother to analyze the frequency and
morphology of congenital defects, and assess gene expression changes in Wt and
Hif1a(+/-) embryos. We observed a decreased number of embryos per litter and an
increased incidence of heart malformations, including atrioventricular septal
defects and reduced myocardial mass, in diabetes-exposed Hif1a(+/-) embryos as
compared to Wt embryos. We also detected significant differences in the
expression of key cardiac transcription factors, including Nkx2.5, Tbx5, and
Mef2C, in diabetes-exposed Hif1a(+/-) embryonic hearts compared to Wt
littermates. Thus, partial global HIF-1a deficiency alters gene expression in the
developing heart and increases susceptibility to congenital defects in a mouse
model of diabetic pregnancy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23619295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Okajimas Folia Anat Jpn. 2013;89(4):113-8.

Misexpression experiment of Tbx5 in axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum) hindlimb
blastema.

Shimokawa T(1), Kominami R, Yasutaka S, Shinohara H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anatomy II, Kanazawa Medical University, 1-1 Daigaku,
Uchinada-machi, Kahoku-gun, 920-0293 Japan. simoort1@kanazawa-med.ac.jp

Axolotls (Ambystoma mexicanum) have the ability to regenerate amputated limbs
throughout their life span. In the present study, we attempted to elucidate how
axolotls can specify limb type correctly during the regeneration process. We
misexpressed Tbx5 in regenerating hindlimb blastema, and consequently a
forelimb-like hindlimb regenerated from the hindlimb blastema. On the other hand,
no change was observed in Tbx5-overexpressing forelimb blastema, and thus we
considered that Tbx5 plays a key role in the specification of forelimb during the
regeneration process of axolotl limbs. However, axolotls' fore- and hindlimbs
have very similar structures except for the number of fingers, and it was very
difficult to judge whether the forelimb-like regenerate was a true forelimb or
merely a forelimb-like hindlimb. Therefore, in order to confirm our conclusion,
we have to investigate other genes that are expressed differentially between
fore- and hindlimbs in future experiments.

PMID: 23614983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 16;8(4):e61445. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061445. Print 2013.

Transcriptome analysis of newt lens regeneration reveals distinct gradients in
gene expression patterns.

Sousounis K(1), Looso M, Maki N, Ivester CJ, Braun T, Tsonis PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Tissue Regeneration and Engineering at
Dayton, University of Dayton, Dayton, Ohio, United States of America.

Regeneration of the lens in newts is quite a unique process. The lens is removed 
in its entirety and regeneration ensues from the pigment epithelial cells of the 
dorsal iris via transdifferentiation. The same type of cells from the ventral
iris are not capable of regenerating a lens. It is, thus, expected that
differences between dorsal and ventral iris during the process of regeneration
might provide important clues pertaining to the mechanism of regeneration. In
this paper, we employed next generation RNA-seq to determine gene expression
patterns during lens regeneration in Notophthalmus viridescens. The expression of
more than 38,000 transcripts was compared between dorsal and ventral iris.
Although very few genes were found to be dorsal- or ventral-specific, certain
groups of genes were up-regulated specifically in the dorsal iris. These genes
are involved in cell cycle, gene regulation, cytoskeleton and immune response. In
addition, the expression of six highly regulated genes, TBX5, FGF10, UNC5B, VAX2,
NR2F5, and NTN1, was verified using qRT-PCR. These graded gene expression
patterns provide insight into the mechanism of lens regeneration, the markers
that are specific to dorsal or ventral iris, and layout a map for future studies 
in the field.

PMCID: PMC3628982
PMID: 23613853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2013 Jul;60:97-106. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.04.004. Epub
2013 Apr 13.

Optimization of direct fibroblast reprogramming to cardiomyocytes using calcium
activity as a functional measure of success.

Addis RC(1), Ifkovits JL, Pinto F, Kellam LD, Esteso P, Rentschler S,
Christoforou N, Epstein JA, Gearhart JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
raddis@mail.med.upenn.edu

Direct conversion of fibroblasts to induced cardiomyocytes (iCMs) has great
potential for regenerative medicine. Recent publications have reported
significant progress, but the evaluation of reprogramming has relied upon
non-functional measures such as flow cytometry for cardiomyocyte markers or GFP
expression driven by a cardiomyocyte-specific promoter. The issue is one of
practicality: the most stringent measures - electrophysiology to detect cell
excitation and the presence of spontaneously contracting myocytes - are not
readily quantifiable in the large numbers of cells screened in reprogramming
experiments. However, excitation and contraction are linked by a third functional
characteristic of cardiomyocytes: the rhythmic oscillation of intracellular
calcium levels. We set out to optimize direct conversion of fibroblasts to iCMs
with a quantifiable calcium reporter to rapidly assess functional
transdifferentiation. We constructed a reporter system in which the calcium
indicator GCaMP is driven by the cardiomyocyte-specific Troponin T promoter.
Using calcium activity as our primary outcome measure, we compared several
published combinations of transcription factors along with novel combinations in 
mouse embryonic fibroblasts. The most effective combination consisted of Hand2,
Nkx2.5, Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5 (HNGMT). This combination is >50-fold more
efficient than GMT alone and produces iCMs with cardiomyocyte marker expression, 
robust calcium oscillation, and spontaneous beating that persist for weeks
following inactivation of reprogramming factors. HNGMT is also significantly more
effective than previously published factor combinations for the
transdifferentiation of adult mouse cardiac fibroblasts to iCMs. Quantification
of calcium function is a convenient and effective means for the identification
and evaluation of cardiomyocytes generated by direct reprogramming. Using this
stringent outcome measure, we conclude that HNGMT produces iCMs more efficiently 
than previously published methods.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3679282
PMID: 23591016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Genomics. 2013 Jun;101(6):326-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2013.03.004. Epub 2013 Mar
28.

Comparative study of human aortic and mitral valve interstitial cell gene
expression and cellular function.

Sun W(1), Zhao R, Yang Y, Wang H, Shao Y, Kong X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, PR China.

Valve interstitial cells (VICs) are essential for valvular pathogenesis. However,
the transcriptional profiles and cellular functions of human aortic VICs (hAVICs)
and mitral VICs (hMVICs) have not been directly compared. We performed NimbleGen 
gene expression profiling analyses of hAVICs and hMVICs. Seventy-eight known
genes were differentially expressed between hAVICs and hMVICs. Higher expression 
of NKX2-5, TBX15, OGN, OMD, and CDKN1C and lower expression of TBX5, MMP1, and
PCDH10 were found in hAVICs compared to hMVICs. The differences in these genes,
excepting OGN and OMD, remained in rheumatic VICs. We also compared cell
proliferation, migration, and response to mineralization medium. hMVICs
proliferated more quickly but showed more calcium deposition and alkaline
phosphatase activity than hAVICs after culture in mineralization medium,
indicating that hMVICs were more susceptible to in vitro calcification. Our
findings reveal differences in the transcription profiles and cellular functions 
of hAVICs and hMVICs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23542235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 2013 Apr;26(4):476-82. doi: 10.5713/ajas.2012.12626.

Comparative Analysis of Nkx2-5/GATA4/TBX5 Expression in Chicken, Quail and
Chicken-quail Hybrids during the Early Stage of Cardiac Development in Embryos.

Ban Q(1), Liu X(1), Hui W(1), Chen D(1), Zhao Z(1), Jia B(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Shihezi University, Road Beisi,
Shihezi 832003, Xinjiang, China.

The present study makes an investigation into expression of genes related to
cardiac development in chicken, quail and chicken-quail hybrids during the early 
stage of embryogenesis. Real-time PCR was used to detect mRNA expressions of
Nkx2-5, GATA4 and TBX5 in the heart of chicken, quail and chicken-quail hybrids
embryos during the 3rd to 7th days of incubation. Results showed that NKX2-5 mRNA
displayed a similar expression trend in chicken, quail and chicken-quail hybrids.
The initial and highest expression of Nkx2-5 was focused on the 3rd day of
incubation, then it declined till 5th day of incubation, thereafter, it
fluctuated. Expression of Nkx2-5 gene in quail was significantly higher than in
chicken and chicken-quail hybrids, and no significant difference was observed
between the two latter species. GATA4 mRNA showed a similar expression trend
between chicken and quail, which displayed a steady increase from 3rd to 6th d,
then, the expression level decreased. However, GATA4 mRNA expression in
chicken-quail hybrids was significantly higher than that in chicken and quail
from 3rd to 5th d (p<0.01), but significantly lower than that in chicken and
quail during the later stage of the experiment (p<0.05), due to the dramatic drop
from 5th d onwards (p<0.01). TBX5 mRNA expression in chicken and quail showed the
same trend as GATA4 expressed in the two species. Furthermore, TBX5 expression in
chicken-quail hybrids was significantly higher than that in chicken and quail
during the whole course of experiment, although relatively lower TBX5 expression 
was detected in the early stage. In conclusion, Nkx2-5, GATA4 and TBX5 genes
showed dynamic changes during the process of cardiac development in chicken,
quail and their hybrids embryos. In addition, the expression trend in chicken was
similar to that in quail, and there was no significant difference for gene
expression level, except NKX2-5. However, expression of these genes in
chicken-quail hybrids was significantly different from their parents, the
difference mechanism needs to be further explored.

PMCID: PMC4093392
PMID: 25049812  [PubMed]


183. Development. 2013 Apr;140(8):1639-44. doi: 10.1242/dev.093260. Epub 2013 Mar 13.

GATA factors efficiently direct cardiac fate from embryonic stem cells.

Turbendian HK(1), Gordillo M, Tsai SY, Lu J, Kang G, Liu TC, Tang A, Liu S,
Fishman GI, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The GATA4 transcription factor is implicated in promoting cardiogenesis in
combination with other factors, including TBX5, MEF2C and BAF60C. However, when
expressed in embryonic stem cells (ESCs), GATA4 was shown to promote endoderm,
not cardiac mesoderm. The capacity of related GATA factors to promote
cardiogenesis is untested. We found that expression of the highly related gene,
Gata5, very efficiently promotes cardiomyocyte fate from murine ESCs. Gata5
directs development of beating sheets of cells that express cardiac troponin T
and show a full range of action potential morphologies that are responsive to
pharmacological stimulation. We discovered that by removing serum from the
culture conditions, GATA4 and GATA6 are each also able to efficiently promote
cardiogenesis in ESC derivatives, with some distinctions. Thus, GATA factors can 
function in ESC derivatives upstream of other cardiac transcription factors to
direct the efficient generation of cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC3621482
PMID: 23487308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci. 2013;89(3):118-28.

Heart regeneration using reprogramming technology.

Ieda M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Cardiovascular Research, Keio University 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. mieda@z8.keio.jp

Loss of terminally differentiated cardiomyocytes due to heart disease is
irreversible and current therapeutic regimes are limited. Cell therapy using stem
cell-derived cardiomyocytes is an attractive option to repair injured hearts. The
discovery of direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) and successful differentiation of iPSCs into cardiomyocytes
provided a revolutionary paradigm in heart regenerative research. During the past
decades, significant advances in stem cell culture, differentiation and
purification protocols, as well as in cell transplantation methodologies, have
been achieved. On the other hand, recent studies demonstrated that a somatic cell
could be converted into an alternative differentiated cell type without first
becoming a stem cell by overexpression of lineage-specific factors. We found that
functional cardiomyocytes can be directly induced from fibroblasts by a
combination of three cardiac transcription factors, Gata4, Mef2c and Tbx5, in
vitro and in vivo. I will review the perspectives of heart regeneration using
reprogramming technology.

PMCID: PMC3647079
PMID: 23474887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e54891. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054891. Epub 2013 Feb 14.

Krüppel-like factor 2 is required for normal mouse cardiac development.

Chiplunkar AR(1), Lung TK, Alhashem Y, Koppenhaver BA, Salloum FN, Kukreja RC,
Haar JL, Lloyd JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, Virginia, United States of America.

Krüppel-like factor 2 (KLF2) is expressed in endothelial cells in the developing 
heart, particularly in areas of high shear stress, such as the atrioventricular
(AV) canal. KLF2 ablation leads to myocardial thinning, high output cardiac
failure and death by mouse embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) in a mixed genetic
background. This work identifies an earlier and more fundamental role for KLF2 in
mouse cardiac development in FVB/N mice. FVB/N KLF2-/- embryos die earlier, by
E11.5. E9.5 FVB/N KLF2-/- hearts have multiple, disorganized cell layers lining
the AV cushions, the primordia of the AV valves, rather than the normal single
layer. By E10.5, traditional and endothelial-specific FVB/N KLF2-/- AV cushions
are hypocellular, suggesting that the cells accumulating at the AV canal have a
defect in endothelial to mesenchymal transformation (EMT). E10.5 FVB/N KLF2-/-
hearts have reduced glycosaminoglycans in the cardiac jelly, correlating with the
reduced EMT. However, the number of mesenchymal cells migrating from FVB/N
KLF2-/- AV explants into a collagen matrix is reduced considerably compared to
wild-type, suggesting that the EMT defect is not due solely to abnormal cardiac
jelly. Echocardiography of E10.5 FVB/N KLF2-/- embryos indicates that they have
abnormal heart function compared to wild-type. E10.5 C57BL/6 KLF2-/- hearts have 
largely normal AV cushions. However, E10.5 FVB/N and C57BL/6 KLF2-/- embryos have
a delay in the formation of the atrial septum that is not observed in a defined
mixed background. KLF2 ablation results in reduced Sox9, UDP-glucose
dehydrogenase (Ugdh), Gata4 and Tbx5 mRNA in FVB/N AV canals. KLF2 binds to the
Gata4, Tbx5 and Ugdh promoters in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays,
indicating that KLF2 could directly regulate these genes. In conclusion, KLF2-/- 
heart phenotypes are genetic background-dependent. KLF2 plays a role in EMT
through its regulation of important cardiovascular genes.

PMCID: PMC3573061
PMID: 23457456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Dev Dyn. 2013 May;242(5):485-502. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23953. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Zebrafish tbx5 paralogs demonstrate independent essential requirements in cardiac
and pectoral fin development.

Parrie LE(1), Renfrew EM, Wal AV, Mueller RL, Garrity DM.

Author information: 
(1)Colorado State University CSU, Department of Biology, Fort Collins, Colorado
80523, USA.

BACKGROUND: T-box genes constitute a large family of transcriptional regulators
involved in developmental patterning. Homozygous mutation of tbx5 leads to
embryonic lethal cardiac phenotypes and forelimb malformations in vertebrate
models. Haploinsufficiency of tbx5 results in Holt-Oram syndrome, a human
congenital disease characterized by cardiac and forelimb defects. Homozygous
mutation of zebrafish tbx5a leads to lethal defects in cardiac looping
morphogenesis, blocks pectoral fin initiation, and impairs outgrowth. Recently, a
second zebrafish tbx5 gene was described, termed tbx5b.
RESULTS: Our phylogenetic analyses confirm tbx5b as a paralog that likely arose
in the teleost-specific whole genome duplication ~270 MYA. Using morpholino
depletion studies, we find that tbx5b is required in the heart for embryonic
survival, and influences the timing and morphogenesis of pectoral fin
development. Because tbx5a hypomorphic mutations are embryonic lethal, tbx5a and 
tbx5b functions in the heart must not be completely redundant. Consistent with
this hypothesis, simultaneous depletion of both tbx5 paralogs did not lead to
more severe phenotypes, and injection of wild-type mRNA from one tbx5 paralog was
not sufficient to cross-rescue phenotypes of the paralogous gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these data indicate that, despite similar
spatio-temporal expression patterns, tbx5a and tbx5b have independent functions
in heart and fin development.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23441045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Jan 24;14:13. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-13.

Bilateral radial agenesis with absent thumbs, complex heart defect, short
stature, and facial dysmorphism in a patient with pure distal microduplication of
5q35.2-5q35.3.

Jamsheer A(1), Sowinska A, Simon D, Jamsheer-Bratkowska M, Trzeciak T,
Latos-Bielenska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medical Sciences in Poznan,
Poznan, Poland. jamsheer@wp.pl

BACKGROUND: A partial duplication of the distal long arm of chromosome 5
(5q35-->qter) is known to be associated with a distinct phenotype referred to as 
Hunter-McAlpine syndrome. Clinical spectrum of this disorder mainly consists of
mental retardation, microcephaly, short stature, skeletal anomalies, and
craniofacial dysmorphism featuring flat facies, micrognathia, large, low-set
dysplastic ears, hypertelorism, almond-shaped, down-slanted palpebral fissures,
epicanthal folds, small nose, long philtrum, small mouth, and thin upper lip.
Less frequent remarkable findings include craniosynostosis, heart defect,
hypoplastic phalanges, preaxial polydactyly, hypospadias, cryptorchidism, and
inguinal hernia. In most patients with a partial duplication of 5q the aberration
occurred due to an inherited unbalanced translocation, therefore the phenotype
was not reflective of pure trisomy 5q.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report on a 9.5-year-old boy with some feature of
Hunter-McAlpine syndrome including short stature, complex heart defect
(dextrocardia, dextroversion, PFO), bilateral cryptorchidism, hypothyroidism, and
craniofacial dysmorphism. Additionally, bilateral radial agenesis with complete
absence of Ist digital rays, ulnar hypoplasia with bowing, choroidal and retinal 
coloboma, abnormal biliary vesicle were identified, which have never been noted
in 5q trisomy patients. Karyotype analysis, sequencing and MLPA for TBX5 and
SALL4 genes were unremarkable. Array comparative genomic hybridization detected a
duplication on 5q35.2-5q35.3, resulting from a de novo chromosomal rearrangement.
Our proband carried the smallest of all previously reported pure distal 5q
trisomies encompassing terminal 5.4-5.6 Mb and presented with the most severe
limb malformation attributed to the increased number of distal 5q copies.
CONCLUSIONS: We postulate that a terminal distal trisomy of 5q35.2-5q35.3, which 
maps 1.1 Mb telomeric to the MSX2 gene is causative for both radial agenesis and 
complex heart defect in our proband. A potential candidate gene causative for
limb malformation in our proband could be FGFR4, which maps relatively in the
closest position to the chromosomal breakage site (about 1.3 Mb) from all known
5q duplications. Since the limb malformation as well as the underlying genetic
defect are distinct from other 5q trisomy patient we propose that a position
effect resulting in altered long-range regulation of the FGFR4 (alternatively
MSX2) may be responsible for the limb malformation in our proband.

PMCID: PMC3576294
PMID: 23342975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Am Heart Assoc. 2012 Dec;1(6):e005652. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.112.005652. Epub 2012 
Dec 19.

In vivo cardiac cellular reprogramming efficacy is enhanced by angiogenic
preconditioning of the infarcted myocardium with vascular endothelial growth
factor.

Mathison M(1), Gersch RP, Nasser A, Lilo S, Korman M, Fourman M, Hackett N,
Shroyer K, Yang J, Ma Y, Crystal RG, Rosengart TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stony Brook University Medical Center, Stony Brook, NY,
USA.

BACKGROUND: In situ cellular reprogramming offers the possibility of regenerating
functional cardiomyocytes directly from scar fibroblasts, obviating the
challenges of cell implantation. We hypothesized that pretreating scar with gene 
transfer of the angiogenic vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) would
enhance the efficacy of this strategy.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5 (GMT) administration via lentiviral
transduction was demonstrated to transdifferentiate rat fibroblasts into
(induced) cardiomyocytes in vitro by cardiomyocyte marker studies. Fisher 344
rats underwent coronary ligation and intramyocardial administration of an
adenovirus encoding all 3 major isoforms of VEGF (AdVEGF-All6A(+)) or an AdNull
control vector (n=12/group). Lentivirus encoding GMT or a GFP control was
administered to each animal 3 weeks later, followed by histologic and
echocardiographic analyses. GMT administration reduced the extent of fibrosis by 
half compared with GFP controls (12 ± 2% vs 24 ± 3%, P<0.01) and reduced the
number of myofibroblasts detected in the infarct zone by 4-fold. GMT-treated
animals also demonstrated greater density of cardiomyocyte-specific marker beta
myosin heavy chain 7(+) cells compared with animals receiving GFP with or without
VEGF (P<0.01). Ejection fraction was significantly improved after GMT vs GFP
administration (12 ± 3% vs -7 ± 3%, P<0.01). Eight (73%) GFP animals but no GMT
animals demonstrated decreased ejection fraction during this interval (P<0.01).
Also, improvement in ejection fraction was 4-fold greater in GMT/VEGF vs GMT/null
animals (17 ± 2% vs 4 ± 1%, P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: VEGF administration to infarcted myocardium enhances the efficacy of
GMT-mediated cellular reprogramming in improving myocardial function and reducing
the extent of myocardial fibrosis compared with the use of GMT or VEGF alone.

PMCID: PMC3540681
PMID: 23316332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Mar;7(3):953-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1266. Epub 2013 Jan 9.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 enhances the expression of cardiac transcription
factors by increasing histone H3 acetylation in H9c2 cells.

Zheng M(1), Zhu J, Lv T, Liu L, Sun H, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Yu Zhong,
Chongqing 400014, PR China.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-2 induces the expression of cardiac
transcription factors during early heart development, however, the underlying
mechanisms for this are not clear. Our previous studies indicated that histone
acetylation is critical in the regulation of cardiac gene expression. In the
present study, the hypothesis that BMP2 enhances the expression of cardiac
transcription factors by increasing histone H3 acetylation was tested. Cultured
H9c2 rat embryonic cardiac myocytes were transfected with adenoviruses expressing
human BMP2 (AdBMP2). Real-time RT-PCR, western blotting, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and colorimetric assays were employed to determine
gene expression, histone H3 acetylation levels and histone acetylase (HAT)
activities. The mRNA expression levels of BMP2, GATA4, MEF2C and p300, but not of
Tbx5 and GCN5, were significantly upregulated following transfection with AdBMP2.
Similarly, the histone H3 acetylation levels were enhanced in the whole chromatin
and in the promoter regions of GATA4 and MEF2C, but not Tbx5, in the transfected 
cells. The HAT activities were also enhanced. These results indicate that BMP2 is
able to upregulate the expression of the cardiac transcription factors GATA4 and 
MEF2C, in part by increasing histone H3 acetylation in the promoter regions of
these genes.

PMID: 23314833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2013 Jan;49(1):82-93. doi:
10.1007/s11626-012-9558-0. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

Differentiation of human ES cell line KIND-2 to yield tripotent cardiovascular
progenitors.

Pawani H(1), Nagvenkar P, Pethe P, Bhartiya D.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Department, National Institute for Research in Reproductive 
Health, Parel, Mumbai, 400 012, India.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have the ability to differentiate into all the
three lineages and are an ideal starting material to obtain cells of desired
lineage for regenerative medicine. Continued efforts are needed to evolve more
robust protocols to obtain cells of desired lineages and in larger numbers. Also,
it has now been realized that rather than transplanting fully committed cells
differentiated in vitro, it may be ideal to transplant committed progenitors
which retain the intrinsic ability to proliferate and also differentiate better
into multiple lineages based on the in vivo cues. For cardiac regeneration, the
desired progenitor is a multipotent cardiovascular progenitor which has the
ability to regenerate cardiomyocytes, endothelial cells, and also smooth muscle
cells. The present study was undertaken to carefully compare three widely used
protocols to differentiate hESCs into cardiac progenitors, viz., spontaneous
differentiation, differentiation by END-2-conditioned medium, and directed
differentiation using growth factors followed by quantitative PCR to study the
relative expression of early cardiovascular markers. hESC differentiation
mimicked the early embryonic development, and the transition into mesoendoderm,
mesoderm, early cardiac progenitors, and cardiac cells associated with
spontaneous beating was clearly evident in all the three groups. However,
compared to spontaneous and END-2-associated differentiation, directed
differentiation led to several-fold higher expression of cardiac transcripts
(>75-fold Nkx2.5 and >150-fold Tbx5) in response to the stage-specific addition
of well-established cardiogenic inducers and inhibitors of specific signaling
pathways. We propose to use tripotent cardiovascular progenitors derived by
directed differentiation for further preclinical studies.

PMID: 23288411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Gene. 2013 Mar 1;516(1):138-42. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.051. Epub 2012 Dec
22.

Prenatal diagnosis and molecular cytogenetic characterization of de novo partial 
trisomy 12q (12q24.21<U+2192>qter) and partial monosomy 6q (6q27<U+2192>qter) associated with
coarctation of the aorta, ventriculomegaly and thickened nuchal fold.

Chen CP(1), Chen YY, Chern SR, Wu PS, Su JW, Chen YT, Chen LF, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. cpc_mmh@yahoo.com

We present rapid aneuploidy diagnosis of de novo partial trisomy 12q
(12q24.21<U+2192>qter) and partial monosomy 6q (6q27<U+2192>qter) by aCGH using uncultured
amniocytes in a fetus with coarctation of the aorta, ventriculomegaly and
thickened nuchal fold. We discuss the association of TBX3, TBX5 and MED13L gene
duplication with coarctation of the aorta, and the association of RNASET2 gene
haploinsufficiency with ventriculomegaly in this case.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23266815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Cell. 2012 Dec 21;151(7):1401-3. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.12.007.

Blending hippo and WNT: sharing messengers and regulation.

Tsai BP(1), Hoverter NP, Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Comment on
    Cell. 2012 Dec 21;151(7):1443-56.

Two new studies reveal ways in which the Wnt pathway commandeers Hippo components
for signaling. Azzolin et al. show how the Hippo transcription factor TAZ
mediates Wnt signals, and Rosenbluh et al. show how ß-catenin and YAP1 form a
kinase-regulated complex with transcription factor TBX5.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23260132  [PubMed]


193. Cell. 2012 Dec 21;151(7):1457-73. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.11.026. Epub 2012 Dec 
13.

ß-Catenin-driven cancers require a YAP1 transcriptional complex for survival and 
tumorigenesis.

Rosenbluh J(1), Nijhawan D, Cox AG, Li X, Neal JT, Schafer EJ, Zack TI, Wang X,
Tsherniak A, Schinzel AC, Shao DD, Schumacher SE, Weir BA, Vazquez F, Cowley GS, 
Root DE, Mesirov JP, Beroukhim R, Kuo CJ, Goessling W, Hahn WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline
Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2013 Mar 28;153(1):267-70.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2013 Feb;13(2):80.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling plays a key role in the pathogenesis of colon and other
cancers; emerging evidence indicates that oncogenic ß-catenin regulates several
biological processes essential for cancer initiation and progression. To decipher
the role of ß-catenin in transformation, we classified ß-catenin activity in 85
cancer cell lines in which we performed genome-scale loss-of-function screens and
found that ß-catenin active cancers are dependent on a signaling pathway
involving the transcriptional regulator YAP1. Specifically, we found that YAP1
and the transcription factor TBX5 form a complex with ß-catenin. Phosphorylation 
of YAP1 by the tyrosine kinase YES1 leads to localization of this complex to the 
promoters of antiapoptotic genes, including BCL2L1 and BIRC5. A small-molecule
inhibitor of YES1 impeded the proliferation of ß-catenin-dependent cancers in
both cell lines and animal models. These observations define a
ß-catenin-YAP1-TBX5 complex essential to the transformation and survival of
ß-catenin-driven cancers.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3530160
PMID: 23245941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50536. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050536. Epub 2012 Nov 30.

MicroRNA 218 mediates the effects of Tbx5a over-expression on zebrafish heart
development.

Chiavacci E(1), Dolfi L, Verduci L, Meghini F, Gestri G, Evangelista AM, Wilson
SW, Cremisi F, Pitto L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Physiology, CNR, Pisa, Italy.

tbx5, a member of the T-box gene family, encodes one of the key transcription
factors mediating vertebrate heart development. Tbx5 function in heart
development appears to be exquisitely sensitive to gene dosage, since both
haploinsufficiency and gene duplication generate the cardiac abnormalities
associated with Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), a highly penetrant autosomal dominant
disease characterized by congenital heart defects of varying severity and upper
limb malformation. It is suggested that tight integration of microRNAs and
transcription factors into the cardiac genetic circuitry provides a rich and
robust array of regulatory interactions to control cardiac gene expression. Based
on these considerations, we performed an in silico screening to identify
microRNAs embedded in genes highly sensitive to Tbx5 dosage. Among the identified
microRNAs, we focused our attention on miR-218-1 that, together with its host
gene, slit2, is involved in heart development. We found correlated expression of 
tbx5 and miR-218 during cardiomyocyte differentiation of mouse P19CL6 cells. In
zebrafish embryos, we show that both Tbx5 and miR-218 dysregulation have a severe
impact on heart development, affecting early heart morphogenesis. Interestingly, 
down-regulation of miR-218 is able to rescue the heart defects generated by tbx5 
over-expression supporting the notion that miR-218 is a crucial mediator of Tbx5 
in heart development and suggesting its possible involvement in the onset of
heart malformations.

PMCID: PMC3511548
PMID: 23226307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48028. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048028. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

Cardiac gene activation analysis in mammalian non-myoblasic cells by Nkx2-5,
Tbx5, Gata4 and Myocd.

Zhou L(1), Liu Y, Lu L, Lu X, Dixon RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cardiology, Texas Heart Institute, Houston, Texas,
United States of America. Lzhou@heart.thi.tmc.edu

Cardiac transcription factors are master regulators during heart development.
Some were shown to transdifferentiate tail tip and cardiac fibroblasts into
cardiomyocytes. However, recent studies have showed that controversies exist.
Potential difference in tail tip and cardiac fibroblast isolation may possibly
confound the observations. Moreover, due to the use of a cardiac reporter (Myh6) 
selection strategy for induced cardiomyocyte enrichment, and the lack of tracking
signals for each transcription factors, individual roles of each transcription
factors in activating cardiac gene expression in mammalian non-myoblastic cells
have never been elucidated. Answers to these questions are an important step
toward cardiomyocyte regeneration. Because mouse 10T1/2 fibroblasts are
non-myoblastic in nature and can be induced to express genes of all three types
of muscle cells, they are an ideal model for the analysis of cardiac and
non-cardiac gene activation after induction. We constructed bi-cistronic
lentiviral vectors, capable of expressing cardiac transcription factors along
with different fluorescent tracking signals. By infecting 10T1/2 fibroblasts with
Nkx2-5, Tbx5, Gata4 or Myocd cardiac transcription factor lentivirus alone or
different combinations, we found that only Tbx5+Myocd and Tbx5+Gata4+Myocd
combinations induced Myh6 and Tnnt2 cardiac marker protein expression.
Microarray-based gene ontology analysis revealed that Tbx5 alone activated genes 
involved in the Wnt receptor signaling pathway and inhibited genes involved in a 
number of cardiac-related processes. Myocd alone activated genes involved in a
number of cardiac-related processes and inhibited genes involved in the Wnt
receptor signaling pathway and non-cardiac processes. Gata4 alone inhibited genes
involved in non-cardiac processes. Tbx5+Gata4+Myocd was the most effective
activator of genes associated with cardiac-related processes. Unlike Tbx5, Gata4,
Myocd alone or Tbx5+Myocd, Tbx5+Gata4+Myocd activated the fewest genes associated
with non-cardiac processes. Conclusively, Tbx5, Gata4 and Myocd play different
roles in cardiac gene activation in mammalian non-myoblastic cells.
Tbx5+Gata4+Myocd activates the most cardiac and the least non-cardiac gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3483304
PMID: 23144723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2012 Dec;5(6):639-46. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.112.963991. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

Novel loci associated with PR interval in a genome-wide association study of 10
African American cohorts.

Butler AM(1), Yin X, Evans DS, Nalls MA, Smith EN, Tanaka T, Li G, Buxbaum SG,
Whitsel EA, Alonso A, Arking DE, Benjamin EJ, Berenson GS, Bis JC, Chen W, Deo R,
Ellinor PT, Heckbert SR, Heiss G, Hsueh WC, Keating BJ, Kerr KF, Li Y, Limacher
MC, Liu Y, Lubitz SA, Marciante KD, Mehra R, Meng YA, Newman AB, Newton-Cheh C,
North KE, Palmer CD, Psaty BM, Quibrera PM, Redline S, Reiner AP, Rotter JI,
Schnabel RB, Schork NJ, Singleton AB, Smith JG, Soliman EZ, Srinivasan SR, Zhang 
ZM, Zonderman AB, Ferrucci L, Murray SS, Evans MK, Sotoodehnia N, Magnani JW,
Avery CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 27514, 
USA. anne.butler@unc.edu

BACKGROUND: The PR interval, as measured by the resting, standard 12-lead ECG,
reflects the duration of atrial/atrioventricular nodal depolarization.
Substantial evidence exists for a genetic contribution to PR, including
genome-wide association studies that have identified common genetic variants at 9
loci influencing PR in populations of European and Asian descent. However, few
studies have examined loci associated with PR in African Americans.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We present results from the largest genome-wide association 
study to date of PR in 13 415 adults of African descent from 10 cohorts. We
tested for association between PR (ms) and 2.8 million genotyped and imputed
single-nucleotide polymorphisms. Imputation was performed using HapMap 2 YRI and 
CEU panels. Study-specific results, adjusted for global ancestry and clinical
correlates of PR, were meta-analyzed using the inverse variance method. Variation
in genome-wide test statistic distributions was noted within studies (<U+03BB> range:
0.9-1.1), although not after genomic control correction was applied to the
overall meta-analysis (<U+03BB>: 1.008). In addition to generalizing previously reported
associations with MEIS1, SCN5A, ARHGAP24, CAV1, and TBX5 to African American
populations at the genome-wide significance level (P<5.0 × 10(-8)), we also
identified a novel locus: ITGA9, located in a region previously implicated in
SCN5A expression. The 3p21 region harboring SCN5A also contained 2 additional
independent secondary signals influencing PR (P<5.0 × 10(-8)).
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the ability to map novel loci in African
Americans as well as the generalizability of loci associated with PR across
populations of African, European, and Asian descent.

PMCID: PMC3560365
PMID: 23139255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Apr;1833(4):783-94. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.10.004.
Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Evolution and development of the building plan of the vertebrate heart.

Jensen B(1), Wang T, Christoffels VM, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology and Physiology, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Early cardiac development involves the formation of a heart tube, looping of the 
tube and formation of chambers. These processes are highly similar among all
vertebrates, which suggest the existence of evolutionary conservation of the
building plan of the heart. From the jawless lampreys to man, T-box transcription
factors like Tbx5 and Tbx20 are fundamental for heart formation, whereas Tbx2 and
Tbx3 repress chamber formation on the sinu-atrial and atrioventricular borders.
Also, electrocardiograms from different vertebrates are alike, even though the
fish heart only has two chambers whereas the mammalian heart has four chambers
divided by septa and in addition has much higher heart rates. We conclude that
most features of the high-performance hearts of mammals and birds can be traced
back to less developed traits in the hearts of ectothermic vertebrates. This
article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Cardiomyocyte biology: Cardiac
pathways of differentiation, metabolism and contraction.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Cell Transplant. 2013;22(7):1227-35. doi: 10.3727/096368912X657297. Epub 2012 Oct
2.

Radio electric conveyed fields directly reprogram human dermal skin fibroblasts
toward cardiac, neuronal, and skeletal muscle-like lineages.

Maioli M(1), Rinaldi S, Santaniello S, Castagna A, Pigliaru G, Gualini S,
Cavallini C, Fontani V, Ventura C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

Somatic cells can be directly reprogrammed to alternative differentiated fates
without first becoming stem/progenitor cells. Nevertheless, the initial need for 
viral-mediated gene delivery renders this strategy unsafe in humans. Here, we
provide evidence that exposure of human skin fibroblasts to a Radio Electric
Asymmetric Conveyer (REAC), an innovative device delivering radio electric
conveyed fields at a radiofrequency of 2.4 GHz, afforded remarkable commitment
toward cardiac, neuronal, and skeletal muscle lineages. REAC induced the
transcription of tissue-restricted genes, including Mef2c, Tbx5, GATA4, Nkx2.5,
and prodynorphin for cardiac reprogramming, as well as myoD, and neurogenin 1 for
skeletal myogenesis and neurogenesis, respectively. Conversely, REAC treatment
elicited a biphasic effect on a number of stemness-related genes, leading to
early transcriptional increase of Oct4, Sox2, cMyc, Nanog, and Klf4 within 6-20
h, followed by a downregulation at later times. The REAC action bypassed a
persistent reprogramming toward an induced pluripotent stem cell-like state and
involved the transcriptional induction of the NADPH oxidase subunit Nox4. Our
results show for the first time the feasibility of using a physical stimulus to
afford the expression of pluripotentiality in human adult somatic cells up to the
attainment of three major target lineages for regenerative medicine.

PMID: 23057961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012 Oct;1270:66-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06696.x.

Cardiac repair with thymosin ß4 and cardiac reprogramming factors.

Srivastava D(1), Ieda M, Fu J, Qian L.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California
94158, USA. dsrivastava@gladstone.ucsf.edu

Heart disease is a leading cause of death in newborns and in adults. We
previously reported that the G-actin-sequestering peptide thymosin ß4 promotes
myocardial survival in hypoxia and promotes neoangiogenesis, resulting in cardiac
repair after injury. More recently, we showed that reprogramming of cardiac
fibroblasts to cardiomyocyte-like cells in vivo after coronary artery ligation
using three cardiac transcription factors (Gata4/Mef2c/Tbx5) offers an
alternative approach to regenerate heart muscle. We have combined the delivery of
thymosin ß4 and the cardiac reprogramming factors to further enhance the degree
of cardiac repair and improvement in cardiac function after myocardial
infarction. These findings suggest that thymosin ß4 and cardiac reprogramming
technology may synergistically limit damage to the heart and promote cardiac
regeneration through the stimulation of endogenous cells within the heart.

© 2012 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 23050819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Feb 15;22(4):654-67. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0181. Epub 2012
Nov 7.

The histone methyltransferase inhibitor BIX01294 enhances the cardiac potential
of bone marrow cells.

Mezentseva NV(1), Yang J, Kaur K, Iaffaldano G, Rémond MC, Eisenberg CA,
Eisenberg LM.

Author information: 
(1)New York Medical College/Westchester Medical Center Stem Cell Laboratory,
Department of Physiology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA.

Bone marrow (BM) has long been considered a potential stem cell source for
cardiac repair due to its abundance and accessibility. Although previous
investigations have generated cardiomyocytes from BM, yields have been low, and
far less than produced from ES or induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Since
differentiation of pluripotent cells is difficult to control, we investigated
whether BM cardiac competency could be enhanced without making cells pluripotent.
From screens of various molecules that have been shown to assist iPSC production 
or maintain the ES cell phenotype, we identified the G9a histone
methyltransferase inhibitor BIX01294 as a potential reprogramming agent for
converting BM cells to a cardiac-competent phenotype. BM cells exposed to
BIX01294 displayed significantly elevated expression of brachyury, Mesp1, and
islet1, which are genes associated with embryonic cardiac progenitors. In
contrast, BIX01294 treatment minimally affected ectodermal, endodermal, and
pluripotency gene expression by BM cells. Expression of cardiac-associated genes 
Nkx2.5, GATA4, Hand1, Hand2, Tbx5, myocardin, and titin was enhanced 114, 76,
276, 46, 635, 123, and 5-fold in response to the cardiogenic stimulator Wnt11
when BM cells were pretreated with BIX01294. Immunofluorescent analysis
demonstrated that BIX01294 exposure allowed for the subsequent display of various
muscle proteins within the cells. The effect of BIX01294 on the BM cell phenotype
and differentiation potential corresponded to an overall decrease in methylation 
of histone H3 at lysine9, which is the primary target of G9a histone
methyltransferase. In summary, these data suggest that BIX01294 inhibition of
chromatin methylation reprograms BM cells to a cardiac-competent progenitor
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3564468
PMID: 22994322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Oct;158A(10):2463-72. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35565. Epub 2012
Sep 10.

Evaluation of genes involved in limb development, angiogenesis, and coagulation
as risk factors for congenital limb deficiencies.

Browne ML(1), Carter TC, Kay DM, Kuehn D, Brody LC, Romitti PA, Liu A, Caggana M,
Druschel CM, Mills JL.

Author information: 
(1)Congenital Malformations Registry, New York State Department of Health, Troy, 
USA. mlb10@health.state.ny.us

We conducted a population-based case-control study of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in selected genes to find common variants that play a role
in the etiology of limb deficiencies (LDs). Included in the study were 389
infants with LDs of unknown cause and 980 unaffected controls selected from all
births in New York State (NYS) for the years 1998-2005. We used cases identified 
from the NYS Department of Health (DOH) Congenital Malformations Registry.
Genotypes were obtained for 132 SNPs in genes involved in limb development (SHH, 
WNT7A, FGF4, FGF8, FGF10, TBX3, TBX5, SALL4, GREM1, GDF5, CTNNB1, EN1, CYP26A1,
CYP26B1), angiogenesis (VEGFA, HIF1A, NOS3), and coagulation (F2, F5, MTHFR).
Genotype call rates were >97% and SNPs were tested for departure from
Hardy-Weinberg expectations by race/ethnic subgroups. For each SNP, odds ratios
(OR)s and confidence intervals (CI)s were estimated and corrected for multiple
comparisons for all LDs combined and for LD subtypes. Among non-Hispanic white
infants, associations between FGF10 SNPs rs10805683 and rs13170645 and all LDs
combined were statistically significant following correction for multiple testing
(OR = 1.99; 95% CI = 1.43-2.77; uncorrected P = 0.000043 for rs10805683
heterozygous genotype, and OR = 2.37; 95% CI = 1.48-3.78; uncorrected P = 0.00032
for rs13170645 homozygous minor genotype). We also observed suggestive evidence
for associations with SNPs in other genes including CYP26B1 and WNT7A. Animal
studies have shown that FGF10 induces formation of the apical ectodermal ridge
and is necessary for limb development. Our data suggest that common variants in
FGF10 increase the risk for a wide range of non-syndromic limb deficiencies.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3448837
PMID: 22965740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Circ Res. 2012 Oct 12;111(9):1147-56. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.271148. Epub
2012 Aug 28.

Induction of cardiomyocyte-like cells in infarct hearts by gene transfer of
Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5.

Inagawa K(1), Miyamoto K, Yamakawa H, Muraoka N, Sadahiro T, Umei T, Wada R,
Katsumata Y, Kaneda R, Nakade K, Kurihara C, Obata Y, Miyake K, Fukuda K, Ieda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Cardiovascular Research, Department of
Cardiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2012 Oct 12;111(9):1108-10.

RATIONALE: After myocardial infarction (MI), massive cell death in the myocardium
initiates fibrosis and scar formation, leading to heart failure. We recently
found that a combination of 3 cardiac transcription factors, Gata4, Mef2c, and
Tbx5 (GMT), reprograms fibroblasts directly into functional cardiomyocytes in
vitro.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether viral gene transfer of GMT into infarcted
hearts induces cardiomyocyte generation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Coronary artery ligation was used to generate MI in the
mouse. In vitro transduction of GMT retrovirus converted cardiac fibroblasts from
the infarct region into cardiomyocyte-like cells with cardiac-specific gene
expression and sarcomeric structures. Injection of the green fluorescent protein 
(GFP) retrovirus into mouse hearts, immediately after MI, infected only
proliferating noncardiomyocytes, mainly fibroblasts, in the infarct region. The
GFP expression diminished after 2 weeks in immunocompetent mice but remained
stable for 3 months in immunosuppressed mice, in which cardiac induction did not 
occur. In contrast, injection of GMT retrovirus into a-myosin heavy chain
(aMHC)-GFP transgenic mouse hearts induced the expression of aMHC-GFP, a marker
of cardiomyocytes, in 3% of virus-infected cells after 1 week. A pooled GMT
injection into the immunosuppressed mouse hearts induced cardiac marker
expression in retrovirus-infected cells within 2 weeks, although few cells showed
striated muscle structures. To transduce GMT efficiently in vivo, we generated a 
polycistronic retrovirus expressing GMT separated by 2A "self-cleaving" peptides 
(3F2A). The 3F2A-induced cardiomyocyte-like cells in fibrotic tissue expressed
sarcomeric a-actinin and cardiac troponin T and had clear cross striations.
Quantitative RT-PCR also demonstrated that FACS-sorted 3F2A-transduced cells
expressed cardiac-specific genes.
CONCLUSIONS: GMT gene transfer induced cardiomyocyte-like cells in infarcted
hearts.

PMID: 22931955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(8):e1002870. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002870. Epub 2012 Aug 
9.

Fine-mapping and initial characterization of QT interval loci in African
Americans.

Avery CL(1), Sethupathy P, Buyske S, He Q, Lin DY, Arking DE, Carty CL, Duggan D,
Fesinmeyer MD, Hindorff LA, Jeff JM, Klein L, Patton KK, Peters U, Shohet RV,
Sotoodehnia N, Young AM, Kooperberg C, Haiman CA, Mohlke KL, Whitsel EA, North
KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America. christy_avery@unc.edu

The QT interval (QT) is heritable and its prolongation is a risk factor for
ventricular tachyarrhythmias and sudden death. Most genetic studies of QT have
examined European ancestral populations; however, the increased genetic diversity
in African Americans provides opportunities to narrow association signals and
identify population-specific variants. We therefore evaluated 6,670 SNPs spanning
eleven previously identified QT loci in 8,644 African American participants from 
two Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) studies: the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study and Women's Health Initiative Clinical 
Trial. Of the fifteen known independent QT variants at the eleven previously
identified loci, six were significantly associated with QT in African American
populations (P=1.20×10(-4)): ATP1B1, PLN1, KCNQ1, NDRG4, and two NOS1AP
independent signals. We also identified three population-specific signals
significantly associated with QT in African Americans (P=1.37×10(-5)): one at
NOS1AP and two at ATP1B1. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) patterns in African
Americans assisted in narrowing the region likely to contain the functional
variants for several loci. For example, African American LD patterns showed that 
0 SNPs were in LD with NOS1AP signal rs12143842, compared with European LD
patterns that indicated 87 SNPs, which spanned 114.2 Kb, were in LD with
rs12143842. Finally, bioinformatic-based characterization of the nine African
American signals pointed to functional candidates located exclusively within
non-coding regions, including predicted binding sites for transcription factors
such as TBX5, which has been implicated in cardiac structure and conductance. In 
this detailed evaluation of QT loci, we identified several African Americans SNPs
that better define the association with QT and successfully narrowed intervals
surrounding established loci. These results demonstrate that the same loci
influence variation in QT across multiple populations, that novel signals exist
in African Americans, and that the SNPs identified as strong candidates for
functional evaluation implicate gene regulatory dysfunction in QT prolongation.

PMCID: PMC3415454
PMID: 22912591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Oct;158A(10):2610-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35584. Epub 2012 
Aug 17.

A novel mutation in the SHH long-range regulator (ZRS) is associated with
preaxial polydactyly, triphalangeal thumb, and severe radial ray deficiency.

Al-Qattan MM(1), Al Abdulkareem I, Al Haidan Y, Al Balwi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) within the posteriorly located zone of polarizing activity
is the main controller of the antero-posterior axis of limb development. The ZRS 
(zone of polarizing activity regulatory sequence) is a long-range limb-specific
SHH enhancer. Several point mutations in the ZRS have been described in humans.
These mutations cause enhanced SHH activity and ectopic anterior expression of
SHH and a variable phenotype of preaxial polydactyly and triphalangeal thumb.
Absent thumb or radius has not been reported with ZRS mutations. Here, we report 
on a family with a variable phenotype of preaxial polydactyly as well as absent
thumb and radius, with kidney and cardiac defects. The family was screened for
SALL1, SALL4, and TBX5 mutations, but all were normal. Finally, they were
screened for ZRS mutations, which showed a novel point mutation within the ZRS,
NG_009240.1: g.106954C>T (traditional nomenclature: ZRS619C>T) in the five
affected members. This mutation was not previously reported in any public domain 
database, and was not found in our healthy and ethnically matched control
individuals or unaffected family members. We hypothesize that interactions of SHH
and SALL1 explain the overlapping features of the family described here and
patients with Townes-Brocks syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22903933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Transl Res. 2012 Sep;160(3):237-8. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2012.04.003. Epub 2012 May
10.

Functional analysis of the novel sequence variants within TBX5 gene promoter in
patients with ventricular septal defects.

Shan J(1), Pang S, Qiao Y, Ma L, Wang H, Xing Q, Wanyan H, Wu G, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment,
Jining Medical College Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical College, Jining,
Shandong, China.

PMID: 22901678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Dev Cell. 2012 Aug 14;23(2):280-91. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.06.006.

Tbx5-hedgehog molecular networks are essential in the second heart field for
atrial septation.

Xie L(1), Hoffmann AD, Burnicka-Turek O, Friedland-Little JM, Zhang K, Moskowitz 
IP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The developmental mechanisms underlying human congenital heart disease (CHD) are 
poorly understood. Atrial septal defects (ASDs) can result from
haploinsufficiency of cardiogenic transcription factors including TBX5. We
demonstrated that Tbx5 is required in the second heart field (SHF) for atrial
septation in mice. Conditional Tbx5 haploinsufficiency in the SHF but not the
myocardium or endocardium caused ASDs. Tbx5 SHF knockout embryos lacked atrial
septum progenitors. We found that Tbx5 mutant SHF progenitors demonstrated
cell-cycle progression defects and that Tbx5 regulated cell-cycle progression
genes including Cdk6. Activated hedgehog (Hh) signaling rescued ASDs in Tbx5
mutant embryos, placing Tbx5 upstream or parallel to Hh in cardiac progenitors.
Tbx5 regulated SHF Gas1 and Osr1 expression, supporting both pathways. These
results describe a SHF Tbx5-Hh network required for atrial septation. A paradigm 
defining molecular requirements in SHF cardiac progenitors for cardiac septum
morphogenesis has implications for the ontogeny of CHD.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3912192
PMID: 22898775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Nov;30(5):1095-104. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1092. Epub 2012
Aug 9.

microRNA expression profiling of the developing mouse heart.

Cao L(1), Kong LP, Yu ZB, Han SP, Bai YF, Zhu J, Hu X, Zhu C, Zhu S, Guo XR.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Ultrasound,
Nanjing Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, PR China.

microRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in regulating normal organ physiology
and development. Many miRNAs show spatially and temporally restricted expression 
patterns during embryogenesis and organogenesis. This study aimed to characterize
the miRNA profile of the fetal mouse heart at 4 key time-points [embryonic day
(E)12.5, E14.5, E16.5 and E18.5] in its development, by performing a sequencing
by oligonucleotide ligation and detection (SOLiD) miRNA screen. The 4 time-points
were designated as groups M1 (E18.5), M2 (E16.5), M3 (E14.5) and M4 (E12.5).
miRNAs found to have consistent fold-changes of >2.0) between the 4 time-points
were selected for further analysis. Ten miRNAs (mmu-miR-23b, mmu-miR-24,
mmu-miR-23a, mmu-miR-375, mmu-miR-29a, mmu-miR-93, mmu-miR-21, mmu-miR-25,
mmu-let-7b and mmu-miR-27b) that were the most highly expressed in the 4 groups, 
including the percentage >1% of total read counts, were identified. No miRNA was 
consistently downregulated or upregulated. There were 16 differentially expressed
miRNAs between the later development group (M1+M2) and the early development
group (M3+M4), which were validated by quantitative real-time PCR. Several
members of the let-7 miRNA cluster (mmu-let-7a/7d/7e/7f) were upregulated in the 
later development group compared with the early development group. A network
analysis of the predicted targets of mmu-let-7a/7d/7e/7f identified 5 target
genes (FOXP1, TBX5, HAND1, AKT2 and PPARGC1A), known to be involved in cardiac
development. Therefore, this study identified several miRNAs that are abundantly 
expressed in the developing heart, several of which are differentially expressed 
in the 4 time-points studied. Findings of this analysis may thus clarify the
mechanisms of normal heart development and provide a physiological basis for
future studies on congenital heart disease.

PMID: 22895573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Sep 7;425(4):741-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.145. Epub 2012 Aug 3.

Genetic analysis of the SIRT1 gene promoter in ventricular septal defects.

Shan J(1), Pang S, Wanyan H, Xie W, Qin X, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment,
Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining,
Shandong 272029, PR China.

Mutations in cardiac transcription factor genes, such as GATA-4, NKX2-5 and TBX5 
genes, have been associated to the patients with familial and isolated congenital
heart disease (CHD). Little work has been done on the epigenetic causes for CHD. 
Sirtuis are highly conserved NAD-dependent class III deacetylases. In mammals,
there are seven members of surtuin family, SIRT1-SIRT7. SIRT1, the closest to
yeast Sir2, has deacetylase activity and ADP-ribosyltransferase activity. SIRT1
has been involved in many cellular processes and implicated in human diseases,
such as obesity, type 2 diabetes, cancer and neurodegenerative diseases. We
hypothesized that altered levels of SIRT1 gene expression, rather than mutations 
in SIRT1 gene, may contribute to the human diseases. In this study, we
genetically analyze the SIRT1 gene promoter in patients with ventricular septal
defects (VSD) (n=333) and ethic-matched healthy controls (n=348). In all, six
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and twelve heterozygous sequence variants 
were identified. Four novel heterozygous variants, g.69643693A>G, g.69643963A>T, 
g.69643971G>A and g.69644366Ins, were found in six VSD patients, but in none of
controls. Six SNPs and variants, g.69643707A>C (rs35706870), g.69643874C>A,
g.69644209C>G, g.69644213G>A, g.69644268T>A and g.69644441G>A, were only
identified in controls. The other SNPs and variants were found in both groups
with similar frequencies. Therefore, the variants within the SIRT1 gene promoter 
identified in VSD patients may alter the transcriptional activities of SIRT1 gene
promoter. Changed SIRT1 protein levels may contribute to the VSD etiology by
affecting the activities of its substrates.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22885181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(8):e1002866. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002866. Epub 2012 Aug 
2.

Multiple roles and interactions of Tbx4 and Tbx5 in development of the
respiratory system.

Arora R(1), Metzger RJ, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York, United States of America.

Normal development of the respiratory system is essential for survival and is
regulated by multiple genes and signaling pathways. Both Tbx4 and Tbx5 are
expressed throughout the mesenchyme of the developing lung and trachea; and,
although multiple genes are known to be required in the epithelium, only Fgfs
have been well studied in the mesenchyme. In this study, we investigated the
roles of Tbx4 and Tbx5 in lung and trachea development using conditional mutant
alleles and two different Cre recombinase transgenic lines. Loss of Tbx5 leads to
a unilateral loss of lung bud specification and absence of tracheal specification
in organ culture. Mutants deficient in Tbx4 and Tbx5 show severely reduced lung
branching at mid-gestation. Concordant with this defect, the expression of
mesenchymal markers Wnt2 and Fgf10, as well as Fgf10 target genes Bmp4 and Spry2,
in the epithelium is downregulated. Lung branching undergoes arrest ex vivo when 
Tbx4 and Tbx5 are both completely lacking. Lung-specific Tbx4 heterozygous;Tbx5
conditional null mice die soon after birth due to respiratory distress. These
pups have small lungs and show severe disruptions in tracheal/bronchial cartilage
rings. Sox9, a master regulator of cartilage formation, is expressed in the
trachea; but mesenchymal cells fail to condense and consequently do not develop
cartilage normally at birth. Tbx4;Tbx5 double heterozygous mutants show decreased
lung branching and fewer tracheal cartilage rings, suggesting a genetic
interaction. Finally, we show that Tbx4 and Tbx5 interact with Fgf10 during the
process of lung growth and branching but not during tracheal/bronchial cartilage 
development.

PMCID: PMC3410851
PMID: 22876201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Development. 2012 Sep;139(17):3180-8. doi: 10.1242/dev.084814.

Hox genes regulate the onset of Tbx5 expression in the forelimb.

Minguillon C(1), Nishimoto S, Wood S, Vendrell E, Gibson-Brown JJ, Logan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. cmgbmc@ibmb.csic.es

Tbx4 and Tbx5 are two closely related T-box genes that encode transcription
factors expressed in the prospective hindlimb and forelimb territories,
respectively, of all jawed vertebrates. Despite their striking limb
type-restricted expression pattern, we have shown that these genes do not
participate in the acquisition of limb type-specific morphologies. Instead, Tbx4 
and Tbx5 play similar roles in the initiation of hindlimb and forelimb outgrowth,
respectively. We hypothesized that different combinations of Hox proteins
expressed in different rostral and caudal domains of the lateral plate mesoderm, 
where limb induction occurs, might be involved in regulating the limb
type-restricted expression of Tbx4 and Tbx5 and in the later determination of
limb type-specific morphologies. Here, we identify the minimal regulatory element
sufficient for the earliest forelimb-restricted expression of the mouse Tbx5 gene
and show that this sequence is Hox responsive. Our results support a mechanism in
which Hox genes act upstream of Tbx5 to control the axial position of forelimb
formation.

PMCID: PMC3413163
PMID: 22872086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Gene. 2012 Oct 15;508(1):106-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.07.019. Epub 2012 Jul
21.

Genetic analysis of an enhancer of the NKX2-5 gene in ventricular septal defects.

Qin X(1), Xing Q, Ma L, Meng H, Liu Y, Pang S, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment,
Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining,
Shandong 272029, China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is one of the most common birth defects in humans.
Mutations in cardiac transcription factor genes, such as GATA4, NKX2-5 and TBX5
genes, have been associated to a small portion of familial and isolated CHD
cases. NKX2-5, a highly conserved homeobox gene, is expressed in the developing
heart. During embryonic development, NKX2-5 plays pivotal roles in specifying
cardiac progenitors, cardiac morphogenesis, cardiomyocyte differentiation and
conduction system development. Numerous mutations in NKX2-5 gene have been
reported in CHD patients, including atrial septal defect, ventricular septal
defect (VSD) and tetrology of Fallot. We have previously identified the sequence 
variants within the NKX2-5 gene promoter in VSD patients. As several studies have
revealed that the NKX2-5 gene is regulated by a complex module involving promoter
and multiple independent cardiac enhancers, one of which is located between -3500
bp and -2500 bp upstream to the transcription start site, we hypothesized that
the variants within the cardiac enhancer may contribute to CHD. In this study, we
genetically analyzed the enhancer of NKX2-5 gene in large cohorts of VSD patients
(n=322) and controls (n=336). The results showed that three novel variants,
g.1467G>A, g.1487 Ins with a 13 bp insertion and g.1515 Ins with a 6 bp
insertion, were identified within the enhancer element in both VSD patients and
controls with similar frequencies (P>0.05). Therefore, our data suggested that
the enhancer of NKX2-5 gene may not be a contributor to the VSD etiology. Other
regulatory elements of the NKX2-5 gene will be further analyzed in CHD patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22824467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Aug 3;424(3):593-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.158. Epub 2012 Jul 7.

Inhibition of histone acetylation by curcumin reduces alcohol-induced expression 
of heart development-related transcription factors in cardiac progenitor cells.

Wang L(1), Sun H, Pan B, Zhu J, Huang G, Huang X, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
PR China.

Alcohol exposure during pregnancy may cause congenital heart disease (CHD). In
our previous studies, we found that alcohol selectively increased acetylation of 
histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9) and enhanced the expression of heart
development-related genes in cardiac progenitor cells. The objective of this
study is to investigate the protective effects of histone acetyltransferases
(HATs) inhibitor, curcumin, on histone hyperacetylation and the over-expression
of heart development genes induced by alcohol. Western blot analysis was employed
to detect the acetylation levels of histone H3K9 and real-time PCR was applied to
measure the expressions of heart development-related transcription factors,
GATA4, Mef2c and Tbx5 (GMT). Our results showed that alcohol increased the
acetylation of H3K9 by 2.76-fold (P<0.05) and significantly enhanced the
expression of GATA4 and Mef2c (P<0.05). When cells were treated with alcohol plus
25 µM curcumin, the hyperacetylation of H3K9 and over-expression of GATA4 and
Mef2c by alcohol was reversed. These data indicate that curcumin can correct the 
over-expression of cardiac genes by reversing the alcohol induced
hyperacetylation of histone H3 at lysine 9 in cardiac progenitor cells,
suggesting that curcumin is protective against alcohol-induced cardiac gene
over-expression that may result in heart malformations.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22776204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Biomed Sci. 2012 Jul 9;19:63. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-19-63.

The paracrine effect of exogenous growth hormone alleviates dysmorphogenesis
caused by tbx5 deficiency in zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos.

Tsai TC(1), Lu JK, Choo SL, Yeh SY, Tang RB, Lee HY, Lu JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research and Education, National Yang-Ming University
Hospital, Yilan, Taiwan, Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Dysmorphogenesis and multiple organ defects are well known in
zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos with T-box transcription factor 5 (tbx5)
deficiencies, mimicking human Holt-Oram syndrome.
METHODS: Using an oligonucleotide-based microarray analysis to study the
expression of special genes in tbx5 morphants, we demonstrated that GH and some
GH-related genes were markedly downregulated. Zebrafish embryos microinjected
with tbx5-morpholino (MO) antisense RNA and mismatched antisense RNA in the
1-cell stage served as controls, while zebrafish embryos co-injected with
exogenous growth hormone (GH) concomitant with tbx5-MO comprised the treatment
group.
RESULTS: The attenuating effects of GH in tbx5-MO knockdown embryos were
quantified and observed at 24, 30, 48, 72, and 96<U+2009>h post-fertilization. Though
the understanding of mechanisms involving GH in the tbx5 functioning complex is
limited, exogenous GH supplied to tbx5 knockdown zebrafish embryos is able to
enhance the expression of downstream mediators in the GH and insulin-like growth 
factor (IGF)-1 pathway, including igf1, ghra, and ghrb, and signal transductors
(erk1, akt2), and eventually to correct dysmorphogenesis in various organs
including the heart and pectoral fins. Supplementary GH also reduced apoptosis as
determined by a TUNEL assay and decreased the expression of apoptosis-related
genes and proteins (bcl2 and bad) according to semiquantitative
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemical analysis,
respectively, as well as improving cell cycle-related genes (p27 and cdk2) and
cardiomyogenetic genes (amhc, vmhc, and cmlc2).
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our results, tbx5 knockdown causes a pseudo GH deficiency
in zebrafish during early embryonic stages, and supplementation of exogenous GH
can partially restore dysmorphogenesis, apoptosis, cell growth inhibition, and
abnormal cardiomyogenesis in tbx5 knockdown zebrafish in a paracrine manner.

PMCID: PMC3407474
PMID: 22776023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Clin Invest. 2012 Jul;122(7):2509-18. doi: 10.1172/JCI62617. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

TBX5 drives Scn5a expression to regulate cardiac conduction system function.

Arnolds DE(1), Liu F, Fahrenbach JP, Kim GH, Schillinger KJ, Smemo S, McNally EM,
Nobrega MA, Patel VV, Moskowitz IP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Cardiac conduction system (CCS) disease, which results in disrupted conduction
and impaired cardiac rhythm, is common with significant morbidity and mortality. 
Current treatment options are limited, and rational efforts to develop cell-based
and regenerative therapies require knowledge of the molecular networks that
establish and maintain CCS function. Recent genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) have identified numerous loci associated with adult human CCS function,
including TBX5 and SCN5A. We hypothesized that TBX5, a critical developmental
transcription factor, regulates transcriptional networks required for mature CCS 
function. We found that deletion of Tbx5 from the mature murine ventricular
conduction system (VCS), including the AV bundle and bundle branches, resulted in
severe VCS functional consequences, including loss of fast conduction,
arrhythmias, and sudden death. Ventricular contractile function and the VCS fate 
map remained unchanged in VCS-specific Tbx5 knockouts. However, key mediators of 
fast conduction, including Nav1.5, which is encoded by Scn5a, and connexin 40
(Cx40), demonstrated Tbx5-dependent expression in the VCS. We identified a
TBX5-responsive enhancer downstream of Scn5a sufficient to drive VCS expression
in vivo, dependent on canonical T-box binding sites. Our results establish a
direct molecular link between Tbx5 and Scn5a and elucidate a hierarchy between
human GWAS loci that affects function of the mature VCS, establishing a paradigm 
for understanding the molecular pathology of CCS disease.

PMCID: PMC3386825
PMID: 22728936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Clin Invest. 2012 Jul;122(7):2519-30. doi: 10.1172/JCI62613. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Genetic variation in T-box binding element functionally affects SCN5A/SCN10A
enhancer.

van den Boogaard M(1), Wong LY, Tessadori F, Bakker ML, Dreizehnter LK, Wakker V,
Bezzina CR, 't Hoen PA, Bakkers J, Barnett P, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology, Heart Failure Research
Center, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

The contraction pattern of the heart relies on the activation and conduction of
the electrical impulse. Perturbations of cardiac conduction have been associated 
with congenital and acquired arrhythmias as well as cardiac arrest. The pattern
of conduction depends on the regulation of heterogeneous gene expression by key
transcription factors and transcriptional enhancers. Here, we assessed the
genome-wide occupation of conduction system-regulating transcription factors
TBX3, NKX2-5, and GATA4 and of enhancer-associated coactivator p300 in the mouse 
heart, uncovering cardiac enhancers throughout the genome. Many of the enhancers 
colocalized with ion channel genes repressed by TBX3, including the clustered
sodium channel genes Scn5a, essential for cardiac function, and Scn10a. We
identified 2 enhancers in the Scn5a/Scn10a locus, which were regulated by TBX3
and its family member and activator, TBX5, and are functionally conserved in
humans. We also provided evidence that a SNP in the SCN10A enhancer associated
with alterations in cardiac conduction patterns in humans disrupts TBX3/TBX5
binding and reduces the cardiac activity of the enhancer in vivo. Thus, the
identification of key regulatory elements for cardiac conduction helps to explain
how genetic variants in noncoding regulatory DNA sequences influence the
regulation of cardiac conduction and the predisposition for cardiac arrhythmias.

PMCID: PMC3386824
PMID: 22706305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nature. 2012 May 13;485(7400):599-604. doi: 10.1038/nature11139.

Heart repair by reprogramming non-myocytes with cardiac transcription factors.

Song K(1), Nam YJ, Luo X, Qi X, Tan W, Huang GN, Acharya A, Smith CL, Tallquist
MD, Neilson EG, Hill JA, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2012 May 31;485(7400):585-6.
    Circ Res. 2012 Sep 14;111(7):831-2.
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2012 Aug 1;5(4):481-2.

The adult mammalian heart possesses little regenerative potential following
injury. Fibrosis due to activation of cardiac fibroblasts impedes cardiac
regeneration and contributes to loss of contractile function, pathological
remodelling and susceptibility to arrhythmias. Cardiac fibroblasts account for a 
majority of cells in the heart and represent a potential cellular source for
restoration of cardiac function following injury through phenotypic reprogramming
to a myocardial cell fate. Here we show that four transcription factors, GATA4,
HAND2, MEF2C and TBX5, can cooperatively reprogram adult mouse tail-tip and
cardiac fibroblasts into beating cardiac-like myocytes in vitro. Forced
expression of these factors in dividing non-cardiomyocytes in mice reprograms
these cells into functional cardiac-like myocytes, improves cardiac function and 
reduces adverse ventricular remodelling following myocardial infarction. Our
results suggest a strategy for cardiac repair through reprogramming fibroblasts
resident in the heart with cardiogenic transcription factors or other molecules.

PMCID: PMC3367390
PMID: 22660318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Front Biosci (Schol Ed). 2012 Jun 1;4:1413-23.

Cardiomyocyte generation using stem cells and directly reprogrammed cells.

Ieda M(1), Fukuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Cardiovascular Research, Keio University 
School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan. mieda@z8.keio.jp

Cardiomyocytes are terminally differentiated cells with limited regenerative
capacity in the adult heart, making cell replacement therapy an attractive option
to repair injured hearts. Embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced pluripotent stem 
(iPS) cells are pluripotent and capable of infinite expansion in vitro,
implicating them as ideal cell types for cell replacement therapy. During the
past several years, significant advances in iPS cell generation technology,
cardiac differentiation, and cell purification protocols were achieved for the
development of stem cell-based heart therapies. The discovery of iPS cells has
also sparked the novel idea of direct conversion of mature cell types into
another cell type without passing through a pluripotent stem cell state.
Functional cardiomyocytes could therefore be directly reprogrammed from
differentiated somatic cells by transduction of the three cardiac transcription
factors, Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5. Herein, we review the recent research
achievements and discuss future challenges in stem cell-based cardiac generation 
and direct cardiac reprogramming technology for heart regeneration.

PMID: 22652883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(5):e1002690. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002690. Epub 2012 May 
10.

Congenital heart disease-causing Gata4 mutation displays functional deficits in
vivo.

Misra C(1), Sachan N, McNally CR, Koenig SN, Nichols HA, Guggilam A, Lucchesi PA,
Pu WT, Srivastava D, Garg V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research and the Heart Center,
Nationwide Children's Hospital, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United
States of America.

Defects of atrial and ventricular septation are the most frequent form of
congenital heart disease, accounting for almost 50% of all cases. We previously
reported that a heterozygous G296S missense mutation of GATA4 caused atrial and
ventricular septal defects and pulmonary valve stenosis in humans. GATA4 encodes 
a cardiac transcription factor, and when deleted in mice it results in cardiac
bifida and lethality by embryonic day (E)9.5. In vitro, the mutant GATA4 protein 
has a reduced DNA binding affinity and transcriptional activity and abolishes a
physical interaction with TBX5, a transcription factor critical for normal heart 
formation. To characterize the mutation in vivo, we generated mice harboring the 
same mutation, Gata4 G295S. Mice homozygous for the Gata4 G295S mutant allele
have normal ventral body patterning and heart looping, but have a thin
ventricular myocardium, single ventricular chamber, and lethality by E11.5. While
heterozygous Gata4 G295S mutant mice are viable, a subset of these mice have
semilunar valve stenosis and small defects of the atrial septum. Gene expression 
studies of homozygous mutant mice suggest the G295S protein can sufficiently
activate downstream targets of Gata4 in the endoderm but not in the developing
heart. Cardiomyocyte proliferation deficits and decreased cardiac expression of
CCND2, a member of the cyclin family and a direct target of Gata4, were found in 
embryos both homozygous and heterozygous for the Gata4 G295S allele. To further
define functions of the Gata4 G295S mutation in vivo, compound mutant mice were
generated in which specific cell lineages harbored both the Gata4 G295S mutant
and Gata4 null alleles. Examination of these mice demonstrated that the Gata4
G295S protein has functional deficits in early myocardial development. In
summary, the Gata4 G295S mutation functions as a hypomorph in vivo and leads to
defects in cardiomyocyte proliferation during embryogenesis, which may contribute
to the development of congenital heart defects in humans.

PMCID: PMC3349729
PMID: 22589735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Circ Res. 2012 Jun 22;111(1):50-5. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.270264. Epub 2012 
May 10.

Inefficient reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes using Gata4, Mef2c, 
and Tbx5.

Chen JX(1), Krane M, Deutsch MA, Wang L, Rav-Acha M, Gregoire S, Engels MC,
Rajarajan K, Karra R, Abel ED, Wu JC, Milan D, Wu SM.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Division of Cardiology, Department of
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2012 Jun 22;111(1):5-8.
    Circ Res. 2012 Jun 22;111(1):3-4.

RATIONALE: Direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes is a novel
strategy for cardiac regeneration. However, the key determinants involved in this
process are unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficiency of direct fibroblast reprogramming via viral 
overexpression of GATA4, Mef2c, and Tbx5 (GMT).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We induced GMT overexpression in murine tail tip fibroblasts
(TTFs) and cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) from multiple lines of transgenic mice
carrying different cardiomyocyte lineage reporters. We found that the induction
of GMT overexpression in TTFs and CFs is inefficient at inducing molecular and
electrophysiological phenotypes of mature cardiomyocytes. In addition,
transplantation of GMT infected CFs into injured mouse hearts resulted in
decreased cell survival with minimal induction of cardiomyocyte genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant challenges remain in our ability to convert fibroblasts 
into cardiomyocyte-like cells and a greater understanding of cardiovascular
epigenetics is needed to increase the translational potential of this strategy.

PMCID: PMC3390172
PMID: 22581928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Pediatr Cardiol. 2012 Dec;33(8):1355-61. doi: 10.1007/s00246-012-0346-0. Epub
2012 May 11.

Genetic and functional analysis of the NKX2-5 gene promoter in patients with
ventricular septal defects.

Pang S(1), Shan J, Qiao Y, Ma L, Qin X, Wanyan H, Xing Q, Wu G, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment,
Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical University, 79
Guhuai Road, Jining, 272029, Shandong, People's Republic of China.

The ventricular septal defect (VSD) is the most common type of congenital heart
disease (CHD). The morbidity and mortality of CHD patients are significantly
higher due to late cardiac complications, likely caused by genetic defects.
Mutations in cardiac transcription factor genes such as GATA-4, TBX5, and NKX2-5 
have been implicated in CHD cases. The NKX2-5 gene, a homeobox gene, is expressed
in the developing heart and the adult heart. Because NKX2-5 is a dosage-sensitive
regulator during embryonic development, the authors hypothesized that the
expression levels of the NKX2-5 gene rather than the mutant protein may play
important roles in CHD. In this study, the promoter regions and exon regions of
the NKX2-5 gene were bidirectionally sequenced in large cohorts of VSD patients
and healthy control subjects. The results showed that a novel sequence variant
(g.4574c>deletion), found only in one VSD patient, and a single nucleotide
polymorphism (rs118026695), the frequency of which was significantly higher in
VSD patients, were identified within the promoter region. Functional analysis
confirmed that these sequence variants significantly enhanced the transcriptional
activities of the NKX2-5 gene promoter, altering the expression of the NKX2-5
gene and the cardiac gene regulatory network. In addition, a synonymous mutation 
in the second exon of the NKX2-5 gene was identified in one VSD patient, which
may affect the translation process. Therefore, the authors' data provide
supportive evidence that mutations in the coding region of the NKX2-5 gene and
sequence variants within its promoter region may be among the contributors to the
CHD etiology.

PMID: 22576768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Sep;53(3):323-32. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2012.04.010. Epub
2012 Apr 28.

A new approach to transcription factor screening for reprogramming of fibroblasts
to cardiomyocyte-like cells.

Protze S(1), Khattak S, Poulet C, Lindemann D, Tanaka EM, Ravens U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical Faculty, Dresden University
of Technology, 01307 Dresden, Germany.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Sep;53(3):311-3.

The simultaneous overexpression of several transcription factors has emerged as a
successful strategy to convert fibroblasts into other cell types including
pluripotent cells, neurons, and cardiomyocytes. The selection and screening of
factors are critical, and have often involved testing a large pool of
transcription factors, followed by successive removal of single factors. Here, to
identify a cardiac transcription factor combination facilitating mouse fibroblast
reprogramming into cardiomyocytes, we directly screened all triplet combinations 
of 10 candidate factors combined with a Q-PCR assay reporting induction of
multiple cardiac-specific genes. Through this screening method the combination of
Tbx5, Mef2c, and Myocd was identified to upregulate a broader spectrum of cardiac
genes compared to the combination of Tbx5, Mef2c, and Gata4 that was recently
shown to induce reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes. Cells
cotransduced with Tbx5, Mef2c, Myocd expressed cardiac contractile proteins, had 
cardiac-like potassium and sodium currents and action potentials could be
elicited. In summary the alternative screening approach that is presented here
avoided the elimination of transcription factors whose potency is masked in
complex transcription factor mixes. Furthermore, our results point to the
importance of verifying multiple lineage specific genes when assessing
reprogramming.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22575762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 15;21(14):3255-63. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds165. Epub 2012 Apr
27.

Regulatory variation in a TBX5 enhancer leads to isolated congenital heart
disease.

Smemo S(1), Campos LC, Moskowitz IP, Krieger JE, Pereira AC, Nobrega MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Recent studies have identified the genetic underpinnings of a growing number of
diseases through targeted exome sequencing. However, this strategy ignores the
large component of the genome that does not code for proteins, but is nonetheless
biologically functional. To address the possible involvement of regulatory
variation in congenital heart diseases (CHDs), we searched for regulatory
mutations impacting the activity of TBX5, a dosage-dependent transcription factor
with well-defined roles in the heart and limb development that has been
associated with the Holt-Oram syndrome (heart-hand syndrome), a condition that
affects 1/100 000 newborns. Using a combination of genomics, bioinformatics and
mouse genetic engineering, we scanned ~700 kb of the TBX5 locus in search of
cis-regulatory elements. We uncovered three enhancers that collectively
recapitulate the endogenous expression pattern of TBX5 in the developing heart.
We re-sequenced these enhancer elements in a cohort of non-syndromic patients
with isolated atrial and/or ventricular septal defects, the predominant cardiac
defects of the Holt-Oram syndrome, and identified a patient with a homozygous
mutation in an enhancer ~90 kb downstream of TBX5. Notably, we demonstrate that
this single-base-pair mutation abrogates the ability of the enhancer to drive
expression within the heart in vivo using both mouse and zebrafish transgenic
models. Given the population-wide frequency of this variant, we estimate that
1/100 000 individuals would be homozygous for this variant, highlighting that a
significant number of CHD associated with TBX5 dysfunction might arise from
non-coding mutations in TBX5 heart enhancers, effectively decoupling the heart
and hand phenotypes of the Holt-Oram syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3384386
PMID: 22543974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 15;21(14):3299-305. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds158. Epub 2012
Apr 24.

Identification of a novel percent mammographic density locus at 12q24.

Stevens KN(1), Lindstrom S, Scott CG, Thompson D, Sellers TA, Wang X, Wang A,
Atkinson E, Rider DN, Eckel-Passow JE, Varghese JS, Audley T, Brown J, Leyland J,
Luben RN, Warren RM, Loos RJ, Wareham NJ, Li J, Hall P, Liu J, Eriksson L, Czene 
K, Olson JE, Pankratz VS, Fredericksen Z, Diasio RB, Lee AM, Heit JA, DeAndrade
M, Goode EL, Vierkant RA, Cunningham JM, Armasu SM, Weinshilboum R, Fridley BL,
Batzler A, Ingle JN, Boyd NF, Paterson AD, Rommens J, Martin LJ, Hopper JL,
Southey MC, Stone J, Apicella C, Kraft P, Hankinson SE, Hazra A, Hunter DJ,
Easton DF, Couch FJ, Tamimi RM, Vachon CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Charlton 6-239, 200 First
St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Percent mammographic density adjusted for age and body mass index (BMI) is one of
the strongest risk factors for breast cancer and has a heritable component that
remains largely unidentified. We performed a three-stage genome-wide association 
study (GWAS) of percent mammographic density to identify novel genetic loci
associated with this trait. In stage 1, we combined three GWASs of percent
density comprised of 1241 women from studies at the Mayo Clinic and identified
the top 48 loci (99 single nucleotide polymorphisms). We attempted replication of
these loci in 7018 women from seven additional studies (stage 2). The
meta-analysis of stage 1 and 2 data identified a novel locus, rs1265507 on 12q24,
associated with percent density, adjusting for age and BMI (P = 4.43 × 10(-8)).
We refined the 12q24 locus with 459 additional variants (stage 3) in a combined
analysis of all three stages (n = 10 377) and confirmed that rs1265507 has the
strongest association in the 12q24 region (P = 1.03 × 10(-8)). Rs1265507 is
located between the genes TBX5 and TBX3, which are members of the
phylogenetically conserved T-box gene family and encode transcription factors
involved in developmental regulation. Understanding the mechanism underlying this
association will provide insight into the genetics of breast tissue composition.

PMCID: PMC3384385
PMID: 22532574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Nature. 2012 May 31;485(7400):593-8. doi: 10.1038/nature11044.

In vivo reprogramming of murine cardiac fibroblasts into induced cardiomyocytes.

Qian L(1), Huang Y, Spencer CI, Foley A, Vedantham V, Liu L, Conway SJ, Fu JD,
Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)1Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California
94158, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2012 Sep 14;111(7):831-2.
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2012 Aug 1;5(4):481-2.
    Nature. 2012 May 31;485(7400):585-6.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Jul 6;11(1):3-4.

The reprogramming of adult cells into pluripotent cells or directly into
alternative adult cell types holds great promise for regenerative medicine. We
reported previously that cardiac fibroblasts,which represent 50%of the cells in
the mammalian heart, can be directly reprogrammed to adult cardiomyocyte-like
cells in vitro by the addition of Gata4, Mef2c and Tbx5 (GMT). Here we use
genetic lineage tracing to show that resident non-myocytes in the murine heart
can be reprogrammed into cardiomyocyte-like cells in vivo by local delivery of
GMT after coronary ligation. Induced cardiomyocytes became binucleate, assembled 
sarcomeres and had cardiomyocyte-like gene expression. Analysis of single cells
revealed ventricular cardiomyocyte-like action potentials, beating upon
electrical stimulation, and evidence of electrical coupling. In vivo delivery of 
GMT decreased infarct size and modestly attenuated cardiac dysfunction up to 3
months after coronary ligation. Delivery of the pro-angiogenic and
fibroblast-activating peptide, thymosin b4, along with GMT, resulted in further
improvements in scar area and cardiac function. These findings demonstrate that
cardiac fibroblasts can be reprogrammed into cardiomyocyte-like cells in their
native environment for potential regenerative purposes.

PMCID: PMC3369107
PMID: 22522929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jun;32(12):2214-23. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00218-12. Epub 2012 Apr 
2.

Dissociation of cardiogenic and postnatal myocardial activities of GATA4.

Gallagher JM(1), Komati H, Roy E, Nemer M, Latinkic BV.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.

Transcription factor GATA4 is a critical regulator of the embryonic and postnatal
heart, but the mechanisms and cofactors required for its diverse functions are
not fully understood. Here, we show that whereas the N-terminal domain of GATA4
is required for inducing cardiogenesis and for promoting postnatal cardiomyocyte 
survival, distinct residues and domains therein are necessary to mediate these
effects. Cardiogenic activity of GATA4 requires a 24-amino-acid (aa) region (aa
129 to 152) which is needed for transcriptional synergy and physical interaction 
with BAF60c. The same region is not essential for induction of endoderm or blood 
cell markers by GATA4, suggesting that it acts as a cell-type-specific
transcriptional activation domain. On the other hand, a serine residue at
position 105, which is a known target for mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
phosphorylation, is necessary for GATA4-dependent cardiac myocyte survival and
hypertrophy but is entirely dispensable for GATA4-induced cardiogenesis. We find 
that S105 is differentially required for transcriptional synergy between GATA4
and serum response factor (SRF) but not other cardiac cofactors such as TBX5 and 
NKX2.5. The findings provide new insight into GATA4 mechanisms of action and
suggest that distinct regulatory pathways regulate activities of GATA4 in
embryonic development and postnatal hearts.

PMCID: PMC3372269
PMID: 22473995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2012;100:253-77. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-387786-4.00008-7.

Transcription factor pathways and congenital heart disease.

McCulley DJ(1), Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA.

Congenital heart disease is a major cause of morbidity and mortality throughout
life. Mutations in numerous transcription factors have been identified in
patients and families with some of the most common forms of cardiac malformations
and arrhythmias. This review discusses transcription factor pathways known to be 
important for normal heart development and how abnormalities in these pathways
have been linked to morphological and functional forms of congenital heart
defects. A comprehensive, current list of known transcription factor mutations
associated with congenital heart disease is provided, but the review focuses
primarily on three key transcription factors, Nkx2-5, GATA4, and Tbx5, and their 
known biochemical and genetic partners. By understanding the interaction
partners, transcriptional targets, and upstream activators of these core cardiac 
transcription factors, additional information about normal heart formation and
further insight into genes and pathways affected in congenital heart disease
should result.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3684448
PMID: 22449847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Development. 2012 May;139(9):1620-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.073056. Epub 2012 Mar 21.

Islet1 regulates establishment of the posterior hindlimb field upstream of the
Hand2-Shh morphoregulatory gene network in mouse embryos.

Itou J(1), Kawakami H, Quach T, Osterwalder M, Evans SM, Zeller R, Kawakami Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota,
321 Church St. SE. Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

How divergent genetic systems regulate a common pathway during the development of
two serial structures, forelimbs and hindlimbs, is not well understood.
Specifically, HAND2 has been shown to regulate Shh directly to initiate its
expression in the posterior margin of the limb mesenchyme. Although the Hand2-Shh
morphoregulatory system operates in both the forelimb and hindlimb bud, a recent 
analysis suggested that its upstream regulation is different in the forelimb and 
hindlimb bud. A combination of all four Hox9 genes is required for Hand2
expression in the forelimb-forming region; however, it remains elusive what
genetic system regulates the Hand2-Shh pathway in the hindlimb-forming region. By
conditional inactivation of Islet1 in the hindlimb-forming region using the
Hoxb6Cre transgene, we show that Islet1 is required for establishing the
posterior hindlimb field, but not the forelimb field, upstream of the Hand2-Shh
pathway. Inactivation of Islet1 caused the loss of posterior structures in the
distal and proximal regions, specifically in the hindlimb. We found that Hand2
expression was downregulated in the hindlimb field and that Shh expression was
severely impaired in the hindlimb bud. In the Hoxb6Cre; Islet1 mutant pelvis, the
proximal element that is formed in a Shh-independent manner, displayed
complementary defects in comparison with Pitx1(-/-) hindlimbs. This suggests that
Islet1 and Pitx1 function in parallel during girdle development in hindlimbs,
which is in contrast with the known requirement for Tbx5 in girdle development in
forelimbs. Our studies have identified a role for Islet1 in hindlimb-specific
development and have revealed Islet1 functions in two distinct processes:
regulation upstream of the Hand2-Shh pathway and contributions to girdle
development.

PMID: 22438573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Feb;26(2):152-7.

[Bio-characteristics of c-kit+ human amniotic fluid-derived mesenchymal stem
cells and their differentiation into cardiomyocytes in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Bai J(1), Wang Y, Liu L, Chen J, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, the First Affiliated Hospital of General Hospital of
Chinese PLA, Beijing, 100048, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the bio-characteristics of c-kit+ human amniotic
fluid-derived mesenchymal stem cells (HAFMSCs) and its capacity to differentiate 
into cardiomyocytes in vitro.
METHODS: Fifty samples of human amniotic fluid were obtained from amniocenteses
or voluntary termination of pregnancy and were expanded in vitro. c-kit+ HAFMSCs 
were sorted by flow cytometry and were recultured in the same media. c-kit+
HAFMSCs were amplified and identified, then exposed to osteogenic, adipogenic,
and myogenic media. The flow cytometry, and immunocytochemistry were used for
identifying the cell phenotype, von Kossa staining for osteogenic
differentiation, oil red O staining for adipogenic differentiation, and real-time
fluorescent quantitative PCR for the expressions of NKx2.5, Tbx5, GATA-4, and
alpha-MHC genes.
RESULTS: After the selection procedure, the percentage of c-kit+ HAFMSCs was
3.07% +/- 1.03% of the total adherent cells. The cells expressed MSCs markers
(CD29, CD44, CD73, CD90, CD105), and did not express hematopoietic stem cells
markers (CD34, CD45). The cells were positive for human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-ABC, and negative for HLA-DR. They also expressed Oct-4, which
characterized the undifferentiated stem cell state. The growth curves of c-kit+
HAMFSCs at passages 5, 10, and 15 were similar. Lipid droplet was observed by oil
red O staining and calcium deposition by von Kossa staining in the cells at 21
days after adipogenic and osteogenic induction. The myocardium special gene
expressions of Tbx5, Nkx2.5, GATA-4, and alpha-MHC were significantly stronger
after myogenic induction than those before myogenic induction (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Selected c-kit+ HAFMSCs by flow cytometry is a group of pure MSCs,
which has potential to differentiate into cardiomyocytes and can be used as
seeding cells for myocardium regeneration treatment.

PMID: 22403876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Aug;20(8):863-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.16. Epub 2012 Feb
15.

TBX5 intragenic duplication: a family with an atypical Holt-Oram syndrome
phenotype.

Patel C(1), Silcock L, McMullan D, Brueton L, Cox H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Birmingham Women's NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, UK.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a rare autosomal dominant heart-hand syndrome due to 
mutations in the TBX5 transcription factor. Affected individuals can have
structural cardiac defects and/or conduction abnormalities, and exclusively upper
limb defects (typically bilateral, asymmetrical radial ray defects). TBX5
mutations reported include nonsense, missense, splicing mutations and exon
deletions. Most result in a null allele and haploinsufficiency, but some impair
nuclear localisation of TBX5 protein or disrupt its interaction with co-factors
and downstream targets. We present a five generation family of nine affected
individuals with an atypical HOS phenotype, consisting of ulnar ray defects
(ulnar hypoplasia, short fifth fingers with clinodactyly) and very mild radial
ray defects (short thumbs, bowing of the radius and dislocation of the radial
head). The cardiac defects seen are those more rarely reported in HOS
(atrioventricular septal defect, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, mitral valve
disease and pulmonary stenosis). Conduction abnormalities include atrial
fibrillation, atrial flutter and sick sinus syndrome. TBX5 mutation screening
(exons 3-10) identified no mutations. Array comparative genomic hybridisation
(CGH) revealed a 48<U+2009>kb duplication at 12q24.21, encompassing exons 2-9 of the
TBX5 gene, with breakpoints within introns 1-2 and 9-10. The duplication
segregates with the phenotype in the family, and is likely to be pathogenic. This
is the first known report of an intragenic duplication of TBX5 and its clinical
effects; an atypical HOS phenotype. Further functional studies are needed to
establish the effects of the duplication and pathogenic mechanism. All
typical/atypical HOS cases should be screened for TBX5 exon duplications.

PMCID: PMC3400730
PMID: 22333898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 1;363(1):234-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.034. Epub 2011
Dec 29.

Tbx20 regulation of cardiac cell proliferation and lineage specialization during 
embryonic and fetal development in vivo.

Chakraborty S(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)The Heart Institute, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH
45229, USA.

TBX20 gain-of-function mutations in humans are associated with congenital heart
malformations and myocardial defects. However the effects of increased Tbx20
function during cardiac chamber development and maturation have not been reported
previously. CAG-CAT-Tbx20 transgenic mice were generated for Cre-dependent
induction of Tbx20 in myocardial lineages in the developing heart.
ßMHCCre-mediated overexpression of Tbx20 in fetal ventricular cardiomyocytes
results in increased thickness of compact myocardium, induction of cardiomyocyte 
proliferation, and increased expression of Bmp10 and pSmad1/5/8 at embryonic day 
(E) 14.5. ßMHCCre-mediated Tbx20 overexpression also leads to increased
expression of cardiac conduction system (CCS) genes Tbx5, Cx40, and Cx43
throughout the ventricular myocardium. In contrast, Nkx2.5Cre mediated
overexpression of Tbx20 in the embryonic heart results in reduced cardiomyocyte
proliferation, increased expression of a cell cycle inhibitor, p21(CIP1), and
decreased expression of Tbx2, Tbx5, and N-myc1 at E9.5, concomitant with
decreased phospho-ERK1/2 expression. Together, these analyses demonstrate that
Tbx20 differentially regulates cell proliferation and cardiac lineage
specification in embryonic versus fetal cardiomyocytes. Induction of pSmad1/5/8
at E14.5 and inhibition of dpERK expression at E9.5 are consistent with selective
Tbx20 regulation of these pathways in association with stage-specific effects on 
cardiomyocyte proliferation. Together, these in vivo data support distinct
functions for Tbx20 in regulation of cardiomyocyte lineage maturation and cell
proliferation at embryonic and fetal stages of heart development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3296120
PMID: 22226977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Dev Dyn. 2012 Feb;241(2):365-75. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23710. Epub 2011 Dec 16.

Dynamic expression of Tbx2 subfamily genes in development of the mouse
reproductive system.

Douglas NC(1), Heng K, Sauer MV, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York 10032, USA. nd2058@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx4, and Tbx5, members of the Tbx2 subfamily of T-box
transcription factor genes, are important for many aspects of embryonic
development and mutations in some human TBX2 subfamily genes cause developmental 
syndromes. In addition, TBX2 and TBX3 are overexpressed in a variety of cancers, 
including reproductive system cancers. This study characterizes the expression of
Tbx2 subfamily genes during development of the reproductive system.
RESULTS: We show that these genes are expressed in both the internal and external
reproductive systems. Tbx2 is expressed in gonads and genital ducts, the Wolffian
and Müllerian ducts, while Tbx3 is only expressed in genital ducts. Tbx4 is
expressed in embryonic and postnatal germ cells. All four genes are expressed in 
mesenchyme in external genitalia, with Tbx3 and Tbx5 expression in the epithelium
as well.
CONCLUSION: This study lays the foundation for investigation of functional
requirements for Tbx2 subfamily genes in development of the mammalian
reproductive system.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3503486
PMID: 22223620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2012 Jan;44(1):92-102. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmr090.

Epigenetic mechanisms in cardiac development and disease.

Vallaster M(1), Vallaster CD, Wu SM.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 02114,
USA.

During mammalian development, cardiac specification and ultimately lineage
commitment to a specific cardiac cell type is accomplished by the action of
specific transcription factors (TFs) and their meticulous control on an
epigenetic level. In this review, we detail how cardiac-specific TFs function in 
concert with nucleosome remodeling and histone-modifying enzymes to regulate a
diverse network of genes required for processes such as cell growth and
proliferation, or epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), for instance. We
provide examples of how several cardiac TFs, such as Nkx2.5, WHSC1, Tbx5, and
Tbx1, which are associated with developmental and congenital heart defects, are
required for the recruitment of histone modifiers, such as Jarid2, p300, and
Ash2l, and components of ATP-dependent remodeling enzymes like Brg1, Baf60c, and 
Baf180. Binding of these TFs to their respective sites at cardiac genes coincides
with a distinct pattern of histone marks, indicating that the precise regulation 
of cardiac gene networks is orchestrated by interactions between TFs and
epigenetic modifiers. Furthermore, we speculate that an epigenetic signature,
comprised of TF occupancy, histone modifications, and overall chromatin
organization, is an underlying mechanism that governs cardiac morphogenesis and
disease.

PMCID: PMC3244653
PMID: 22194017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Syndromol. 2011 Sep;1(6):307-310. Epub 2011 Aug 3.

A Boy with Holt-Oram Syndrome Caused by Novel Mutation c.1304delT in the TBX5
Gene.

Muru K(1), Kalev I, Teek R, Sõnajalg M, Kuuse K, Reimand T, Ounap K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu,
Estonia.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is an autosomal dominant developmental defect involving 
preaxial radial ray upper limb deformity and variable cardiac defects. It has
been demonstrated that HOS is caused by mutations in the T-box transcription
factor gene TBX5. Numerous germline mutations (more than 60) of this gene produce
preterminal stop codons, which lead to synthesis of a truncated nonfunctional
TBX5 protein. The haplo-insufficiency of the TBX5 gene is the most significant
cause of HOS. We report on a sporadic patient with clinical features of HOS. Our 
patient had a cardiac anomaly - a muscular ventricular and atrial septal defect, 
patent ductus arteriosus and a conduction defect (a first-step atrioventricular
block). Upper limb anomalies in our patient were relatively mild and unusual to
HOS - distally displaced thumbs, narrow shoulders and hypotrophy of the muscles
in the shoulder region. Molecular analysis identified a novel and unusual
heterozygous frameshift mutation - c.1304delT (p.Leu435fsX146) - in exon 9 of the
TBX5 gene, which is predicted to cause an elongated TBX5 protein with 84
miscoding amino acids and 62 supernumerary C-terminal amino acids. To the best of
our knowledge, only one such type of elongation mutation has thus far been
reported in the TBX5 gene.

PMCID: PMC3214961
PMID: 22190901  [PubMed]


234. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012 Jan;95(1):231-40. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.111.022749. Epub 2011
Dec 14.

Interactions of single nucleotide polymorphisms with dietary calcium intake on
the risk of metabolic syndrome.

Kim K(1), Yang YJ, Kim K, Kim MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Hanyang University, College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Gene-nutrient interactions may be important in modulating
susceptibility to metabolic disorders.
OBJECTIVES: The objectives of this study were to assess the association of
dietary calcium intake with the risk of metabolic syndrome and to investigate the
interaction effects between dietary calcium intake and candidate gene
polymorphisms.
DESIGN: Subjects were participants in the Korea Association Resource project,
which was initiated in 2007 as a large-scale, genomewide association analysis. A 
total of 8031 subjects were included in the study. Associations were assessed by 
using multivariable-adjusted logistic regression analyses.
RESULTS: High calcium intake appeared to be associated with a low risk of
metabolic syndrome after covariates in both men (P-trend = 0.03) and women
(P-trend = 0.0002) were controlled for. Among 27 single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) selected as possible candidate gene polymorphisms affecting the risk of
metabolic syndrome, 3 SNPs [rs6445834 in Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 3
(ARHGEF3), rs10850335 in T-box 5 (TBX5), rs180349 in BUD13 homolog (Saccaromyces 
cerevisiae) (BUD13)] showed significant interaction effects with calcium intake
tertiles or sufficiency in both men and women. Subjects with major allele
homozygotes of these gene polymorphisms and high calcium intakes generally had a 
lower risk of metabolic syndrome than did those with minor allele homozygotes and
low calcium intakes.
CONCLUSION: Dietary calcium intake appears to be inversely associated with the
risk of metabolic syndrome and may modulate susceptibility to the syndrome in
subjects who are minor allele carriers of rs6445834 in ARHGEF3, rs10850335 in
TBX5, or rs180349 in BUD13.

PMID: 22170361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Mar 20;21(5):814-28. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0551. Epub 2012
Jan 17.

Positional identity of murine mesenchymal stem cells resident in different organs
is determined in the postsegmentation mesoderm.

Sági B(1), Maraghechi P, Urbán VS, Hegyi B, Szigeti A, Fajka-Boja R, Kudlik G,
Német K, Monostori E, Gócza E, Uher F.

Author information: 
(1)National Blood Service, Stem Cell Biology Unit, Budapest, Hungary.

Although mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) of distinct tissue origin have a large
number of similarities and differences, it has not been determined so far whether
tissue-resident MSCs are the progenies of one ancestor cell lineage or the
results of parallel cell developmental events. Here we compared the expression
levels of 177 genes in murine MSCs derived from adult and juvenile bone marrow
and adult adipose tissue, as well as juvenile spleen, thymus, and aorta wall by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and the results were partially
validated at protein level. All MSC lines uniformly expressed a large set of
genes including well-known mesenchymal markers, such as a-smooth muscle actin,
collagen type I a-chain, GATA6, Mohawk, and vimentin. In contrast, pluripotency
genes and the early mesodermal marker T-gene were not expressed. On the other
hand, different MSC lines consistently expressed distinct patterns of Hox genes
determining the positional identity of a given cell population. Moreover, MSCs of
different origin expressed a few other transcription factors also reflecting
their topological identity and so the body segment or organ to which they
normally contributed in vivo: (1) thymus-derived cells specifically expressed
Tbx5 and Pitx2; (2) spleen-derived MSCs were characterized with Tlx1 and Nkx2.5; 
(3) Pitx1 designated femoral bone marrow cells and (4) En2 appeared in aorta
wall-derived MSCs. Thus, MSCs exhibited topographic identity and memory even
after long-term cultivation in vitro. On the basis of these results, we suggest
that postnatal MSCs isolated from different anatomical sites descend from
precursor cells developing in the postsegmentation mesoderm.

PMID: 22149974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2011 Aug;27(8):1206-14.

[Differentiation of porcine amniotic fluid stem cells into the beating
cardiomyocytes].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen J(1), Wei Y, Peng S, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Shaanxi Center for Stem Cell Engineering and Technology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100, China.

The aim of this research is to find an effective cardiomyocyte-induced method
derived from porcine amniotic fluid stem cells (pAFS). For cardiac
differentiation, the cells were formed embryoid bodies (EBs) firstly, then
cultured in induced-medium including 5-azacytidine (5-aza) and vitamin C (Vc). We
detected the specific markers of cardiomyocyte by immunocytochemistry, RT-PCR and
transmission electron microscope. The results showed that some embryoid bodies
beat rhythmically after 10 days of induction. Furthermore, analysis of t test
revealed that the percentage of beating cardiomyocyte-like cell clusters was
highest (33%) when induction using 0.1 mmol/L Vc and 5 micromol/L 5-aza.
Immunocytochemistry analysis demonstrated that cardiomyocyte-like cell clusters
expressed alpha-actin, Tnni3. RT-PCR analysis also illustrated that TbX5, Gata4, 
alpha-MHC and Tnni3 were expressed positive in cardiomyocyte-like cell clusters. 
Especially, we observed basic structures of myocardium, such as myofilament,
glycogen granule and so on by transmission electron microscope. In conclusion,
5-azacytidine and vitamin C could promote differentiation of pAFS into
myocardium.

PMID: 22097810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Dev Dyn. 2011 Dec;240(12):2634-45. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22776.

Tbx5 overexpression favors a first heart field lineage in murine embryonic stem
cells and in Xenopus laevis embryos.

Herrmann F(1), Bundschu K, Kühl SJ, Kühl M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ulm University,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, Ulm, Germany

The T-box transcription factor Tbx5 is involved in several developmental
processes including cardiogenesis. Early steps of cardiac development are
characterised by the formation of two cardiogenic lineages, the first (FHF) and
the second heart field (SHF) lineage, which arise from a common cardiac
progenitor cell population. To further investigate the function of Tbx5 during
cardiogenesis, we generated a murine embryonic stem cell line constitutively
overexpressing Tbx5. Differentiation of these cells is characterised by an
earlier and increased appearance of contracting cardiomyocytes that beat with a
higher frequency than control cells. In semi-quantitative and quantitative RT-PCR
analyses, we observed an up-regulation of cardiac marker genes such as Troponin
T, endogenous Tbx5, and Nkx2.5 and a down-regulation of others like BMP4 and
Hand2. Similar data were gained in Xenopus laevis arguing for a conserved
function of Tbx5. Furthermore, markers of the conduction system and atrial
cardiomyocytes were increased.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22072574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Congenit Heart Dis. 2012 Mar-Apr;7(2):151-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1747-0803.2011.00573.x. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Combined mutation screening of NKX2-5, GATA4, and TBX5 in congenital heart
disease: multiple heterozygosity and novel mutations.

Granados-Riveron JT(1), Pope M, Bu'lock FA, Thornborough C, Eason J, Setchfield
K, Ketley A, Kirk EP, Fatkin D, Feneley MP, Harvey RP, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, School of Biology, University of Nottingham, Queen's
Medical Centre, Nottingham, UK.

Background.  Variants of several genes encoding transcription modulators, signal 
transduction, and structural proteins are known to cause Mendelian congenital
heart disease (CHD). NKX2-5 and GATA4 were the first CHD-causing genes identified
by linkage analysis in large affected families. Mutations of TBX5 cause Holt-Oram
syndrome, which includes CHD as a clinical feature. All three genes have a
well-established role in cardiac development. Design.  In order to investigate
the possible role of multiple mutations in CHD, a combined mutation screening was
performed in NKX2-5, GATA4, and TBX5 in the same patient cohort. Samples from a
cohort of 331 CHD patients were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction, double
high-performance liquid chromatography and sequencing in order to identify
changes in the NKX2-5, GATA4, and TBX5 genes. Results.  Two cases of multiple
heterozygosity of putative disease-causing mutations were identified. One patient
was found with a novel L122P NKX2-5 mutation in combination with the private
A1443D mutation of MYH6. A patient heterozygote for a D425N GATA4 mutation
carries also a private mutation of the MYH6 gene (V700M). Conclusions.  In
addition to reporting two novel mutations of NKX2-5 in CHD, we describe families 
where multiple individual mutations seem to have an additive effect over the
pathogenesis of CHD. Our findings highlight the usefulness of multiple gene
mutational analysis of large CHD cohorts.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3370385
PMID: 22011241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Dev Dyn. 2012 Jan;241(1):190-9. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22763. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

Transactivation in Drosophila of human enhancers by human transcription factors
involved in congenital heart diseases.

Amodio V(1), Tevy MF, Traina C, Ghosh TK, Capovilla M.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute, Department of Biology and Evolution, University
of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The human transcription factors (TFs) GATA4, NKX2.5 and TBX5 form
part of the core network necessary to build a human heart and are involved in
Congenital Heart Diseases (CHDs). The human natriuretic peptide precursor A
(NPPA) and a-myosin heavy chain 6 (MYH6) genes are downstream effectors involved 
in cardiogenesis that have been demonstrated to be in vitro targets of such TFs.
RESULTS: To study the interactions between these human TFs and their target
enhancers in vivo, we overexpressed them in the whole Drosophila cardiac tube
using the UAS/GAL4 system. We observed that all three TFs up-regulate their
natural target enhancers in Drosophila and cause developmental defects when
overexpressed in eyes and wings.
CONCLUSIONS: A strong potential of the present model might be the development of 
combinatorial and mutational assays to study the interactions between human TFs
and their natural target promoters, which are not easily undertaken in tissue
culture cells because of the variability in transfection efficiency, especially
when multiple constructs are used. Thus, this novel system could be used to
determine in vivo the genetic nature of the human mutant forms of these TFs,
setting up a powerful tool to unravel the molecular genetic mechanisms that lead 
to CHDs.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3326377
PMID: 21990232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Biomed Sci. 2011 Oct 8;18:73. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-18-73.

Induction of apoptosis and inhibition of cell growth by tbx5 knockdown contribute
to dysmorphogenesis in Zebrafish embryos.

Lu J(1), Tsai T, Choo S, Yeh S, Tang R, Yang A, Lee H, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pathology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. jenherlu@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The tbx5 mutation in human causes Holt-Oram syndrome, an autosomal
dominant condition characterized by a familial history of congenital heart
defects and preaxial radial upper-limb defects. We report aberrant apoptosis and 
dormant cell growth over head, heart, trunk, fin, and tail of zebrafish embryos
with tbx5 deficiency correspond to the dysmorphogenesis of tbx5 morphants.
METHODS: Wild-type zebrafish embryos at the 1-cell stage were injected with 4.3
nl of 19.4 ng of tbx5 morpholino or mismatch-tbx5-MO respectively in tbx5
morphants and mismatched control group. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR was used to for 
expression analysis of apoptosis and cell cycle-related genes. TUNEL and
immunohistochemical assay showed the apoptosis spots within the local tissues.
Ultra-structure of cardiac myocardium was examined by transmission electron
microscope.
RESULTS: Apoptosis-related genes (bad, bax, and bcl2), and cell cycle-related
genes (cdk2, pcna, p27, and p57) showed remarkable increases in transcriptional
level by RT-PCR. Using a TUNEL and immnuohistochemical assay, apoptosis was
observed in the organs including the head, heart, pectoral fins, trunk, and tail 
of tbx5 knockdown embryos. Under transmission electron microscopic examination,
mitochondria in cardiomyocytes became swollen and the myocardium was largely
disorganized with a disarrayed appearance, compatible with reduced enhancement of
myosin in the cardiac wall. The ATP level was reduced, and the ADP/ATP ratio as
an apoptotic index significantly increased in the tbx5 deficient embryos.
CONCLUSION: Our study highlighted that tbx5 deficiency evoked apoptosis,
distributed on multiple organs corresponding to dysmorphogenesis with the
shortage of promising maturation, in tbx5 knockdown zebrafish embryos. We
hypothesized that mesenchymal cell apoptosis associated with altered TBX5 level
may subsequently interfered with organogenesis and contributed to
dysmorphogenesis in tbx5 deficiency zebrafish embryos.

PMCID: PMC3199240
PMID: 21982178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Atherosclerosis. 2011 Dec;219(2):709-14. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2011.09.006. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

Genetic variations in CYP17A1, CACNB2 and PLEKHA7 are associated with blood
pressure and/or hypertension in She ethnic minority of China.

Lin Y(1), Lai X, Chen B, Xu Y, Huang B, Chen Z, Zhu S, Yao J, Jiang Q, Huang H,
Wen J, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Ningde Municipal Hospital, Ningde 352100, China.

OBJECTIVES: Two large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWAs) have
identified multiple variants associated with blood pressure (BP) or hypertension.
The present study was to investigate whether some variations were associated with
BP traits and hypertension or even prehypertension in adult She ethnic minority
of China.
METHODS: The population of the present study comprised 4460 (1979 males and 2481 
females, respectively) unrelated she ethnic minority based on a cross-sectional
study from Ningde City in Fujian province of China. There were 1692
hypertensives, 1600 prehypertensives and 1168 normotensive controls,
respectively. We genotyped 7 variants in CYP17A1, PLEKHA7, CACNB2, ATP2B1,
TBX3-TBX5, CSK-ULK3 and SH2B3 reported by the previous GWAs on Europeans. All
analyses were performed in an additive genetic model.
RESULTS: As the minor allele of rs653178 in/near SH2B3 was very rare with the
frequency of 0.018, we excluded this single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the 
further analyses. Of the other 6 loci, linear regression analyses revealed that
rs11191548 in CYP17A1 and rs11014166 in CACNB2 were significantly associated with
systolic BP (ß = -1.17, P = 0.002 and ß = -0.50, P = 0.006, respectively), while 
only SNP rs11191548 was significantly associated with diastolic BP (ß = -0.56,
P=0.002) after adjusted by age, sex and BMI. Two variants in CACNB2 and PLEKHA7
were found to be significantly related to hypertension (odds ratios [OR] and (95%
confidence interval [CI]): 0.79 (0.65-0.97) and 1.19 (1.01-1.41), respectively)
in logistic regression analyses after adjusted by age, sex and BMI. In addition, 
we found that combined risk alleles of the 6 SNPs increased risk of hypertension 
in a stepwise fashion (P for trend < 0.001). However, none of the 6 SNPs was
significantly associated with BMI or prehypertension status. While logistic
analysis showed that subjects with cumulative risk alleles more than 9 had
significantly higher risk for prehypertension (adjusted OR: 3.10, P < 0.001)
compared with those with risk alleles less than 4.
CONCLUSIONS: We replicated that variations in CYP17A1, CACNB2 and PLEKHA7 were
related to BP traits and/or hypertension in She population. In addition, although
we failed to observe single gene associated with prehypertension, we first found 
that conjoint effect of multiple risk alleles on BP might increase the risk of
progressing to prehypertension.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21963141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e24242. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024242. Epub 2011 Aug 29.

Synergistic activation of cardiac genes by myocardin and Tbx5.

Wang C(1), Cao D, Wang Q, Wang DZ.

Author information: 
(1)UNC McAllister Heart Institute, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, United States of America.

Myocardial differentiation is associated with the activation and expression of an
array of cardiac specific genes. However, the transcriptional networks that
control cardiac gene expression are not completely understood. Myocardin is a
cardiac and smooth muscle-specific expressed transcriptional coactivator of Serum
Response Factor (SRF) and is able to potently activate cardiac and smooth muscle 
gene expression during development. We hypothesize that myocardin discriminates
between cardiac and smooth muscle specific genes by associating with distinct
co-factors. Here, we show that myocardin directly interacts with Tbx5, a member
of the T-box family of transcription factors involved in the Holt-Oram syndrome. 
Tbx5 synergizes with myocardin to activate expression of the cardiac specific
genes atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) and alpha myosin heavy chain (a-MHC), but
not that of smooth muscle specific genes SM22 or smooth muscle myosin heavy chain
(SM-MHC). We found that this synergistic activation of shared target genes is
dependent on the binding sites for Tbx5, T-box factor-Binding Elements (TBEs).
Myocardin and Tbx5 physically interact and their interaction domains were mapped 
to the basic domain and the coil domain of myocardin and Tbx5, respectively. Our 
analysis demonstrates that the Tbx5G80R mutation, which leads to the Holt-Oram
syndrome in humans, failed to synergize with myocardin to activate cardiac gene
expression. These data uncover a key role for Tbx5 and myocardin in establishing 
the transcriptional foundation for cardiac gene activation and suggest that the
interaction of myocardin and Tbx5 maybe involved in cardiac development and
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3163680
PMID: 21897873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Sep 9;412(4):513-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.08.010. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Alternative splicing of T-box transcription factor genes.

DeBenedittis P(1), Jiao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

T-box (TBX) transcription factors are an ancient gene family with critical roles 
in embryogenesis. Currently, TBX3, TBX5, and TBX20 are TBX genes defined to have 
multiple protein isoforms created by alternative splicing and characterized by
expression and functional studies. These proteins are important for development
as mutations lead to severe developmental disorders in humans and mice.
Cumulative studies suggest that alternative splicing of these genes can regulate 
TBX activities during multiple biological processes including cardiogenesis, limb
development, and cancer mechanisms. This mini-review focuses on how alternative
splicing adds complexity to transcriptional regulation of target genes controlled
by TBX transcription factors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3171624
PMID: 21856288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011 Oct;301(4):H1531-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00216.2011. Epub 2011 Jul 29.

LEOPARD-type SHP2 mutant Gln510Glu attenuates cardiomyocyte differentiation and
promotes cardiac hypertrophy via dysregulation of Akt/GSK-3ß/ß-catenin signaling.

Ishida H(1), Kogaki S, Narita J, Ichimori H, Nawa N, Okada Y, Takahashi K, Ozono 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka,
Japan.

LEOPARD syndrome (LS) is an autosomal dominant inherited multisystemic disorder. 
Most cases involve mutations in the PTPN11 gene, which encodes the protein
tyrosine phosphatase Src homology 2-containing protein phosphatase 2 (SHP2). LS
frequently causes severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), even from the fetal
period. However, the molecular pathogenesis has not been clearly elucidated.
Here, we analyzed the roles of the LS-type SHP2 mutant Gln510Glu (Q510E), which
showed the most severe type of HCM in LS, in cardiomyocyte differentiation, and
in morphological changes. We generated mutant P19CL6 cell lines, the most
convenient cardiomyocyte differentiation model, which continuously expressed
SHP2-Q510E, SHP2-D61N (Noonan-type mutant), wild-type SHP2, and green fluorescent
protein (native SHP2 expression only). SHP2-Q510E mutant P19CL6 cells showed
significant attenuation of myofibrillogenesis, with increased proliferative
activity. Mature cardiomyocytes from the SHP2-Q510E mutant were significantly
larger than those of controls and the other mutants. However, expression of
cardiac-specific transcriptional factors (Gata4, Tbx5, and Nkx2.5) did not differ
significantly between the LS-type SHP2-Q510E mutants and the other mutants and
controls. Our results indicate that SHP2-Q510E mutants can differentiate into
cardiac progenitors but are inhibited from undergoing terminal differentiation
into mature cardiomyocytes. In contrast, Akt and glycogen synthase kinase
(GSK)-3ß phosphorylation were upregulated, and nuclear ß-catenin at the late
stage of differentiation was highly accumulated in SHP2-Q510E mutant P19CL6
cells. Supplementation with the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt inhibitor LY-294002
during the late stage of differentiation was found to partially restore
myofibrillogenesis while suppressing the increase in size of individual mature
cardiomyocytes derived from the SHP2-Q510E mutants. Our findings suggest that
dysregulation of the Akt/GSK-3ß/ß-catenin pathway can contribute to the
pathogenesis of HCM in LS patients, not only through hypertrophic changes in
individual cardiac cells but also via the expansion of cardiac progenitors.

PMID: 21803945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Rev Esp Cardiol. 2011 Dec;64(12):1225-6. doi: 10.1016/j.recesp.2011.02.016. Epub 
2011 Jul 12.

[Holt-Oram syndrome: family affected without TBX5 mutation and without phenotype 
manifestations in a probable mutation carrier].

[Article in Spanish]

Murga-Eizagaechevarria N, Garcia-Barcina M, Sarasola Diez E.

PMID: 21752519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Dev Biol. 2011 Sep 1;357(1):108-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.06.031. Epub 2011
Jun 29.

Cellular and molecular investigations into the development of the pectoral
girdle.

Valasek P(1), Theis S, DeLaurier A, Hinits Y, Luke GN, Otto AM, Minchin J, He L, 
Christ B, Brooks G, Sang H, Evans DJ, Logan M, Huang R, Patel K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Institute for Cardiovascular and Metabolic
Research, University of Reading, UK. valasekpetr@hotmail.com

The forelimbs of higher vertebrates are composed of two portions: the
appendicular region (stylopod, zeugopod and autopod) and the less prominent
proximal girdle elements (scapula and clavicle) that brace the limb to the main
trunk axis. We show that the formation of the muscles of the proximal limb occurs
through two distinct mechanisms. The more superficial girdle muscles (pectoral
and latissimus dorsi) develop by the "In-Out" mechanism whereby migration of
myogenic cells from the somites into the limb bud is followed by their extension 
from the proximal limb bud out onto the thorax. In contrast, the deeper girdle
muscles (e.g. rhomboideus profundus and serratus anterior) are induced by the
forelimb field which promotes myotomal extension directly from the somites. Tbx5 
inactivation demonstrated its requirement for the development of all forelimb
elements which include the skeletal elements, proximal and distal muscles as well
as the sternum in mammals and the cleithrum of fish. Intriguingly, the formation 
of the diaphragm musculature is also dependent on the Tbx5 programme. These
observations challenge our classical views of the boundary between limb and trunk
tissues. We suggest that significant structures located in the body should be
considered as components of the forelimb.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21741963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Development. 2011 Aug;138(15):3113-23. doi: 10.1242/dev.064279. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Smarcd3b and Gata5 promote a cardiac progenitor fate in the zebrafish embryo.

Lou X(1), Deshwar AR, Crump JG, Scott IC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Development and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada.

Development of the heart requires recruitment of cardiovascular progenitor cells 
(CPCs) to the future heart-forming region. CPCs are the building blocks of the
heart, and have the potential to form all the major cardiac lineages. However,
little is known regarding what regulates CPC fate and behavior. Activity of
GATA4, SMARCD3 and TBX5 - the `cardiac BAF' (cBAF) complex, can promote
myocardial differentiation in embryonic mouse mesoderm. Here, we exploit the
advantages of the zebrafish embryo to gain mechanistic understanding of cBAF
activity. Overexpression of smarcd3b and gata5 in zebrafish results in an
enlarged heart, whereas combinatorial loss of cBAF components inhibits cardiac
differentiation. In transplantation experiments, cBAF acts cell autonomously to
promote cardiac fate. Remarkably, cells overexpressing cBAF migrate to the
developing heart and differentiate as cardiomyocytes, endocardium and smooth
muscle. This is observed even in host embryos that lack endoderm or cardiac
mesoderm. Our results reveal an evolutionarily conserved role for cBAF activity
in cardiac differentiation. Importantly, they demonstrate that Smarcd3b and Gata5
can induce a primitive, CPC-like state.

PMID: 21715426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Mol Ther. 2011 Sep;19(9):1695-703. doi: 10.1038/mt.2011.125. Epub 2011 Jun 21.

Directed differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to interrogate the cardiac
gene regulatory network.

Dixon JE(1), Dick E, Rajamohan D, Shakesheff KM, Denning C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Wolfson Centre for Stem Cells, Tissue Engineering, and
Modelling, Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, UK.

Comment in
    Mol Ther. 2011 Sep;19(9):1576-8.

The limited ability of the heart to regenerate has prompted development of new
systems to produce cardiomyocytes for therapeutics. While differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) into cardiomyocytes has been well documented, 
the process remains inefficient and/or expensive, and progress would be
facilitated by better understanding the early genetic events that cause cardiac
specification. By maintaining a transgenic cardiac-specific MYH6-monomeric red
fluorescent protein (mRFP) reporter hESC line in conditions that promote
pluripotency, we tested the ability of combinations of 15 genes to induce cardiac
specification. Screening identified GATA4 plus TBX5 as the minimum requirement to
activate the cardiac gene regulatory network and produce mRFP(+) cells, while a
combination of GATA4, TBX5, NKX2.5, and BAF60c (GTNB) was necessary to generate
beating cardiomyocytes positive for cTnI and a-actinin. Including the
chemotherapeutic agent, Ara-C, from day 10 of induced differentiation enriched
for cTnI/a-actinin double positive cells to 45%. Transient expression of GTNB for
5-7 days was necessary to activate the cardiogenesis through progenitor
intermediates in a manner consistent with normal heart development. This system
provides a route to test the effect of different factors on human cardiac
differentiation and will be useful in understanding the network failures that
underlie disease phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3182351
PMID: 21694703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jul 1;410(2):183-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.05.011. Epub 2011 May 7.

A novel Fbxo25 acts as an E3 ligase for destructing cardiac specific
transcription factors.

Jang JW(1), Lee WY, Lee JH, Moon SH, Kim CH, Chung HM.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Laboratory, Department of Developmental Biology, CHA
University, Seoul 135-907, Republic of Korea.

Alterations in ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) have been implicated in the
etiology of human cardiovascular diseases. Skp1/Cul1/F-box (SCF) ubiquitin E3
ligase complex plays a pivotal role in ubiquitination of cardiac proteins.
However, a specific ubiquitin E3 ligase responsible for the destruction of
cardiac transcription factors such as Nkx2-5, Isl1, Mef2C, and Tbx5 remains
elusive to date. Here, we show that a novel F-box containing Fbxo25 is
cardiac-specific and acts as an ubiquitin E3 ligase for cardiac transcription
factors. Fbxo25 expression was nuclei-specific in vitro and cardiomyocytes.
Expression level of Fbxo25 was higher in a fetal heart than an adult. Moreover,
Fbxo25 expression was increased along with those of cardiac-specific genes during
cardiomyocyte development from ESCs. Fbxo25 expression facilitated protein
degradation of Nkx2-5, Isl1, Hand1, and Mef2C. Especially, Fbxo25 ubiquitinated
Nkx2-5, Isl1, and Hand1. Altogether, Fbxo25 acts as an ubiquitin E3 ligase to
target cardiac transcription factors including Nkx2-5, Isl1, and Hand1,
indicating that cardiac protein homeostasis through Fbxo25 has a pivotal impact
on cardiac development.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21596019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Dev Dyn. 2011 May;240(5):1116-26. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22461. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Zebrafish limb development is triggered by a retinoic acid signal during
gastrulation.

Grandel H(1), Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Center and Center for Regenerative Therapies, University of
Technology, Dresden.

Studies in mouse and zebrafish show that vertebrate forelimb development is
initiated by retinoic acid (RA). An RA signal leads to transcription of tbx5 in
forelimb precursors which is necessary and sufficient for limb development.
However, the timing of the RA signaling event has remained controversial as have 
source tissue and tissue interactions. We have thus determined the contribution
of RA to zebrafish pectoral fin development at different developmental stages.
Specifically, an early gastrula stage RA signal triggers the process that leads
to determination of tbx5-expressing limb precursors, while a later somitogenesis 
stage RA signal maintains these precursors. Preceding the lack of tbx5-expressing
limb precursors in RA deficient zebrafish embryos, aldh1a2 and cyp26a1 expression
domains are distorted along the gastrula margin suggesting that positional values
in the ventrolateral mesodermal anlagen are affected. We propose that limb
precursor determination requires RA dependent specification of lateral plate
territories during gastrulation.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21509893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Jul 15;91(2):212-22. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr112. Epub 2011 Apr 
14.

Mechanisms of T-box gene function in the developing heart.

Greulich F(1), Rudat C, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, OE5250, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

The multi-chambered mammalian heart arises from a simple tube by polar
elongation, myocardial differentiation and morphogenesis. Members of the large
family of T-box (Tbx) transcription factors have been identified as crucial
players that act in distinct subprogrammes during cardiac regionalization. Tbx1
and Tbx18 ensure elongation of the cardiac tube at the anterior and posterior
pole, respectively. Tbx1 acts in the pharyngeal mesoderm to maintain
proliferation of mesenchymal precursor cells for formation of a myocardialized
and septated outflow tract. Tbx18 is expressed in the sinus venosus region and is
required for myocardialization of the caval veins and the sinoatrial node. Tbx5
and Tbx20 function in the early heart tube and independently activate the chamber
myocardial gene programme, whereas Tbx2 and Tbx3 locally repress this programme
to favour valvuloseptal and conduction system development. Here, we summarize
that these T-box factors act in different molecular circuits and control target
gene expression using diverse molecular strategies including binding to distinct 
protein interaction partners.

PMID: 21498422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Apr 5;108(14):5632-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1016959108. Epub 2011 Mar 17.

Co-occupancy by multiple cardiac transcription factors identifies transcriptional
enhancers active in heart.

He A(1), Kong SW, Ma Q, Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Children's Hospital Informatics Program,
Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Identification of genomic regions that control tissue-specific gene expression is
currently problematic. ChIP and high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) of
enhancer-associated proteins such as p300 identifies some but not all enhancers
active in a tissue. Here we show that co-occupancy of a chromatin region by
multiple transcription factors (TFs) identifies a distinct set of enhancers.
GATA-binding protein 4 (GATA4), NK2 transcription factor-related, locus 5
(NKX2-5), T-box 5 (TBX5), serum response factor (SRF), and myocyte-enhancer
factor 2A (MEF2A), here referred to as "cardiac TFs," have been hypothesized to
collaborate to direct cardiac gene expression. Using a modified ChIP-seq
procedure, we defined chromatin occupancy by these TFs and p300 genome wide and
provided unbiased support for this hypothesis. We used this principle to show
that co-occupancy of a chromatin region by multiple TFs can be used to identify
cardiac enhancers. Of 13 such regions tested in transient transgenic embryos,
seven (54%) drove cardiac gene expression. Among these regions were three
cardiac-specific enhancers of Gata4, Srf, and swItch/sucrose
nonfermentable-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of
chromatin, subfamily d, member 3 (Smarcd3), an epigenetic regulator of cardiac
gene expression. Multiple cardiac TFs and p300-bound regions were associated with
cardiac-enriched genes and with functional annotations related to heart
development. Importantly, the large majority (1,375/1,715) of loci bound by
multiple cardiac TFs did not overlap loci bound by p300. Our data identify
thousands of prospective cardiac regulatory sequences and indicate that multiple 
TF co-occupancy of a genomic region identifies developmentally relevant enhancers
that are largely distinct from p300-associated enhancers.

PMCID: PMC3078411
PMID: 21415370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Cells Tissues Organs. 2011;194(5):349-62. doi: 10.1159/000323533. Epub 2011 Mar
9.

Pitx2c modulates cardiac-specific transcription factors networks in
differentiating cardiomyocytes from murine embryonic stem cells.

Lozano-Velasco E(1), Chinchilla A, Martínez-Fernández S, Hernández-Torres F,
Navarro F, Lyons GE, Franco D, Aránega AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Biology, University of Jaén, Jaén, Spain.

AIM: The knowledge of the molecular signals that control cell differentiation
into cardiomyocytes is critical to apply cell-based therapies and repair an
injured heart. The transcription factor Pitx2 has essential roles in the
development of different organs including the heart. Although a direct role of
Pitx2 in the developing myocardium has recently been reported, the molecular
pathways driven by Pitx2 as well as its cardiac target genes remain largely
unexplored. The aim of this study was to unravel the molecular mechanisms driven 
by Pitx2 during the process of cardiomyocyte differentiation in vitro in mouse
embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Pitx2c was overexpressed in the R1-embryonic stem cell line.
mRNA levels and protein distribution of several specific cardiac genes were
analyzed by real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry experiments in R1-embryonic
stem cell-derived beating areas at different stages of in vitro differentiation. 
Our results show that overexpression of Pitx2c in embryonic stem cell-derived
cardiomyocytes is able to dynamically upregulate several cardiac-enriched
transcription factors such as Isl1, Mef2c and Gata4. Additionally, Pitx2c induces
the expression of chamber-specific cardiac genes such as Tbx5, Nppa and Cx40.
These data were validated in an in vivo model of Pitx2 loss of function.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results demonstrate that Pitx2 plays a major
role reinforcing the transcriptional program of cardiac differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21389672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Jun 1;20(11):2273-84. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr092. Epub 2011 Mar 
4.

Association of genetic variation with systolic and diastolic blood pressure among
African Americans: the Candidate Gene Association Resource study.

Fox ER(1), Young JH, Li Y, Dreisbach AW, Keating BJ, Musani SK, Liu K, Morrison
AC, Ganesh S, Kutlar A, Ramachandran VS, Polak JF, Fabsitz RR, Dries DL, Farlow
DN, Redline S, Adeyemo A, Hirschorn JN, Sun YV, Wyatt SB, Penman AD, Palmas W,
Rotter JI, Townsend RR, Doumatey AP, Tayo BO, Mosley TH Jr, Lyon HN, Kang SJ,
Rotimi CN, Cooper RS, Franceschini N, Curb JD, Martin LW, Eaton CB, Kardia SL,
Taylor HA, Caulfield MJ, Ehret GB, Johnson T; International Consortium for Blood 
Pressure Genome-wide Association Studies (ICBP-GWAS), Chakravarti A, Zhu X, Levy 
D.

Collaborators: Munroe PB, Rice KM, Bochud M, Johnson AD, Chasman DI, Smith AV,
Tobin MD, Verwoert GC, Hwang SJ, Pihur V, Vollenweider P, O'Reilly PF, Amin N,
Bragg-Gresham JL, Teumer A, Glazer NL, Launer L, Zhao JH, Aulchenko Y, Heath S,
Sõber S, Parsa A, Luan J, Arora P, Dehghan A, Zhang F, Lucas G, Hicks AA, Jackson
AU, Peden JF, Tanaka T, Wild SH, Rudan I, Igl W, Milaneschi Y, Parker AN, Fava C,
Chambers JC, Kumari M, Go MJ, van der Harst P, Kao WH, Sjögren M, Vinay DG,
Alexander M, Tabara Y, Shaw-Hawkins S, Whincup PH, Liu Y, Shi G, Kuusisto J,
Seielstad M, Sim X, Nguyen KD, Lehtimäki T, Matullo G, Wu Y, Gaunt T,
Onland-Moret NC, Cooper MN, Platou CG, Org E, Hardy R, Dahgam S, Palmen J, Vitart
V, Braund P, Kuznetsova T, Uiterwaal CS, Campbell H, Ludwig B, Tomaszewski M,
Tzoulaki I, Palmer ND, CARDIoGRAM consortium, CKDGen consortium, KidneyGen
consortium, EchoGen consortium, CHARGE-HF consortium, Aspelund T, Garcia M, Chang
YP, O'Connell JR, Steinle NI, Grobbee DE, Arking DE, Hernandez D, Najjar S,
McArdle WL, Hadley D, Brown MJ, Connell JM, Hingorani AD, Day IN, Lawlor DA,
Beilby JP, Lawrence RW, Clarke R, Collins R, Hopewell JC, Ongen H, Bis JC,
Kähönen M, Viikari J, Adair LS, Lee NR, Chen MH, Olden M, Pattaro C, Hoffman
Bolton JA, Köttgen A, Bergmann S, Mooser V, Chaturvedi N, Frayling TM, Islam M,
Jafar TH, Erdmann J, Kulkarni SR, Bornstein SR, Grässler J, Groop L, Voight BF,
Kettunen J, Howard P, Taylor A, Guarrera S, Ricceri F, Emilsson V, Plump A,
Barroso I, Khaw KT, Weder AB, Hunt SC, Bergman RN, Collins FS, Bonnycastle LL,
Scott LJ, Stringham HM, Peltonen L, Perola M, Vartiainen E, Brand SM, Staessen
JA, Wang TJ, Burton PR, Soler Artigas M, Dong Y, Snieder H, Wang X, Zhu H, Lohman
KK, Rudock ME, Heckbert SR, Smith NL, Wiggins KL, Shriner D, Veldre G, Viigimaa
M, Kinra S, Prabhakaran D, Tripathy V, Langefeld CD, Rosengren A, Thelle DS,
Corsi AM, Singleton A, Forrester T, Hilton G, McKenzie CA, Salako T, Iwai N, Kita
Y, Ogihara T, Ohkubo T, Okamura T, Ueshima H, Umemura S, Eyheramendy S, Meitinger
T, Wichmann HE, Cho YS, Kim HL, Lee JY, Scott J, Sehmi J, Zhang W, Hedblad B,
Nilsson P, Smith GD, Wong A, Narisu N, Stancáková A, Raffel LJ, Yao J, Kathiresan
S, O'Donnell C, Schwartz SM, Ikram MA, Longstreth WT Jr, Seshadri S, Shrine NR,
Wain LV, Morken MA, Swift AJ, Laitinen J, Prokopenko I, Zitting P, Cooper JA,
Humphries S, Danesh J, Rasheed A, oel A, Hamsten A, Watkins H, Bakker SJ, van
Gilst WH, Janipalli CS, Mani KR, Yajnik CS, Hofman A, Mattace-Raso FU, Oostra BA,
Demirkan A, Isaacs A, Rivadeneira F, Lakatta EG, Orru M, Scuteri A, Ala-Korpela
M, Kangas AJ, Lyytikäinen LP, Soininen P, Tukiainen T, Würz P, Ong RT, Dörr M,
Kroemer HK, Völker U, Völzke H, Galan P, Hercberg S, Lathrop M, Zelenika D,
Deloukas P, Mangino M, Spector TD, Zhai G, Meschia JF, Nalls MA, Sharma P, Terzic
J, Kumar MJ, Denniff M, Zukowska-Szczechowska E, Wagenknecht LE, Fowkes FG,
Charchar FJ, Schwarz PE, Hayward C, Guo X, Bots ML, Brand E, Samani NJ, Polasek
O, Talmud PJ, Nyberg F, Kuh D, Laan M, Hveem K, Palmer LJ, van der Schouw YT,
Casas JP, Mohlke KL, Vineis P, Raitakari O, Wong TY, Tai ES, Laakso M, Rao DC,
Harris TB, Morris RW, Dominiczak AF, Kivimaki M, Marmot MG, Miki T, Saleheen D,
Chandak GR, Coresh J, Navis G, Salomaa V, Han BG, Kooner JS, Melander O, Ridker
PM, Bandinelli S, Gyllensten UB, Wright AF, Wilson JF, Ferrucci L, Farrall M,
Tuomilehto J, Pramstaller PP, Elosua R, Soranzo N, Sijbrands EJ, Altshuler D,
Loos RJ, Shuldiner AR, Gieger C, Meneton P, Uitterlinden AG, Wareham NJ, Gudnason
V, Rettig R, Uda M, Strachan DP, Witteman JC, Hartikainen AL, Beckmann JS,
Boerwinkle E, Boehnke M, Larson MG, Järvelin MR, Psaty BM, Abecasis GR, Elliott
P, van Duijn C, Newton-Cheh C.

The prevalence of hypertension in African Americans (AAs) is higher than in other
US groups; yet, few have performed genome-wide association studies (GWASs) in AA.
Among people of European descent, GWASs have identified genetic variants at 13
loci that are associated with blood pressure. It is unknown if these variants
confer susceptibility in people of African ancestry. Here, we examined
genome-wide and candidate gene associations with systolic blood pressure (SBP)
and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) using the Candidate Gene Association Resource 
(CARe) consortium consisting of 8591 AAs. Genotypes included genome-wide
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data utilizing the Affymetrix 6.0 array with
imputation to 2.5 million HapMap SNPs and candidate gene SNP data utilizing a 50K
cardiovascular gene-centric array (ITMAT-Broad-CARe [IBC] array). For Affymetrix 
data, the strongest signal for DBP was rs10474346 (P= 3.6 × 10(-8)) located near 
GPR98 and ARRDC3. For SBP, the strongest signal was rs2258119 in C21orf91 (P= 4.7
× 10(-8)). The top IBC association for SBP was rs2012318 (P= 6.4 × 10(-6)) near
SLC25A42 and for DBP was rs2523586 (P= 1.3 × 10(-6)) near HLA-B. None of the top 
variants replicated in additional AA (n = 11 882) or European-American (n = 69
899) cohorts. We replicated previously reported European-American blood pressure 
SNPs in our AA samples (SH2B3, P= 0.009; TBX3-TBX5, P= 0.03; and CSK-ULK3, P=
0.0004). These genetic loci represent the best evidence of genetic influences on 
SBP and DBP in AAs to date. More broadly, this work supports that notion that
blood pressure among AAs is a trait with genetic underpinnings but also with
significant complexity.

PMCID: PMC3090190
PMID: 21378095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Dev Dyn. 2011 May;240(5):1017-27. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22582. Epub 2011 Feb 28.

Regulation of limb bud initiation and limb-type morphology.

Duboc V(1), Logan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC-National Institute for Medical
Research, London, UK.

While the paired forelimb and hindlimb buds of vertebrates are initially
morphologically homogeneous, as the limb progenitors differentiate, each
individual tissue element attains a characteristic limb-type morphology that
ultimately defines the constitution of the forelimb or hindlimb. This review
focuses on contemporary understanding of the regulation of limb bud initiation
and formation of limb-type specific morphologies and how these regulatory
mechanisms evolved in vertebrates. We also attempt to clarify the definition of
the terms limb-type identity and limb-type morphology that have frequently been
used interchangeably. Over the last decade, three genes, Tbx4, Tbx5, and Pitx1,
have been extensively studied for their roles in limb initiation and determining 
limb-type morphologies. The role of Tbx4 and Tbx5 in limb initiation is clearly
established. However, their putative role in the generation of limb-type
morphologies remains controversial. In contrast, all evidence supports a function
for Pitx1 in determination of hindlimb morphologies.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21360788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Nov;20(11):1973-83. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0490. Epub 2011
Apr 3.

Canonical WNT signaling enhances stem cell expression in the developing heart
without a corresponding inhibition of cardiogenic differentiation.

Martin LK(1), Mezentseva NV, Bratoeva M, Ramsdell AF, Eisenberg CA, Eisenberg LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA.

WNT signaling has been shown to influence the development of the heart. Although 
recent data suggested that canonical WNTs promote the emergence and expansion of 
cardiac progenitors in the pregastrula embryo, it has long been accepted that
once gastrulation begins, canonical WNT signaling needs to be suppressed for
cardiac development to proceed. Yet, this latter supposition appears to be odds
with the expression of multiple canonical WNTs in the developing heart. The
present study examining the effect of ectopic canonical WNT signaling on
cardiogenesis in the developing frog was designed to test the hypothesis that
heart formation is dependent on the inhibition of canonical WNT activity at the
onset of gastrulation. Here we report that cardiac differentiation of explanted
precardiac tissue from the dorsal marginal zone was not suppressed by exposure to
WNT1 protein, although expression of Tbx5, Tbx20, and Nkx2.5 was selectively
reduced. Pharmacological activation of WNT signaling in intact embryos using the 
GSK3 inhibitor SB415286 did not prevent the formation of an anatomically normal
and functionally sound heart, with the only defect observed being lower levels of
the cardiac transcription factor Nkx2.5. In both the explant and whole embryo
studies, expression of muscle genes and proteins was unaffected by ectopic
canonical WNT signaling. In contrast, canonical Wnt signaling upregulated
expression of the cardiac stem cell marker c-kit and pluripotency genes Oct25 and
Oct60. However, this regulatory stimulation of stem cells did not come at the
expense of blocking cardiac progenitors from differentiating.

PMCID: PMC3202895
PMID: 21351874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. PLoS Genet. 2011 Feb 10;7(2):e1001304. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001304.

Genome-wide association studies of the PR interval in African Americans.

Smith JG(1), Magnani JW, Palmer C, Meng YA, Soliman EZ, Musani SK, Kerr KF,
Schnabel RB, Lubitz SA, Sotoodehnia N, Redline S, Pfeufer A, Müller M, Evans DS, 
Nalls MA, Liu Y, Newman AB, Zonderman AB, Evans MK, Deo R, Ellinor PT, Paltoo DN,
Newton-Cheh C, Benjamin EJ, Mehra R, Alonso A, Heckbert SR, Fox ER;
Candidate-gene Association Resource (CARe) Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. 
gustav.smith@med.lu.se

The PR interval on the electrocardiogram reflects atrial and atrioventricular
nodal conduction time. The PR interval is heritable, provides important
information about arrhythmia risk, and has been suggested to differ among human
races. Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have identified common genetic
determinants of the PR interval in individuals of European and Asian ancestry,
but there is a general paucity of GWA studies in individuals of African ancestry.
We performed GWA studies in African American individuals from four cohorts
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>6,247) to identify genetic variants associated with PR interval duration.
Genotyping was performed using the Affymetrix 6.0 microarray. Imputation was
performed for 2.8 million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using combined
YRI and CEU HapMap phase II panels. We observed a strong signal (rs3922844)
within the gene encoding the cardiac sodium channel (SCN5A) with genome-wide
significant association (p<2.5 x 10<U+207B>8) in two of the four cohorts and in the
meta-analysis. The signal explained 2% of PR interval variability in African
Americans (beta <U+200A>=<U+200A>5.1 msec per minor allele, 95% CI <U+200A>=<U+200A>4.1-6.1, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>3 x 10<U+207B>²³). 
This SNP was also associated with PR interval (beta<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.4 msec per minor allele, 
95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.8-3.0, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>3 x 10<U+207B>¹6) in individuals of European ancestry
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>14,042), but with a smaller effect size (p for heterogeneity <0.001) and
variability explained (0.5%). Further meta-analysis of the four cohorts
identified genome-wide significant associations with SNPs in SCN10A (rs6798015), 
MEIS1 (rs10865355), and TBX5 (rs7312625) that were highly correlated with SNPs
identified in European and Asian GWA studies. African ancestry was associated
with increased PR duration (13.3 msec, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.009) in one but not the other three 
cohorts. Our findings demonstrate the relevance of common variants to African
Americans at four loci previously associated with PR interval in European and
Asian samples and identify an association signal at one of these loci that is
more strongly associated with PR interval in African Americans than in Europeans.

PMCID: PMC3037415
PMID: 21347284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Dec;226(12):3422-32. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22697.

Collagen I regulates the self-renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells through a2ß1 
integrin- and DDR1-dependent Bmi-1.

Suh HN(1), Han HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, Korea.

Adhesion of cells to extracellular matrix (ECM) influences vital aspects of
anchorage-dependent cell behavior including survival, proliferation, and
differentiation. However, the role of collagen I in mouse embryonic stem cells
(mESCs) is not well-known. Therefore, in the present study we examined the effect
of collagen I on mESC self-renewal and related signal pathways. Collagen I
(10<U+2009>µg/ml) maintained mESCs in an undifferentiated state (Nanog, OCT4, and
SSEA-1) and did not affect differentiation (GATA4, Tbx5, Fgf5, and Cdx2) in the
presence of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF). Treatment with collagen I bound
both a2ß1 integrin and discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1), and stimulated
intracellular signaling pathways. Collagen I-bound a2ß1 integrin increased
integrin-linked kinase (ILK) phosphorylation, cleaved Notch protein expression in
the nuclear fraction, and Gli-1 mRNA expression. In addition, collagen I-bound
DDR1 increased GTP-bound Ras, phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) p85a catalytic
subunit protein expression, and Akt and ERK phosphorylation. Importantly,
collagen I increased Bmi-1 protein expression in the nucleus which was blocked by
small interfering RNA (siRNA) specific for Gli-1 and ERK, showing that parallel
pathways of integrins and DDR1 merge at Bmi-1. Furthermore, collagen I-induced
p16 decrease and p-Rb increase were reversed by Bmi-1-specific siRNA. Moreover,
Bmi-1 silencing abolished the collagen I-induced increase of proliferation
indices and undifferentiation markers. These results indicate that collagen I
stimulates the self-renewal of mESCs mediated by Bmi-1 through a2ß1
integrin-dependent ILK, Notch, Gli-1, and DDR1-dependent Ras, PI3K/Akt, and ERK.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21344393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2010 May;20(4):109-14. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2010.09.004.

Tbx20, Smads, and the atrioventricular canal.

Singh R(1), Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule, D-30625 Hannover,
Germany.

Specification of chamber and nonchamber myocardium in the forming vertebrate
heart is a crucial lineage decision on which most of the functional architecture 
of the mature organ is built. Members of the T-box (Tbx) gene family are decisive
players in this early myocardial dichotomy by either promoting (Tbx5, Tbx20) or
inhibiting (Tbx2, Tbx3) the chamber gene program in the early heart tube. Because
Tbx5 and Tbx20 are widely expressed in the linear heart tube, localized
expression of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in regions fated to become primary myocardium of the 
atrioventricular canal and outflow tract is crucial to localize the chambers.
Here, we will review recent findings that suggest an important role for Tbx20 and
Bmp2/Smad signaling in restricting Tbx2 activation to the atrioventricular canal 
and outflow tract. Surprisingly, Tbx20 does not act as a direct transcriptional
repressor of Tbx2 but sequesters receptor-activated Smad factors of the Bmp
signaling pathway to prevent precocious Tbx2 transcription.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21335279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Nat Commun. 2011 Feb 8;2:187. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1187.

Chromatin remodelling complex dosage modulates transcription factor function in
heart development.

Takeuchi JK(1), Lou X, Alexander JM, Sugizaki H, Delgado-Olguín P, Holloway AK,
Mori AD, Wylie JN, Munson C, Zhu Y, Zhou YQ, Yeh RF, Henkelman RM, Harvey RP,
Metzger D, Chambon P, Stainier DY, Pollard KS, Scott IC, Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California
94158, USA.

Dominant mutations in cardiac transcription factor genes cause human inherited
congenital heart defects (CHDs); however, their molecular basis is not
understood. Interactions between transcription factors and the
Brg1/Brm-associated factor (BAF) chromatin remodelling complex suggest potential 
mechanisms; however, the role of BAF complexes in cardiogenesis is not known. In 
this study, we show that dosage of Brg1 is critical for mouse and zebrafish
cardiogenesis. Disrupting the balance between Brg1 and disease-causing cardiac
transcription factors, including Tbx5, Tbx20 and Nkx2-5, causes severe cardiac
anomalies, revealing an essential allelic balance between Brg1 and these cardiac 
transcription factor genes. This suggests that the relative levels of
transcription factors and BAF complexes are important for heart development,
which is supported by reduced occupancy of Brg1 at cardiac gene promoters in Tbx5
haploinsufficient hearts. Our results reveal complex dosage-sensitive
interdependence between transcription factors and BAF complexes, providing a
potential mechanism underlying transcription factor haploinsufficiency, with
implications for multigenic inheritance of CHDs.

PMCID: PMC3096875
PMID: 21304516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Cardiol Young. 2011 Jun;21(3):351-3. doi: 10.1017/S1047951111000072. Epub 2011
Jan 28.

Holt-Oram syndrome: novel TBX5 mutation and associated anomalous right coronary
artery.

Vianna CB(1), Miura N, Pereira AC, Jatene MB.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Institute (InCor), Clinical Department, University of Sao Paulo, Avenue 
Dr Eneas Carvalho Aguiar 44, Sao Paulo, Brazil. caio.vianna@incor.usp.br

The Holt-Oram syndrome was confirmed in an asymptomatic 36-year-old man by a
novel TBX5-gene mutation (exon 8 acceptor splicing site, c.663-1G greater than
A). Computed tomography showed an atrial septal defect and an anomalous right
coronary artery crossing between the aorta and pulmonary arteries. Surgery
corrected the septal defect and the initial segment of the anomalous vessel was
unroofed and enlarged. Anomalous coronary arteries were not previously described 
in the Holt-Oram syndrome patients and should be added to the list of possible
associated cardiac defects.

PMID: 21272410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Proteome Sci. 2011 Jan 19;9(1):3. doi: 10.1186/1477-5956-9-3.

Cardiogenol C can induce Mouse Hair Bulge Progenitor Cells to Transdifferentiate 
into Cardiomyocyte-like Cells.

Yau WW(1), Tang MK, Chen E, Yaoyao, Wong IW, Lee HS, Lee KKh.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Regeneration Thematic Research Programme, School of Biomedical
Sciences, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong.
kaholee@cuhk.edu.hk.

BACKGROUND: Hair bulge progenitor cells (HBPCs) are multipotent stem cells
derived from the bulge region of mice vibrissal hairs. The purified HBPCs express
CD34, K15 and K14 surface markers. It has been reported that HBPCs could be
readily induced to transdifferentiate into adipocytes and osteocytes. However,
the ability of HBPCs to transdifferentiate into cardiomyocytes has not yet been
investigated.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The cardiomyogenic potential of HBPCs was
investigated using a small cell-permeable molecule called Cardiogenol C. We
established that Cardiogenol C could induce HBPCs to express transcription
factors GATA4, Nkx2.5 and Tbx5, which are early specific markers for
pre-cardiomyogenic cells. In prolonged cultures, the Cardiogenol C-treated HBPCs 
can also express muscle proteins, cardiac-specific troponin I and sarcomeric
myosin heavy chain. However, we did not observe the ability of these cells to
functionally contract. Hence, we called these cells cardiomyocyte-like cells
rather than cardiomyocytes. We tried to remedy this deficiency by pre-treating
HBPCs with Valproic acid first before exposing them to Cardiogenol C. This
pretreatment inhibited, rather than improved, the effectiveness of Cardiogenol C 
in reprogramming the HBPCs. We used comparative proteomics to determine how
Cardiogenol C worked by identifying proteins that were differentially expressed. 
We identified proteins that were involved in promoting cell differentiation,
cardiomyocyte development and for the normal function of striated muscles. From
those differentially expressed proteins, we further propose that Cardiogenol C
might exert its effect by activating the Wnt signaling pathway through the
suppression of Kremen1. In addition, by up-regulating the expression of chromatin
remodeling proteins, SIK1 and Smarce1 would initiate cardiac differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In conclusion, our CD34+/K15+ HBPCs could be induced to
transdifferentiate into cardiomyocyte-like cells using a small molecule called
Cardiogenol C. The process involves activation of the Wnt signaling pathway and
altered expression of several key chromatin remodeling proteins. The finding is
clinically significant as HBPCs offer a readily accessible and autologous source 
of progenitor cells for cell-based therapy of heart disease, which is one of
major killers in developed countries.

PMCID: PMC3033794
PMID: 21247432  [PubMed]


263. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2011 Jan 14;2(1):1. doi: 10.1186/scrt42.

From fibroblast cells to cardiomyocytes: direct lineage reprogramming.

Yang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh, 530 45th
Street, 8117 Rangos Research Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15201, USA. lyang@pitt.edu

Recent advances in stem cell biology have established the feasibility of
reprogramming human and murine fibroblast cells into induced pluripotent stem
cells. Three master regulators have been demonstrated to be sufficient in the
management of cell status of 'pluripotent' versus 'differentiated'. The same
strategy has been used to directly convert one somatic cell type into another
cell type, such as the converting of exocrine pancreas cells into cells closely
resembling beta cells and the reprogramming of fibroblast cells into functional
neuron cells. Srivastava's group reported the first direct reprogramming of mouse
fibroblast cells into mesoderm lineage cells (cardiomyocytes) with the enforced
expression of three cardiac transcriptional factors: Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5. The 
induced cardiomyocytes exhibit a global gene expression profile and basic
electrophysiological characteristics similar to those of postnatal
cardiomyocytes. This study made significant advances in cardiovascular and stem
cell fields and has important implications in understanding heart developmental
biology as well as in potential therapies of human cardiovascular diseases.

PMCID: PMC3092141
PMID: 21241459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Dec;48(12):905-12.

[Effects of folic acid on the development of heart of zebrafish].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun SN(1), Gui YH, Jiang Q, Song HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
201102, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct the folic acid deficient model in zebrafish and observe
the abnormal cardiac phenotypes, to find the optimal period for supplementing
folic acid that can most effectively prevent the heart malformation induced by
folic acid deficiency, and to investigate the possible mechanisms by which folic 
acid deficiency induces malformations of heart.
METHOD: The folic acid deficient zebrafish model was constructed by using both
the folic acid antagonist methotrexate (MTX) and knocking-down dhfr
(dihydrofolate reductase gene). Exogenous tetrahydrofolic acid rescue experiment 
was performed. Folic acid was given to folic acid deficient groups in different
periods. The percent of cardiac malformation, the cardiac phenotypes, the heart
rate and the ventricular shortening fraction (VSF) were recorded. The out flow
tract (OFT) was observed by using fluorescein micro-angiography. Whole-mount in
situ hybridization and real-time PCR were performed to detect vmhc, amhc, tbx5
and nppa expressions.
RESULT: About (78.00 ± 3.74)% embryos in MTX treated group and (68.00 ± 6.32)%
embryos in dhfr knocking-down group had heart malformations, including the
abnormal cardiac shapes, the hypogenesis of OFT and the reduced heart rate and
VSF. Giving exogenous tetrahydrofolic acid rescued the above abnormalities. Given
the folic acid on 8 - 12 hours post-fertilization (hpf), both the MTX treated
group (20.20% ± 3.77%) and dhfr knocking-down group (43.40% ± 4.51%) showed the
most significantly reduced percent of cardiac malformation and the most obviously
improved cardiac development. In folic acid deficient group, the expressions of
tbx5 and nppa were reduced while the expressions of vmhc and amhc appeared
normal. After being given folic acid to MTX treated group and dhfr knocking-down 
group, the expressions of tbx5 and nppa were increased.
CONCLUSIONS: The synthesis of tetrahydrofolic acid was decreased in our folic
acid deficient model. Giving folic acid in the middle period, which is the early 
developmental stage, can best prevent the abnormal developments of hearts induced
by folic acid deficiency. Folic acid deficiency did not disrupt the
differentiations of myosins in ventricle and atrium. The cardiac malformations
caused by folic acid deficiency were related with the reduced expressions of tbx5
and nppa.

PMID: 21215183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Rev Med Inst Mex Seguro Soc. 2010 Nov-Dec;48(6):657-9.

[Holt-Oram syndrome associated with facial anomalies. A case report].

[Article in Spanish]

Aviña-Fierro JA(1), Colonnelli-Barba G.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital de Pediatría, Centro Médico Nacional de Occidente, Instituto Mexicano
del Seguro Social, Guadalajara, Jalisco, México. avinafie@megared.net.mx

Cardiomyelic syndromes have skeletal malformations of the upper limb and
congenital heart disease, and are related to mutations in transcription factors
with T-Box domains. Holt-Oram syndrome is characterized by upper-extremity
malformations involving the radial, thenar, or carpal bones and congenital heart 
defects. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, a mutation in TBX5 gene
located on chromosome 12 (12q24.1) is associated with variable phenotypes. This
is an unusual case of a patient with Holt-Oram syndrome associated with facial
anomalies: hemifacial microsomia on the right side, forehead prominent and tall, 
hypertelorism, depressed nasal bridge, low set ears and micrognathia. The
presentation broadens the clinical spectrum with delineation of facial dysmorphic
features.

PMID: 21184723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Development. 2010 Dec;137(24):4283-94. doi: 10.1242/dev.049445.

Developmental origins of precocial forelimbs in marsupial neonates.

Keyte AL(1), Smith KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA. alk2@duke.edu

Marsupial mammals are born in an embryonic state, as compared with their
eutherian counterparts, yet certain features are accelerated. The most
conspicuous of these features are the precocial forelimbs, which the newborns use
to climb unaided from the opening of the birth canal to the teat. The
developmental mechanisms that produce this acceleration are unknown. Here we show
that heterochronic and heterotopic changes early in limb development contribute
to forelimb acceleration. Using Tbx5 and Tbx4 as fore- and hindlimb field
markers, respectively, we have found that, compared with mouse, both limb fields 
arise notably early during opossum development. Patterning of the forelimb buds
is also accelerated, as Shh expression appears early relative to the outgrowth of
the bud itself. In addition, the forelimb fields and forelimb myocyte allocation 
are increased in size and number, respectively, and migration of the spinal
nerves into the forelimb bud has been modified. This shift in the extent of the
forelimb field is accompanied by shifts in Hox gene expression along the
anterior-posterior axis. Furthermore, we found that both fore- and hindlimb
fields arise gradually during gastrulation and extension of the embryonic axis,
in contrast to the appearance of the limb fields in their entirety in all other
known cases. Our results show a surprising evolutionary flexibility in the early 
limb development program of amniotes and rule out the induction of the limb
fields by mature structures such as the somites or mesonephros.

PMID: 21098569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Biomed Res. 2010 Oct;31(5):301-5.

Different distribution of Cav3.2 and Cav3.1 transcripts encoding T-type Ca(2+)
channels in the embryonic heart of mice.

Mizuta E(1), Shirai M, Arakawa K, Hidaka K, Miake J, Ninomiya H, Kato M,
Shigemasa C, Shirayoshi Y, Hisatome I, Morisaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Department of
Multidisciplinary Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University,
Yonago, Japan. einosuke@kc4.so-net.ne.jp

We investigated the distribution of T-type Ca(2+) channel mRNAs in the mouse
embryonic heart. Cav3.2, but not Cav3.1, was expressed in the E8.5 embryonic
heart along with cardiac progenitor markers (Nkx2.5, Tbx5, Isl-1) and contractile
proteins (alpha and beta MHC). In the E10.5 heart, the distribution of Cav3.1
mRNA was confirmed in the AV-canal and overlapped with that of MinK or Tbx2.
Cav3.2 mRNA was observed not only in the AV-canal but also in the outflow tract, 
along with MinK and Isl-1, indicating the expression of Cav3.2 in the secondary
heart field. Thus, Cav3.2 may contribute to the development of the outflow tract 
from the secondary heart field in the embryonic heart, whereas Cav3.1 may be
involved in the development of the cardiac conduction-system together with
Cav3.2.

PMID: 21079360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Med Clin (Barc). 2010 Nov 13;135(14):653-7. doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2010.04.013.
Epub 2010 Jun 17.

[Holt-Oram syndrome: study of 7 cases].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez-García M(1), Lorda-Sanchez I, García-Hoyos M, Ramos C, Ayuso C,
Trujillo-Tiebas MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Genética, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, España.
mmartinezg@fjd.es

FUNDAMENTAL AND OBJECTIVE: Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a heart-hand disease with 
an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. About 85% of the affected patients
present de novo mutations in the TBX5 gene. The aim of this study is to propose a
molecular strategy to diagnose patients with clinical suspicion of HOS.PATIENTS
AND METHODS: A sequence analysis of 7 patients from exon 2 to exon 8 of the TBX5 
gene was performed. MLPAp179 and MLPAp180 were performed in those cases in which 
no mutation was found.
RESULTS: p.Arg270X and p.Ala34Glyfsx27 mutations were identified in 2 cases.
These cases fulfilled the strict clinical criteria, had a family history of HOS
and had similar clinical features. In other three cases, MLPA results showed
deletions of the GLI3 coding region.
CONCLUSIONS: In order to increase the TBX5 mutation detection rate, an exhaustive
physical examination focused on the strict clinical criteria may be necessary to 
rule out clinical overlapping syndromes. We propose that molecular analysis of
GLI3 may be performed in patients with clinical suspicion of HOS without
mutations in TBX5.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21070912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Nat Commun. 2010 Jul 13;1:35. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1036.

Divergent transcriptional activities determine limb identity.

Ouimette JF(1), Jolin ML, L'honoré A, Gifuni A, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institut de recherches cliniques de
Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, Canada H2W 1R7.

Limbs develop using a common genetic programme despite widely differing
morphologies. This programme is modulated by limb-restricted regulators such as
hindlimb (HL) transcription factors Pitx1 and Tbx4 and the forelimb (FL) Tbx5.
Both Tbx factors have been implicated in limb patterning and growth, but their
relative activities and underlying mechanisms remain unclear. In this paper, we
show that Tbx4 and Tbx5 harbour conserved and divergent transcriptional
regulatory domains that account for their roles in limb development. In
particular, both factors share an activator domain and the ability to stimulate
limb growth. However, we find that Tbx4 is the primary effector of HL identity
for both skeletal and muscle development; this activity relies on a repressor
domain that is inactivated by a human TBX4 small-patella syndrome mutation. We
propose that limb identity is largely achieved by default in FL, whereas a
specific repressor activity unique to Tbx4 determines HL identity.

PMCID: PMC3046407
PMID: 20975709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 9;107(45):19356-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0914888107. Epub 2010 Oct 25.

An endocardial pathway involving Tbx5, Gata4, and Nos3 required for atrial septum
formation.

Nadeau M(1), Georges RO, Laforest B, Yamak A, Lefebvre C, Beauregard J, Paradis
P, Bruneau BG, Andelfinger G, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit in Cardiac Growth and Differentiation and Molecular Biology
Program, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada H3C 3J7.

In humans, septal defects are among the most prevalent congenital heart diseases,
but their cellular and molecular origins are not fully understood. We report that
transcription factor Tbx5 is present in a subpopulation of endocardial cells and 
that its deletion therein results in fully penetrant, dose-dependent atrial
septal defects in mice. Increased apoptosis of endocardial cells lacking Tbx5, as
well as neighboring TBX5-positive myocardial cells of the atrial septum through
activation of endocardial NOS (Nos3), is the underlying mechanism of disease.
Compound Tbx5 and Nos3 haploinsufficiency in mice worsens the cardiac phenotype. 
The data identify a pathway for endocardial cell survival and unravel a
cell-autonomous role for Tbx5 therein. The finding that Nos3, a gene regulated by
many congenital heart disease risk factors including stress and diabetes,
interacts genetically with Tbx5 provides a molecular framework to understand
gene-environment interaction in the setting of human birth defects.

PMCID: PMC2984205
PMID: 20974940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. BMC Dev Biol. 2010 Oct 15;10:104. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-104.

Pdlim7 is required for maintenance of the mesenchymal/epidermal Fgf signaling
feedback loop during zebrafish pectoral fin development.

Camarata T(1), Snyder D, Schwend T, Klosowiak J, Holtrup B, Simon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University, The Feinberg School of
Medicine, Children's Memorial Research Center, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

BACKGROUND: Vertebrate limb development involves a reciprocal feedback loop
between limb mesenchyme and the overlying apical ectodermal ridge (AER). Several 
gene pathways participate in this feedback loop, including Fgf signaling. In the 
forelimb lateral plate mesenchyme, Tbx5 activates Fgf10 expression, which in turn
initiates and maintains the mesenchyme/AER Fgf signaling loop. Recent findings
have revealed that Tbx5 transcriptional activity is regulated by dynamic
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and interaction with Pdlim7, a PDZ-LIM protein family
member, along actin filaments. This Tbx5 regulation is critical in heart
formation, but the coexpression of both proteins in other developing tissues
suggests a broader functional role.
RESULTS: Knock-down of Pdlim7 function leads to decreased pectoral fin cell
proliferation resulting in a severely stunted fin phenotype. While early gene
induction and patterning in the presumptive fin field appear normal, the pectoral
fin precursor cells display compaction and migration defects between 18 and 24
hours post-fertilization (hpf). During fin growth fgf24 is sequentially expressed
in the mesenchyme and then in the apical ectodermal ridge (AER). However, in
pdlim7 antisense morpholino-treated embryos this switch of expression is
prevented and fgf24 remains ectopically active in the mesenchymal cells. Along
with the lack of fgf24 in the AER, other critical factors including fgf8 are
reduced, suggesting signaling problems to the underlying mesenchyme. As a
consequence of perturbed AER function in the absence of Pdlim7, pathway
components in the fin mesenchyme are misregulated or absent, indicating a
breakdown of the Fgf signaling feedback loop, which is ultimately responsible for
the loss of fin outgrowth.
CONCLUSION: This work provides the first evidence for the involvement of Pdlim7
in pectoral fin development. Proper fin outgrowth requires fgf24 downregulation
in the fin mesenchyme with subsequent activation in the AER, and Pdlim7 appears
to regulate this transition, potentially through Tbx5 regulation. By controlling 
Tbx5 subcellular localization and transcriptional activity and possibly
additional yet unknown means, Pdlim7 is required for proper development of the
heart and the fins. These new regulatory mechanisms may have important
implications how we interpret Tbx5 function in congenital hand/heart syndromes in
humans.

PMCID: PMC2967529
PMID: 20950450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Development. 2010 Nov;137(22):3823-33. doi: 10.1242/dev.054015. Epub 2010 Oct 7.

Endothelin receptor type A expression defines a distinct cardiac subdomain within
the heart field and is later implicated in chamber myocardium formation.

Asai R(1), Kurihara Y, Fujisawa K, Sato T, Kawamura Y, Kokubo H, Tonami K,
Nishiyama K, Uchijima Y, Miyagawa-Tomita S, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The avian and mammalian heart originates from two distinct embryonic regions: an 
early differentiating first heart field and a dorsomedially located second heart 
field. It remains largely unknown when and how these subdivisions of the heart
field divide into regions with different fates. Here, we identify in the mouse a 
subpopulation of the first (crescent-forming) field marked by endothelin receptor
type A (Ednra) gene expression, which contributes to chamber myocardium through a
unique type of cell behavior. Ednra-lacZ/EGFP-expressing cells arise in the
ventrocaudal inflow region of the early linear heart tube, converge to the
midline, move anteriorly along the outer curvature and give rise to chamber
myocardium mainly of the left ventricle and both atria. This movement was
confirmed by fluorescent dye-labeling and transplantation experiments. The
Ednra-lacZ/EGFP-expressing subpopulation is characterized by the presence of
Tbx5-expressing cells. Ednra-null embryonic hearts often demonstrate hypoplasia
of the ventricular wall, low mitotic activity and decreased Tbx5 expression with 
reciprocal expansion of Tbx2 expression. Conversely, endothelin 1 stimulates ERK 
phosphorylation and Tbx5 expression in the early embryonic heart. These results
indicate that early Ednra expression defines a subdomain of the first heart field
contributing to chamber formation, in which endothelin 1/Ednra signaling is
involved. The present finding provides an insight into how subpopulations within 
the crescent-forming (first) heart field contribute to the coordination of heart 
morphogenesis through spatiotemporally defined cell movements.

PMID: 20929948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. World J Pediatr Congenit Heart Surg. 2010 Oct;1(3):328-43. doi:
10.1177/2150135110379623.

Insights after 40 years of the fontan operation.

Chin AJ(1), Whitehead KK, Watrous RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Fontan's visionary operation and its modifications over the ensuing decades have 
re-established nonturbulent flow and substantially reduced cyanosis for patients 
with severe hypoplasia of one ventricle. However, a long list of largely
unexpected sequelae has emerged over the last 40 years. Although it is not
difficult to understand how care providers could become discouraged, a number of 
myths have arisen, which we will attempt to dispel with real-world
counterexamples as well as with lessons learned from other disciplines:
evolutionary, developmental, and computational biology. We argue that distinctive
biochemical abnormalities pointing to dysfunction in multiple organs, including
the largest organ system in the body, the endothelium, occur long before grossly 
observable changes in cardiac imaging can be recognized. With a rational redesign
of both our surveillance scheme and our wellness strategies, we hope that Fontan 
survivors and their families, as well as physicians, nurses, and therapists, will
see why Fontan's principle remains just as vibrant today as it was in 1971.

PMID: 23804889  [PubMed]


274. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Dec 1;19(23):4625-33. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq393. Epub 2010 Sep 
21.

Shox2 mediates Tbx5 activity by regulating Bmp4 in the pacemaker region of the
developing heart.

Puskaric S(1), Schmitteckert S, Mori AD, Glaser A, Schneider KU, Bruneau BG,
Blaschke RJ, Steinbeisser H, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Division of Developmental Genetics,
Institute of Human Genetics,University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Heart formation requires a highly balanced network of transcriptional activation 
of genes. The homeodomain transcription factor, Shox2, is essential for the
formation of the sinoatrial valves and for the development of the pacemaking
system. The elucidation of molecular mechanisms underlying the development of
pacemaker tissue has gained clinical interest as defects in its patterning can be
related to atrial arrhythmias. We have analyzed putative targets of Shox2 and
identified the Bmp4 gene as a direct target. Shox2 interacts directly with the
Bmp4 promoter in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays and activates transcription
in luciferase-reporter assays. In addition, ectopic expression of Shox2 in
Xenopus embryos stimulates transcription of the Bmp4 gene, and silencing of Shox2
in cardiomyocytes leads to a reduction in the expression of Bmp4. In Tbx5(del/+) 
mice, a model for Holt-Oram syndrome, and Shox2(-/-) mice, we show that the T-box
transcription factor Tbx5 is a regulator of Shox2 expression in the inflow tract 
and that Bmp4 is regulated by Shox2 in this compartment of the embryonic heart.
In addition, we could show that Tbx5 acts cooperatively with Nkx2.5 to regulate
the expression of Shox2 and Bmp4. This work establishes a link between Tbx5,
Shox2 and Bmp4 in the pacemaker region of the developing heart and thus
contributes to the unraveling of the intricate interplay between the
heart-specific transcriptional machinery and developmental signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2972695
PMID: 20858598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Med Sci (Paris). 2010 Aug-Sep;26(8-9):699-700. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2010268-9699.

[Tbx5 and the heart adaptation to life on earth].

[Article in French]

Nemer G, Nemer M.

PMID: 20819703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2010 Dec;10(4):268-74. doi: 10.1007/s12012-010-9081-z.

Ethanol and its metabolites induce histone lysine 9 acetylation and an alteration
of the expression of heart development-related genes in cardiac progenitor cells.

Zhong L(1), Zhu J, Lv T, Chen G, Sun H, Yang X, Huang X, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, 136 Zhong Shan Er Road, Yu Zhong District, 400014 Chongqing, People's
Republic of China.

Alcohol exposure during pregnancy may cause congenital heart disease (CHD), but
the underlying mechanisms are not clear. Recent evidence suggests that ethanol
and its metabolites can selectively increase histone H3 acetylation at lysine 9
(H3AcK9) residue in rat hepatocytes. This may be a mechanism by which ethanol
alters gene expression. The goal of current study is to investigate the effect of
ethanol and its metabolites on H3AcK9 acetylation and the mRNA expression of
heart development-related genes (GATA4, Mef2c, and Tbx5) in cardiac progenitor
cells. We used mitochondrial activity (MTT) assay to assess the viability of
cardiac progenitor cells. Western blotting and real-time PCR were employed to
determine H3AcK9 acetylation and gene expression. Low levels of ethanol (50 mM), 
acetaldehyde (4 mM), and acetate (4 mM) had no effect on cell proliferation.
However, high concentrations of ethanol (200 mM), acetaldehyde (12 mM), and
acetate (16 mM) reduced cell viability by 30%, respectively (P < 0.05). Low
levels of ethanol and acetate increased the acetylation of H3 lysine 9 by 2.4-
and 2.2-fold, respectively (P < 0.05), but did not significantly change the
expression of the heart development-related genes. High concentrations of ethanol
and acetate increased H3 lysine 9 acetylation by 5.3- and 5.6-fold, respectively 
(P < 0.05). Moreover, high levels of ethanol and acetate significantly augmented 
the expression of GATA4 and Mef2c. Conversely, acetaldehyde (4 or 12 mM) had
little effect on H3 lysine 9 acetylation or the expression of the heart
development-related genes. Our studies demonstrate that high levels of ethanol or
its metabolites induce H3AcK9 acetylation and impair cardiac progenitor cells.
The altered histone H3 acetylation at lysine 9 has an important impact on the
expression of the heart development-related genes, which may be one of the
mechanisms underlying the alcohol-induced CHD.

PMID: 20811785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Oncogene. 2010 Dec 9;29(49):6464-74. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.370. Epub 2010 Aug 30.

Epigenetic inactivation of T-box transcription factor 5, a novel tumor suppressor
gene, is associated with colon cancer.

Yu J(1), Ma X, Cheung KF, Li X, Tian L, Wang S, Wu CW, Wu WK, He M, Wang M, Ng
SS, Sung JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Institute of Digestive Disease,
Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong
Kong, SAR China. junyu@cuhk.edu.hk

T-box transcription factor 5 (TBX5) is a member of a phylogenetically conserved
family of genes involved in the regulation of developmental processes. The
function of TBX5 in cancer development is largely unclear. We identified that
TBX5 was preferentially methylated in cancer using methylation-sensitive
arbitrarily primed PCR. We aim to clarify the epigenetic inactivation, biological
function and clinical significance of TBX5 in colon cancer. Promoter methylation 
was evaluated by combined bisulfite restriction analysis and bisulfite genomic
sequencing. Cell proliferation was examined by cell viability assay and colony
formation assay, apoptosis by flow cytometry and cell migration by wound-healing 
assay. TBX5 target genes were identified by cDNA microarray analysis. Cox
regression model and log-rank test were used to identify independent predictors
of prognosis. TBX5 was silenced or downregulated in 88% (7/8) colon cancer cell
lines, but was expressed in normal colon tissues. Loss of gene expression was
associated with promoter methylation. The biological function of TBX5 in human
colon cancer cells was examined. Re-expression of TBX5 in silenced colon cancer
cell lines suppressed colony formation (P<0.001), proliferation (P<0.001),
migration and induced apoptosis (P<0.01). Induction of apoptosis was mediated
through cross-talk of extrinsic apoptosis pathway, apoptotic BCL2-associated X
protein and Granzyme A signaling cascades. TBX5 suppressed tumor cell
proliferation and metastasis through the upregulation of cyclin-dependent kinase 
inhibitor 2A, metastasis suppressor 1 and downregulation of synuclein gamma and
metastasis-associated protein 1 family member 2. TBX5 methylation was detected in
68% (71/105) of primary colon tumors. Multivariate analysis showed that patients 
with TBX5 methylation had a significantly poor overall survival (P=0.0007). In
conclusion, we identified a novel functional tumor suppressor gene TBX5
inactivated by promoter methylation in colon cancer. Detection of methylated TBX5
may serve as a potential biomarker for the prognosis of this malignancy.

PMID: 20802524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Aug 24;56(9):721-34. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.03.066.

Guided cardiopoiesis enhances therapeutic benefit of bone marrow human
mesenchymal stem cells in chronic myocardial infarction.

Behfar A(1), Yamada S, Crespo-Diaz R, Nesbitt JJ, Rowe LA, Perez-Terzic C,
Gaussin V, Homsy C, Bartunek J, Terzic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Marriott Heart
Disease Research Program, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Aug 24;56(9):735-7.

OBJECTIVES: The goal of this study was to guide bone marrow-derived human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) into a cardiac progenitor phenotype and assess
therapeutic benefit in chronic myocardial infarction.
BACKGROUND: Adult stem cells, delivered in their naïve state, demonstrate a
limited benefit in patients with ischemic heart disease. Pre-emptive lineage
pre-specification may optimize therapeutic outcome.
METHODS: hMSC were harvested from a coronary artery disease patient cohort. A
recombinant cocktail consisting of transforming growth factor-beta(1), bone
morphogenetic protein-4, activin A, retinoic acid, insulin-like growth factor-1, 
fibroblast growth factor-2, alpha-thrombin, and interleukin-6 was formulated to
engage hMSC into cardiopoiesis. Derived hMSC were injected into the myocardium of
a nude infarcted murine model and followed over 1 year for functional and
structural end points.
RESULTS: Although the majority of patient-derived hMSC in their native state
demonstrated limited effect on ejection fraction, stem cells from rare
individuals harbored a spontaneous capacity to improve contractile performance.
This reparative cytotype was characterized by high expression of homeobox
transcription factor Nkx-2.5, T-box transcription factor TBX5, helix-loop-helix
transcription factor MESP1, and myocyte enhancer factor MEF2C, markers of
cardiopoiesis. Recombinant cardiogenic cocktail guidance secured the
cardiopoietic phenotype across the patient cohort. Compared with unguided
counterparts, cardiopoietic hMSC delivered into infarcted myocardium achieved
superior functional and structural benefit without adverse side effects.
Engraftment into murine hearts was associated with increased human-specific
nuclear, sarcomeric, and gap junction content along with induction of myocardial 
cell cycle activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Guided cardiopoiesis thus enhances the therapeutic benefit of bone
marrow-derived hMSC in chronic ischemic cardiomyopathy.

Copyright 2010 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2932958
PMID: 20723802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Cell. 2010 Aug 6;142(3):375-86. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.07.002.

Direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into functional cardiomyocytes by defined
factors.

Ieda M(1), Fu JD, Delgado-Olguin P, Vedantham V, Hayashi Y, Bruneau BG,
Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. ieda@cpnet.med.keio.ac.jp

Comment in
    Regen Med. 2011 Jan;6(1):31-4.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2010 Aug 6;7(2):139-41.

The reprogramming of fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) raises
the possibility that a somatic cell could be reprogrammed to an alternative
differentiated fate without first becoming a stem/progenitor cell. A large pool
of fibroblasts exists in the postnatal heart, yet no single "master regulator" of
direct cardiac reprogramming has been identified. Here, we report that a
combination of three developmental transcription factors (i.e., Gata4, Mef2c, and
Tbx5) rapidly and efficiently reprogrammed postnatal cardiac or dermal
fibroblasts directly into differentiated cardiomyocyte-like cells. Induced
cardiomyocytes expressed cardiac-specific markers, had a global gene expression
profile similar to cardiomyocytes, and contracted spontaneously. Fibroblasts
transplanted into mouse hearts one day after transduction of the three factors
also differentiated into cardiomyocyte-like cells. We believe these findings
demonstrate that functional cardiomyocytes can be directly reprogrammed from
differentiated somatic cells by defined factors. Reprogramming of endogenous or
explanted fibroblasts might provide a source of cardiomyocytes for regenerative
approaches.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2919844
PMID: 20691899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Dev Dyn. 2010 Sep;239(9):2393-403. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22384.

Role of fibroblast growth factor signaling during proepicardium formation in the 
chick embryo.

Torlopp A(1), Schlueter J, Brand T.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Würzburg, Germany.

The proepicardium forms at the venous pole of the embryonic heart and gives rise 
to several cell types of the mature heart. We investigated the role of fibroblast
growth factors (FGFs) during proepicardium formation in the chick embryo. Several
FGF ligands (Fgf2, Fgf10, and Fgf12) and receptors (Fgfr1, Fgfr2, and Fgfr4) are 
expressed in the proepicardium. Experimental modulation of FGF signaling in
explant cultures affected cell proliferation and survival. In contrast,
expression of Tbx18, Wt1, or Tbx5 were unaffected by FGF inhibition. In agreement
with the explant data, villous outgrowth of the proepicardium was strongly
impaired by FGF inhibition in vivo, however Tbx18 expression was maintained.
These data suggest that during proepicardium formation, FGF ligands act as
autocrine or paracrine growth factors to prevent apoptosis, maintain
proliferation, and to promote villous outgrowth of the proepicardium. However,
FGF is not involved in the induction or maintenance of proepicardium-specific
marker gene expression.

Developmental Dynamics 239:2393-2403, 2010. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20683934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Tissue Eng Part A. 2011 Jan;17(1-2):45-58. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2010.0124. Epub
2010 Oct 7.

Transplantation of marrow-derived cardiac stem cells carried in fibrin improves
cardiac function after myocardial infarction.

Guo HD(1), Wang HJ, Tan YZ, Wu JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Histology and Embryology, Shanghai Medical School of
Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

The high death rate of the transplanted stem cells in the infarcted heart and the
low efficiency of differentiation toward cardiomyocytes influence the outcome of 
stem cell transplantation for treatment of myocardial infarction (MI). Fibrin
glue (FG) has been extensively used as a cell implantation matrix to increase
cell survival. However, mechanisms of the effects of FG for stem cell
transplantation to improve cardiac function are unclear. We have isolated
c-kit+/Sca-1+ marrow-derived cardiac stem cells (MCSCs) from rat bone marrow; the
cells expressed weakly early cardiac transcription factor Nkx2.5, GATA-4, Mef2C, 
and Tbx5. Effects of FG on survival, proliferation, and migration of MCSCs were
examined in vitro. Cytoprotective effects of FG were assessed by exposure of
MCSCs to anoxia. Efficacy of MCSC transplantation in FG was evaluated in the
female rat MI model. The MCSCs survived well and proliferated in FG, and they may
migrate out from the edge of FG in the wound and nature state. Acridine
orange/ethidium bromide staining and lactate dehydrogenase analysis showed that
MCSCs in FG were more resistant to anoxia as compared with MCSCs alone. In a rat 
MI model, cardiac function was improved and scar area was obviously reduced in
group of MCSCs in FG compared with group of MCSCs and FG alone, respectively. Y
chromosome fluorescence in situ hybridization showed that there were more
survived MCSCs in group of MCSCs in FG than those in group of MCSCs alone, and
most Y chromosome positive cells expressed cardiac troponin T (cTnT) and
connexin-43 (Cx-43). Cx-43 was located between Y chromosome positive cells and
recipient cardiomyocytes. Microvessel density in the peri-infarct regions and
infarct regions significantly increased in group of MCSCs in FG. These results
suggest that FG provide a suitable microenvironment for survival and
proliferation of MCSCs and protect cells from apoptosis and necrosis caused by
anoxia. MCSCs could differentiate into cardiomyocytes after being transplanted in
the border of the infarcted myocardium and form connections with native
cardiomyocytes. FG is helpful for MCSC transplantation to repair myocardium and
improve cardiac function through promoting the survival, migration, and
cardiomyogenic differentiation of MCSCs and inducing angiogenesis.

PMID: 20673001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Rev Med Inst Mex Seguro Soc. 2009 Jul-Aug;47(4):421-6.

[Holt-Oram syndrome and portal extrahepatic hypertension. A case report].

[Article in Spanish]

Loya-García BE(1), Montesano-Delfín JR, Guízar-Mendoza JM, Gallegos-Rivas MC,
Hernández-González MA, Venegas-Loya P.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Medicina Familiar 51, Delegación Guanajuato, Instituto Mexicano del 
Seguro Social, Guanajuato, Jalisco, Mexico. blanca.loya@imss.gob.mx

BACKGROUND: The Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is characterized by skeletal
abnormalities, frequently accompanied by congenital cardiac defects. It was first
described by Holt and Oram in 1960. It has a prevalence of 0.95/10,000 live
newborns. The syndrome shows a dominant autosomic heritance with high penetrance.
A mutation in the transcription gene factor TBX5 has been identified. This factor
has been shown to be important in the heart and upper extremities development.
CLINICAL CASE: A 17 year-old boy with muscle-skeletal abnormalities in forearms
and hands, with implantation defects of thumbs and narrow shoulders as well as
wide atrial septal defect type osteum secundum. He also showed portal
cavernomatosus degeneration which conditioned portal extrahepatic hypertension
and esophageal varicose veins. The diagnosis was established by clinical,
radiological and auxiliary studies. His parents were also studied, and they did
not show abnormalities.
CONCLUSIONS: Two previous cases have been reported in the Mexican medical
literature, both due to de novo genetic mutation. However, none has been
associated with portal cavernomatosus degeneration and portal hypertension.

PMID: 20553648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Oct 1;88(1):111-20. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq179. Epub 2010 Jun
3.

Tyrosine hydroxylase is expressed during early heart development and is required 
for cardiac chamber formation.

López-Sánchez C(1), Bártulos O, Martínez-Campos E, Gañán C, Valenciano AI,
García-Martínez V, De Pablo F, Hernández-Sánchez C.

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Oct 1;88(1):1-2.

AIMS: Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) is the first and rate-limiting enzyme in
catecholamine biosynthesis. Whereas the neuroendocrine roles of cathecolamines
postnatally are well known, the presence and function of TH in organogenesis is
unclear. The aim of this study was to define the expression of TH during cardiac 
development and to unravel the role it may play in heart formation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied TH expression in chick embryos by whole mount in 
situ hybridization and by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction and analysed TH activity by high-performance liquid chromatography. We
used gain- and loss-of-function models to characterize the role of TH in early
cardiogenesis. We found that TH expression was enriched in the cardiac field of
gastrulating chick embryos. By stage 8, TH mRNA was restricted to the splanchnic 
mesoderm of both endocardial tubes and was subsequently expressed predominantly
in the myocardial layer of the atrial segment. Overexpression of TH led to
increased atrial myosin heavy chain (AMHC1) and T-box 5 gene (Tbx5) expression in
the ventricular region and induced bradyarrhythmia. Similarly, addition of
l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (l-DOPA) or dopamine induced ectopic expression of
cardiac transcription factors (cNkx2.5, Tbx5) and AMHC1 as well as sarcomere
formation. Conversely, blockage of dopamine biosynthesis and loss of TH activity 
decreased AMHC1 and Tbx5 expression, whereas exposure to retinoic acid (RA)
induced TH expression in parallel to that of AMHC1 and Tbx5. Concordantly,
inhibition of endogenous RA synthesis decreased TH expression as well as that of 
AMHC1 and Tbx5.
CONCLUSION: TH is expressed in a dynamic pattern during the primitive heart tube 
formation. TH induces cardiac differentiation in vivo and it is a key regulator
of the heart patterning, conferring atriogenic identity.

PMID: 20525643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 30;285(31):23639-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.101063. Epub
2010 Jun 3.

Stat3 directly controls the expression of Tbx5, Nkx2.5, and GATA4 and is
essential for cardiomyocyte differentiation of P19CL6 cells.

Snyder M(1), Huang XY, Zhang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The transcription factor Stat3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 
3) mediates many physiological processes, including embryogenesis, stem cell
self-renewal, and postnatal survival. In response to gp130 receptor activation,
Stat3 becomes phosphorylated by the receptor-associated Janus kinase, forms
dimers, and enters the nucleus where it binds to Stat3 target genes and regulates
their expression. In this report, we demonstrate that Stat3 binds directly to the
promoters and regulates the expression of three genes that are essential for
cardiac differentiation: Tbx5, Nkx2.5, and GATA4. We further demonstrate that
Tbx5, Nkx2.5, and GATA4 expression is dependent on Stat3 in response to ligand
treatment and during ligand-independent differentiation of P19CL6 cells into
cardiomyocytes. Finally, we show that Stat3 is necessary for the differentiation 
of P19CL6 cells into beating cardiomyocytes. All together, these results
demonstrate that Stat3 is required for the differentiation of cardiomyocytes
through direct transcriptional regulation of Tbx5, Nkx2.5, and GATA4.

PMCID: PMC2911296
PMID: 20522556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Oct 1;88(1):130-9. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq178. Epub 2010 Jun 2.

Functional analysis of novel TBX5 T-box mutations associated with Holt-Oram
syndrome.

Boogerd CJ(1), Dooijes D, Ilgun A, Mathijssen IB, Hordijk R, van de Laar IM, Rump
P, Veenstra-Knol HE, Moorman AF, Barnett P, Postma AV.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Jan 1;89(1):253. Mathijssen, Inge B [added].

AIMS: Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a heart/hand syndrome clinically characterized 
by upper limb and cardiac malformations. Mutations in T-box transcription factor 
5 (TBX5) underlie this syndrome, the majority of which lead to premature stops.
In this study, we present our functional analyses of five (novel) missense TBX5
mutations identified in HOS patients, most of whom presented with severe cardiac 
malformations.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Functional characterization of mutant proteins shows a
dramatic loss of DNA-binding capacity, as well as diminished binding to known
cardiac interaction partners NKX2-5 and GATA4. The disturbance of these
interactions leads to a loss of function, as measured by the reduced activation
of Nppa and FGF10 in rat heart derived cells, although with variable severity.
Two out of the five mutations are peculiar: one, p.H220del, is associated with
additional extra-cardiac defects, perhaps by interfering with other T-box
dependant pathways, and another, p.I106V, leads to limb defects only, which is
supported by its normal interaction with cardiac-specific interaction partners.
CONCLUSION: Overall, our data are consistent with the hypothesis that these novel
missense mutations in TBX5 lead to functional haploinsufficiency and result in a 
reduced transcriptional activation of target genes, which is likely central to
the pathogenesis of HOS.

PMID: 20519243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Development. 2010 Jun;137(11):1919-29. doi: 10.1242/dev.043588.

The BMP pathway acts to directly regulate Tbx20 in the developing heart.

Mandel EM(1), Kaltenbrun E, Callis TE, Zeng XX, Marques SR, Yelon D, Wang DZ,
Conlon FL.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina McAllister Heart Institute, UNC-Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

TBX20 has been shown to be essential for vertebrate heart development. Mutations 
within the TBX20 coding region are associated with human congenital heart
disease, and the loss of Tbx20 in a wide variety of model systems leads to
cardiac defects and eventually heart failure. Despite the crucial role of TBX20
in a range of cardiac cellular processes, the signal transduction pathways that
act upstream of Tbx20 remain unknown. Here, we have identified and characterized 
a conserved 334 bp Tbx20 cardiac regulatory element that is directly activated by
the BMP/SMAD1 signaling pathway. We demonstrate that this element is both
necessary and sufficient to drive cardiac-specific expression of Tbx20 in
Xenopus, and that blocking SMAD1 signaling in vivo specifically abolishes
transcription of Tbx20, but not that of other cardiac factors, such as Tbx5 and
MHC, in the developing heart. We further demonstrate that activation of Tbx20 by 
SMAD1 is mediated by a set of novel, non-canonical, high-affinity SMAD-binding
sites located within this regulatory element and that phospho-SMAD1 directly
binds a non-canonical SMAD1 site in vivo. Finally, we show that these
non-canonical sites are necessary and sufficient for Tbx20 expression in Xenopus,
and that reporter constructs containing these sites are expressed in a
cardiac-specific manner in zebrafish and mouse. Collectively, our findings define
Tbx20 as a direct transcriptional target of the BMP/SMAD1 signaling pathway
during cardiac maturation.

PMCID: PMC2867324
PMID: 20460370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 29;5(4):e10338. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010338.

HOXB13, a target of DNMT3B, is methylated at an upstream CpG island, and
functions as a tumor suppressor in primary colorectal tumors.

Ghoshal K(1), Motiwala T, Claus R, Yan P, Kutay H, Datta J, Majumder S, Bai S,
Majumder A, Huang T, Plass C, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America. kalpana.ghoshal@osumc.edu

BACKGROUND: A hallmark of cancer cells is hypermethylation of CpG islands (CGIs),
which probably arises from upregulation of one or more DNA methyltransferases.
The purpose of this study was to identify the targets of DNMT3B, an essential DNA
methyltransferase in mammals, in colon cancer.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation with DNMT3B
specific antibody followed by CGI microarray identified genes with or without
CGIs, repeat elements and genomic contigs in RKO cells. ChIP-Chop analysis showed
that the majority of the target genes including P16, DCC, DISC1, SLIT1,
CAVEOLIN1, GNA11, TBX5, TBX18, HOXB13 and some histone variants, that harbor CGI 
in their promoters, were methylated in multiple colon cancer cell lines but not
in normal colon epithelial cells. Further, these genes were reactivated in RKO
cells after treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a DNA hypomethylating agent.
COBRA showed that the CGIs encompassing the promoter and/or coding region of DCC,
TBX5, TBX18, SLIT1 were methylated in primary colorectal tumors but not in
matching normal colon tissues whereas GNA11 was methylated in both. MassARRAY
analysis demonstrated that the CGI located approximately 4.5 kb upstream of
HOXB13 +1 site was tumor-specifically hypermethylated in primary colorectal
cancers and cancer cell lines. HOXB13 upstream CGI was partially hypomethylated
in DNMT1(-/-) HCT cells but was almost methylation free in cells lacking both
DNMT1 and DNMT3B. Analysis of tumor suppressor properties of two aberrantly
methylated transcription factors, HOXB13 and TBX18, revealed that both inhibited 
growth and clonogenic survival of colon cancer cells in vitro, but only HOXB13
abolished tumor growth in nude mice.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This is the first report that identifies several
important tumor suppressors and transcription factors as direct DNMT3B targets in
colon cancer and as potential biomarkers for this cancer. Further, this study
shows that methylation at an upstream CGI of HOXB13 is unique to colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2861599
PMID: 20454457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Mol Biol. 2010 Jul 2;400(1):71-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.04.052. Epub 2010
May 5.

Structural basis of TBX5-DNA recognition: the T-box domain in its DNA-bound and
-unbound form.

Stirnimann CU(1), Ptchelkine D, Grimm C, Müller CW.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology
Unit, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

TBX5, a member of the T-box transcription factor family, plays an important role 
in heart and limb development. More than 60 single point or deletion mutations of
human TBX5 are associated with Holt-Oram syndrome that manifests itself as heart 
and limb malformations in 1 out of 100,000 live births. The majority of these
mutations are located in the TBX5 T-box domain. We solved the crystal structures 
of the human TBX5 T-box domain in its DNA-unbound form and in complex with a
natural DNA target site allowing for the first time the comparison between
unbound and DNA-bound forms. Our analysis identifies a 3(10)-helix at the
C-terminus of the T-box domain as an inducible recognition element, critically
required for the interaction with DNA, as it only forms upon DNA binding and is
unstructured in the DNA-unbound form. Using circular dichroism, we characterized 
the thermal stability of six TBX5 mutants containing single point mutations in
the T-box domain (M74V, G80R, W121G, G169R, T223M, and R237W) and compared them
with wild-type protein. Mutants G80R and W121G show drastically reduced thermal
stability, while the other mutants only show a marginal stability decrease. For
all TBX5 mutants, binding affinities to specific and nonspecific DNA sequences
were determined using isothermal titration calorimetry. All TBX5 mutants show
reduced binding affinities to a specific DNA target site, although to various
degrees. Interestingly, all tested TBX5 mutants differ in their ability to bind
unspecific DNA, indicating that both sequence-specific and unspecific binding
might contribute to the misregulation of target gene expression.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20450920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cardiovasc Ther. 2011 Dec;29(6):362-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-5922.2010.00152.x.
Epub 2010 Apr 23.

Cardiac natriuretic peptides: from basic discovery to clinical practice.

Hayek S(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiac Growth and Differentiation, Department of Biochemistry, 
Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
ON, Canada.

Discoveries of the cardiac natriuretic peptides ANP, BNP, and CNP along with
studies of their function and regulation in health and disease, have led to
breakthroughs in the understanding and clinical management of heart failure.
Analysis of the ANP and BNP promoters and patterns of expression uncovered a set 
of key regulators and pathways that converge onto these sensitive markers of
early myocyte differentiation and cardiac stress. Among the most studied are the 
transcription factors GATA4, TBX5, and NKX2-5, which are central to cardiac
development and mutations of which are associated with congenital heart disease. 
In clinical practice, plasma natriuretic peptides levels have been used as
quantitative biomarkers of heart failure and proved to be highly effective for
the diagnosis of heart failure, for risk-stratification of patients and guided
therapy, as well as for screening for subclinical cardiac stress. Emerging
studies are revealing the cardioprotective attributes of these peptides and may
offer new therapeutic venues for myocardial infarction and heart failure.
Clinical trials have documented the benefits and risks of the use of synthetic
ANP (Anaritide) and BNP (Nesiritide) for treating heart failure, renal failure,
and hypertension. This review summarizes the function and regulation of cardiac
natriuretic peptides and the translation of the basic biochemical discoveries
into clinical practice both at the diagnostic and therapeutic level.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 20433683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Circ Res. 2010 Jun 25;106(12):1818-28. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.217950. Epub
2010 Apr 22.

Tbx5 and Bmp signaling are essential for proepicardium specification in
zebrafish.

Liu J(1), Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, Cardiovascular Research Institute, and Liver Center,
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

RATIONALE: The proepicardial organ (PE) contributes to the cellular diversity of 
the developing heart by giving rise to the epicardium as well as vascular smooth 
muscle cells and fibroblasts. Despite the importance of these cells in cardiac
development, function and regeneration, the signals required for the
specification of the PE remain largely unexplored.
OBJECTIVE: We aim to identify the signaling molecules and transcription factors
that regulate PE specification.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we present the first genetic evidence that bone
morphogenetic protein (Bmp) signaling in conjunction with the T-box transcription
factor Tbx5a is essential for PE specification in zebrafish. Specifically, Bmp4
from the cardiac region, but not the liver bud, acting through the type I BMP
receptor Acvr1l, is required for PE specification. By overexpressing a
dominant-negative form of a Bmp receptor at various embryonic stages, we
determined when Bmp signaling was required for PE specification. We also found
that overexpression of bmp2b right before PE specification led to the ectopic
expression of PE specific markers including tbx18. Furthermore, using
loss-of-function approaches, we discovered a previously unappreciated PE
specification role for Tbx5a at early somite stages; this role occurs earlier
than, and appears to be independent from, the requirement for Bmp signaling in
this process.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, these data lead us to propose that Tbx5a confers anterior
lateral plate mesodermal cells the competence to respond to Bmp signals and
initiate PE development.

PMCID: PMC2892550
PMID: 20413782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Genet Mol Biol. 2010 Apr;33(2):232-6. doi: 10.1590/S1415-47572010005000051. Epub 
2010 Jun 1.

Novel mutations in the TBX5 gene in patients with Holt-Oram Syndrome.

Porto MP(1), Vergani N, Carvalho AC, Cernach MC, Brunoni D, Perez AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morfologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP
Brazil.

The Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is an autosomal dominant condition characterized by 
upper limb and cardiac malformations. Mutations in the TBX5 gene cause HOS and
have also been associated with isolated heart and arm defects. Interactions
between the TBX5, GATA4 and NKX2.5 proteins have been reported in humans. We
screened the TBX5, GATA4, and NKX2.5 genes for mutations, by direct sequencing,
in 32 unrelated patients presenting classical (8) or atypical HOS (1), isolated
congenital heart defects (16) or isolated upper-limb malformations (7).
Pathogenic mutations in the TBX5 gene were found in four HOS patients, including 
two new mutations (c.374delG; c.678G > T) in typical patients, and the hotspot
mutation c.835C > T in two patients, one of them with an atypical HOS phenotype
involving lower-limb malformations. Two new mutations in the GATA4 gene were
found in association with isolated upper-limb malformations, but their clinical
significance remains to be established. A previously described possibly
pathogenic mutation in the NKX2.5 gene (c.73C > 7) was detected in a patient with
isolated heart malformations and also in his clinically normal father.

PMCID: PMC3036863
PMID: 21637475  [PubMed]


292. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2010 Jun;88(6):480-6. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20654.

Elevated glucose induces congenital heart defects by altering the expression of
tbx5, tbx20, and has2 in developing zebrafish embryos.

Liang J(1), Gui Y, Wang W, Gao S, Li J, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Maternal diabetes increases the risk of congenital heart defects in
infants, and hyperglycemia acts as a major teratogen. Multiple steps of cardiac
development, including endocardial cushion morphogenesis and development of
neural crest cells, are challenged under elevated glucose conditions. However,
the direct effect of hyperglycemia on embryo heart organogenesis remains to be
investigated.
METHODS: Zebrafish embryos in different stages were exposed to D-glucose for 12
or 24 hr to determine the sensitive window during early heart development. In the
subsequent study, 6 hr post-fertilization embryos were treated with either 25
mmol/liter D-glucose or L-glucose for 24 hr. The expression of genes was analyzed
by whole-mount in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: The highest incidence of cardiac malformations was found during 6-30 hpf
exposure periods. After 24 hr exposure, D-glucose-treated embryos exhibited
significant developmental delay and diverse cardiac malformations, but embryos
exposed to L-glucose showed no apparent phenotype. Further investigation of the
origin of heart defects showed that cardiac looping was affected earliest, while 
the specification of cardiac progenitors and heart tube assembly were complete.
Moreover, the expression patterns of tbx5, tbx20, and has2 were altered in the
defective hearts.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that elevated glucose alone induces cardiac
defects in zebrafish embryos by altering the expression pattern of tbx5, tbx20,
and has2 in the heart. We also show the first evidence that cardiac looping is
affected earliest during heart organogenesis. These research results are
important for devising preventive and therapeutic strategies aimed at reducing
the occurrence of congenital heart defects in diabetic pregnancy.

2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20306498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Holt-Oram Syndrome.

McDermott DA, Fong JC, Basson CT.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2004 Jul 20.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is characterized by:
Upper-extremity malformations involving radial, thenar, or carpal bones; and
Variably, one or both of the following: Personal and/or family history of
congenital heart malformation, most commonly ostium secundum atrial septal defect
(ASD) and ventricular septal defect (VSD), especially those occurring in the
muscular trabeculated septum. Cardiac conduction disease. An abnormal carpal bone
is present in all affected individuals and may be the only evidence of disease.
Seventy-five percent of individuals with HOS have a congenital heart
malformation.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of HOS is established in a proband with a
preaxial radial ray anomaly and a personal or family history of cardiac septation
and/or conduction defects. More than 70% of individuals who meet strict clinical 
diagnostic criteria have an identifiable heterozygous pathogenic variant in TBX5.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Management involves a multidisciplinary 
team of specialists in medical genetics, cardiology, orthopedics, and hand
surgery. Affected individuals and families are also likely to benefit from
programs providing social support to those with limb anomalies. Surveillance:
Annual ECG for all affected individuals, annual Holter monitor for individuals
with known conduction disease, and echocardiogram every one to five years for
those with septal defects. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Presymptomatic
diagnosis and treatment is warranted in relatives at risk to identify those who
would benefit from appropriate cardiac management. Pregnancy management: Affected
women who have not undergone cardiac evaluation should do so prior to pregnancy
or as soon as the pregnancy is recognized; those with a known history of a
structural cardiac defect or cardiac conduction abnormality should be followed by
a cardiologist during pregnancy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: HOS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
Approximately 85% of affected individuals have HOS as the result of a de novo
pathogenic variant. Offspring of an affected individual are at a 50% risk of
being affected. In pregnancies at 50% risk, detailed high-resolution prenatal
ultrasound examination may detect upper-limb malformations and/or congenital
heart malformations. Prenatal molecular genetic testing may be used to confirm a 
diagnosis if the TBX5 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected
relative.

PMID: 20301290  [PubMed]


294. Dev Growth Differ. 2010 May;52(4):351-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2010.01170.x. 
Epub 2010 Mar 7.

Coordinated regulation of dorsal bone morphogenetic protein 4 and ventral Sonic
hedgehog signaling specifies the dorso-ventral polarity in the optic vesicle and 
governs ocular morphogenesis through fibroblast growth factor 8 upregulation.

Kobayashi T(1), Yasuda K, Araki M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, Nara
Women's University, Nara, Japan.

Dorsal and ventral specification in the early optic vesicle plays a crucial role 
in vertebrate ocular morphogenesis, and proper dorsal-ventral polarity in the
optic vesicle ensures that distinct structures develop in separate domains within
the eye primordium. The polarity is determined progressively during development
by coordinated regulation of extraocular dorsal and ventral factors. In the
present study, we cultured discrete portions of embryonic chick brains by
preparing anterior cephalon, anterior dorsal cephalon and anterior ventral
cephalon, and clearly demonstrate that bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) and
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) constitute a dorsal-ventral signaling system together with
fibroblast growth factor 8 (FGF8). BMP4 and Shh upregulate Tbx5 and Pax2, as
reported previously, and at the same time Shh downregulates Tbx5, while BMP4
affects Pax2 expression to downregulate similarly. Shh induces Fgf8 expression in
the ventral optic vesicle. This, in turn, determines the distinct boundary of the
retinal pigmented epithelium and the neural retina by suppressing Mitf
expression. The lens develops only when signals from both the dorsal and ventral 
regions come across together. Inverted deposition of Shh and BMP4 signals in
organ-cultured optic vesicle completely re-organized ocular structures to be
inverted. Based on these observations we propose a novel model in which the two
signals govern the whole of ocular development when they encounter each other in 
the ocular morphogenic domain.

PMID: 20298259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biomed Sci. 2010 Mar 10;17:16. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-17-16.

Sodium valproate-induced congenital cardiac abnormalities in mice are associated 
with the inhibition of histone deacetylase.

Wu G(1), Nan C, Rollo JC, Huang X, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, the Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Valproic acid, a widely used anticonvulsant drug, is a potent
teratogen resulting in various congenital abnormalities. However, the mechanisms 
underlying valproic acid induced teratogenesis are nor clear. Recent studies
indicate that histone deacetylase is a direct target of valproic acid.
METHODS: In the present study, we have used histological analysis and RT-PCR
assays to examine the cardiac abnormalities in mice treated with sodium valproate
(NaVP) and determined the effects of NaVP on histone deacetylase activity and the
expression of heart development-related genes in mouse myocardial cells.
RESULTS: The experimental data show that NaVP can induce cardiac abnormalities in
fetal mice in a dose-dependent manner. NaVP causes a dose-dependent inhibition of
hitone deacetylase (HDAC) activity in mouse myocardial cells. However, the
expression levels of HDAC (both HDAC1 and HDAC2) are not significantly changed in
fetal mouse hearts after administration of NaVP in pregnant mice. The
transcriptional levels of other heart development-related genes, such as CHF1,
Tbx5 and MEF2, are significantly increased in fetal mouse hearts treated with
NaVP.
CONCLUSIONS: The study indicates that administration of NaVP in pregnant mice can
result in various cardiac abnormalities in fetal hearts, which is associated with
an inhibition of histone deacetylase without altering the transcription of this
enzyme.

PMCID: PMC2841099
PMID: 20219112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Jun;25(6):1216-33. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.34.

Enhanced differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to mesenchymal progenitors
by inhibition of TGF-beta/activin/nodal signaling using SB-431542.

Mahmood A(1), Harkness L, Schrøder HD, Abdallah BM, Kassem M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biotechnology Centre, Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital
of Odense, University of South Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

Directing differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) into specific
cell types using an easy and reproducible protocol is a prerequisite for the
clinical use of hESCs in regenerative-medicine procedures. Here, we report a
protocol for directing the differentiation of hESCs into mesenchymal progenitor
cells. We demonstrate that inhibition of transforming growth factor beta
(TGF-beta)/activin/nodal signaling during embryoid body (EB) formation using
SB-431542 (SB) in serum-free medium markedly upregulated paraxial mesodermal
markers (TBX6, TBX5) and several myogenic developmental markers, including early 
myogenic transcriptional factors (Myf5, Pax7), as well as myocyte-committed
markers [NCAM, CD34, desmin, MHC (fast), alpha-smooth muscle actin, Nkx2.5,
cTNT]. Continuous inhibition of TGF-beta signaling in EB outgrowth cultures
(SB-OG) enriched for myocyte progenitor cells; markers were PAX7(+) (25%),
MYOD1(+) (52%), and NCAM(+) (CD56) (73%). DNA microarray analysis revealed
differential upregulation of 117 genes (>2-fold compared with control cells)
annotated to myogenic development and function. Moreover, these cells showed the 
ability to contract (80% of the population) and formed myofibers when implanted
intramuscularly in vivo. Interestingly, SB-OG cells cultured in 10% fetal bovine 
serum (FBS) developed into a homogeneous population of mesenchymal progenitors
that expressed CD markers characteristic of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs):
CD44(+) (100%), CD73(+) (98%), CD146(+) (96%), and CD166(+) (88%) with the
ability to differentiate into osteoblasts, adipocytes, and chondrocytes in vitro 
and in vivo. Furthermore, microarray analysis of these cells revealed
downregulation of genes related to myogenesis: MYH3 (-167.9-fold), ACTA1
(-161-fold), MYBPH (-139-fold), ACTC (-100.3-fold), MYH8 (-45.5-fold), and MYOT
(-41.8-fold) and marked upregulation of genes related to mesoderm-derived cell
lineages. In conclusion, our data provides a simple and versatile protocol for
directing the differentiation of hESCs into a myogenic lineage and then further
into mesenchymal progenitors by blocking the TGF-beta signaling pathway.

(c) 2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 20200949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Dev Cell. 2010 Jan 19;18(1):148-56. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.11.013.

Tbx4 and tbx5 acting in connective tissue are required for limb muscle and tendon
patterning.

Hasson P(1), DeLaurier A, Bennett M, Grigorieva E, Naiche LA, Papaioannou VE,
Mohun TJ, Logan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC-National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

Proper functioning of the musculoskeletal system requires the precise integration
of bones, muscles, and tendons. Complex morphogenetic events ensure that these
elements are linked together in the appropriate three-dimensional configuration. 
It has been difficult, however, to tease apart the mechanisms that regulate
tissue morphogenesis. We find that deletion of Tbx5 in forelimbs (or Tbx4 in
hindlimbs) specifically affects muscle and tendon patterning without disrupting
skeletal development, thus suggesting that distinct cues regulate these
processes. We identify muscle connective tissue as the site of action of these
transcription factors and show that N-Cadherin and beta-Catenin are key
downstream effectors acting in muscle connective tissue and regulating
soft-tissue morphogenesis. In humans, TBX5 mutations lead to Holt-Oram syndrome, 
which is characterized by forelimb musculoskeletal defects. Our results suggest
that a focus on connective tissue is required to understand the etiology of
diseases affecting soft tissue formation.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3034643
PMID: 20152185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 9;285(15):11129-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.087429. Epub 2010
Feb 3.

Pitx2-dependent occupancy by histone deacetylases is associated with T-box gene
regulation in mammalian abdominal tissue.

Hilton T(1), Gross MK, Kioussi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factor Pitx2 and the T-box transcription factors
are essential for organogenesis. Pitx2 and T-box genes are induced by growth
factors and function as transcriptional activators or repressors. Gene expression
analyses on abdominal tissue were used to identify seven of the T-box genes of
the genome as Pitx2 target genes in the abdomen at embryonic day.10.5. Pitx2
activated Tbx4, Tbx15, and Mga and repressed Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx5, and Tbx6
expression. As expected, activated genes showed reduced expression patterns, and 
repressed T-box genes showed increased expression patterns in the abdomen of
Pitx2 mutants. Pitx2 occupied chromatin sites near all of these T-box genes.
Co-occupancy by coactivators, corepressors, and histone acetylation at these
sites was frequently Pitx2-dependent. Genes repressed by Pitx2 generally showed
increased histone acetylation and decreased histone deacetylase
(HDAC)/corepressor occupancy in Pitx2 mutants. The lower N-CoR, HDAC1, and HDAC3 
occupancy observed at multiple sites along Tbx1 chromatin in mutants is
consistent with the model that increased histone acetylation and gene expression 
of Tbx1 may result from a loss of recruitment of corepressors by Pitx2. Genes
activated by Pitx2 showed less consistent patterns in chromatin analyses. Reduced
H4 acetylation and increased HDAC1/nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR) occupancy
at some Tbx4 sites were accompanied by increased H3 acetylation and reduced HDAC3
occupancy at the same or other more distal chromatin sites in mutants.
Pitx2-dependent occupancy by corepressors resulted in alteration of the
acetylation levels of several T-box genes, whereas Pitx2-dependent occupancy by
coactivators was more site-localized. These studies will provide the basic
scientific underpinning to understand abdominal wall syndromes.

PMCID: PMC2856990
PMID: 20129917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2010 Dec;43(6):720-30. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2009-0412OC. 
Epub 2010 Jan 29.

Genetic influences on asthma susceptibility in the developing lung.

Carpe N(1), Mandeville I, Ribeiro L, Ponton A, Martin JG, Kho AT, Chu JH,
Tantisira K, Weiss ST, Raby BA, Kaplan F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, 4060 Saint Catherine West,
Montreal, PQ, Canada.

Asthma is the leading serious pediatric chronic illness in the United States,
affecting 7.1 million children. The prevalence of asthma in children under 4
years of age has increased dramatically in the last 2 decades. Existing evidence 
suggests that this increase in prevalence derives from early environmental
exposures acting on a pre-existing asthma-susceptible genotype. We studied the
origins of asthma susceptibility in developing lung in rat strains that model the
distinct phenotypes of airway hyperresponsiveness (Fisher rats) and atopy (brown 
Norway [BN] rats). Postnatal BN rat lungs showed increased epithelial
proliferation and tracheal goblet cell hyperplasia. Fisher pups showed increased 
lung resistance at age 2 weeks, with elevated neutrophils throughout the
postnatal period. Diverse transcriptomic signatures characterized the distinct
respiratory phenotypes of developing lung in both rat models. Linear regression
across age and strain identified developmental variation in expression of 1,376
genes, and confirmed both strain and temporal regulation of lung gene expression.
Biological processes that were heavily represented included growth and
development (including the T Box 1 transcription factor [Tbx5], the epidermal
growth factor receptor [Egfr], the transforming growth factor beta-1-induced
transcript 1 [Tgfbr1i1]), extracellular matrix and cell adhesion (including
collagen and integrin genes), and immune function (including lymphocyte antigen 6
(Ly6) subunits, IL-17b, Toll-interacting protein, and Ficolin B). Genes validated
by quantitative RT-PCR and protein analysis included collagen III alpha 1 Col3a1,
Ly6b, glucocorticoid receptor and Importin-13 (specific to the BN rat lung), and 
Serpina1 and Ficolin B (specific to the Fisher lung). Innate differences in
patterns of gene expression in developing lung that contribute to individual
variation in respiratory phenotype are likely to contribute to the pathogenesis
of asthma.

PMCID: PMC3159089
PMID: 20118217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Nat Genet. 2010 Feb;42(2):117-22. doi: 10.1038/ng.511. Epub 2010 Jan 10.

Several common variants modulate heart rate, PR interval and QRS duration.

Holm H(1), Gudbjartsson DF, Arnar DO, Thorleifsson G, Thorgeirsson G,
Stefansdottir H, Gudjonsson SA, Jonasdottir A, Mathiesen EB, Njølstad I, Nyrnes
A, Wilsgaard T, Hald EM, Hveem K, Stoltenberg C, Løchen ML, Kong A,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland. hilma.holm@decode.is

Electrocardiographic measures are indicative of the function of the cardiac
conduction system. To search for sequence variants that modulate heart rate, PR
interval and QRS duration in individuals of European descent, we performed a
genome-wide association study in approximately 10,000 individuals and followed up
the top signals in an additional approximately 10,000 individuals. We identified 
several genome-wide significant associations (with P < 1.6 x 10(-7)). We
identified one locus for heart rate (MYH6), four for PR interval (TBX5, SCN10A,
CAV1 and ARHGAP24) and four for QRS duration (TBX5, SCN10A, 6p21 and 10q21). We
tested for association between these loci and subjects with selected arrhythmias 
in Icelandic and Norwegian case-control sample sets. We observed correlations
between TBX5 and CAV1 and atrial fibrillation (P = 4.0 x 10(-5) and P = 0.00032, 
respectively), between TBX5 and advanced atrioventricular block (P = 0.0067), and
between SCN10A and pacemaker implantation (P = 0.0029). We also replicated
previously described associations with the QT interval.

PMID: 20062063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Nat Genet. 2010 Feb;42(2):153-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.517. Epub 2010 Jan 10.

Genome-wide association study of PR interval.

Pfeufer A(1), van Noord C, Marciante KD, Arking DE, Larson MG, Smith AV, Tarasov 
KV, Müller M, Sotoodehnia N, Sinner MF, Verwoert GC, Li M, Kao WH, Köttgen A,
Coresh J, Bis JC, Psaty BM, Rice K, Rotter JI, Rivadeneira F, Hofman A, Kors JA, 
Stricker BH, Uitterlinden AG, van Duijn CM, Beckmann BM, Sauter W, Gieger C,
Lubitz SA, Newton-Cheh C, Wang TJ, Magnani JW, Schnabel RB, Chung MK, Barnard J, 
Smith JD, Van Wagoner DR, Vasan RS, Aspelund T, Eiriksdottir G, Harris TB, Launer
LJ, Najjar SS, Lakatta E, Schlessinger D, Uda M, Abecasis GR, Müller-Myhsok B,
Ehret GB, Boerwinkle E, Chakravarti A, Soliman EZ, Lunetta KL, Perz S, Wichmann
HE, Meitinger T, Levy D, Gudnason V, Ellinor PT, Sanna S, Kääb S, Witteman JC,
Alonso A, Benjamin EJ, Heckbert SR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar der Technischen
Universität München, Munich, Germany. arne.pfeufer@web.de

The electrocardiographic PR interval (or PQ interval) reflects atrial and
atrioventricular nodal conduction, disturbances of which increase risk of atrial 
fibrillation. We report a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies for PR
interval from seven population-based European studies in the CHARGE Consortium:
AGES, ARIC, CHS, FHS, KORA, Rotterdam Study, and SardiNIA (N = 28,517). We
identified nine loci associated with PR interval at P < 5 x 10(-8). At the 3p22.2
locus, we observed two independent associations in voltage-gated sodium channel
genes, SCN10A and SCN5A. Six of the loci were near cardiac developmental genes,
including CAV1-CAV2, NKX2-5 (CSX1), SOX5, WNT11, MEIS1, and TBX5-TBX3, providing 
pathophysiologically interesting candidate genes. Five of the loci, SCN5A,
SCN10A, NKX2-5, CAV1-CAV2, and SOX5, were also associated with atrial
fibrillation (N = 5,741 cases, P < 0.0056). This suggests a role for common
variation in ion channel and developmental genes in atrial and atrioventricular
conduction as well as in susceptibility to atrial fibrillation.

PMCID: PMC2850197
PMID: 20062060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Dec 22;106(51):21726-30. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0910153106. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

Tbx4/5 gene duplication and the origin of vertebrate paired appendages.

Minguillon C(1), Gibson-Brown JJ, Logan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council-National Institute for Medical Research, The
Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

Paired fins/limbs are one of the most successful vertebrate innovations, since
they are used for numerous fundamental activities, including locomotion, feeding,
and breeding. Gene duplication events generate new genes with the potential to
acquire novel functions, and two rounds of genome duplication took place during
vertebrate evolution. The cephalochordate amphioxus diverged from other chordates
before these events and is widely used to deduce the functions of ancestral
genes, present in single copy in amphioxus, compared to the functions of their
duplicated vertebrate orthologues. The T-box genes Tbx5 and Tbx4 encode two
closely related transcription factors that are the earliest factors required to
initiate forelimb and hind limb outgrowth, respectively. Since the genetic
components proposed to be responsible for acquiring a trait during evolution are 
likely to be involved in the formation of that same trait in living organisms, we
investigated whether the duplication of an ancestral, single Tbx4/5 gene to give 
rise to distinct Tbx4 and Tbx5 genes has been instrumental in the acquisition of 
limbs during vertebrate evolution. We analyzed whether the amphioxus Tbx4/5 gene 
is able to initiate limb outgrowth, and assayed the amphioxus locus for the
presence of limb-forming regulatory regions. We show that AmphiTbx4/5 is able to 
initiate limb outgrowth and, in contrast, that the genomic locus lacks the
regulatory modules required for expression that would result in limb formation.
We propose that changes at the level of Tbx5 and Tbx4 expression, rather than the
generation of novel protein function, have been necessary for the acquisition of 
paired appendages during vertebrate evolution.

PMCID: PMC2799857
PMID: 19995988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Gene Expr Patterns. 2010 Jan;10(1):24-30. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2009.11.003. Epub
2009 Nov 17.

Identification and characterisation of the developmental expression pattern of
tbx5b, a novel tbx5 gene in zebrafish.

Albalat R(1), Baquero M, Minguillón C.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Tbx5 is a T-box transcription factor that has been characterised in most
vertebrate lineages and is widely expressed during the development of various
embryonic structures, including the heart, the eyes and the anterior set of
paired appendages (tetrapod forelimbs and fish pectoral fins). Mutations in TBX5 
cause Holt-Oram syndrome, an autosomal dominant human "heart-hand" condition
characterised by upper limb and heart malformations. In zebrafish, embryos with
compromised tbx5 function show a complete absence of pectoral fins, whereas heart
and eye development are not so highly disturbed. Here, we identify a new tbx5
gene in zebrafish that we have called tbx5b. This duplicate gene is present in
all teleost genomes whose sequence is available, suggesting it resulted from the 
teleost-specific genome duplication event that took place during fish evolution. 
We show that tbx5b has lost the characteristic forelimb/pectoral fin expression
of Tbx5 genes but has retained the eye and heart expression, partially
overlapping with that of its paralogue, now referred to as tbx5a. Functional
redundancy of tbx5a and tbx5b in the eye and heart would therefore explain the
mild phenotypes observed during development of these organs in fish embryos with 
compromised tbx5a function.

PMID: 19925885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Dev Biol. 2010 Jan 15;337(2):233-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.039. Epub 2009 
Nov 3.

Pdlim7 (LMP4) regulation of Tbx5 specifies zebrafish heart atrio-ventricular
boundary and valve formation.

Camarata T(1), Krcmery J, Snyder D, Park S, Topczewski J, Simon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University, The Feinberg School of
Medicine, Children's Memorial Research Center, 2300 Children's Plaza M/C 204,
Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

Tbx5 is involved in congenital heart disease, however, the mechanisms leading to 
organ malformation are greatly unknown. We hypothesized a model by which the Tbx5
binding protein Pdlim7 controls nuclear/cytoplasmic shuttling and function of the
transcription factor. Using the zebrafish, we present in vivo significance for an
essential role of Tbx5/Pdlim7 protein interaction in the regulation of cardiac
formation. Knock-down of Pdlim7 results in a non-looped heart, strikingly
reminiscent of the tbx5 heartstrings mutant phenotype. However, while
misregulation of Pdlim7 and Tbx5 produce similar aberrant cardiac morphology,
molecular and histological analysis uncovered that the Pdlim7 and Tbx5 cardiac
phenotypes are due to opposite effects on valve development. Loss of Pdlim7
function causes no valve tissue to develop while lack of Tbx5 results in
increased valve tissue. These opposing defects are evident before valve formation
and are the result of distinct gene misregulation during specification of the
atrio-ventricular (AV) boundary. We show that Pdlim7/Tbx5 interactions affect the
expression of Tbx5 target genes nppa and tbx2b at the AV boundary, and their
domains of misexpression directly correlate with the identified valve defects.
These studies demonstrate that controlling the correct balance of Tbx5 activity
is crucial for the specification of the AV boundary and valve formation.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2812577
PMID: 19895804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2010 Jan 29;17(1):87-98. doi: 10.1677/ERC-09-0065. Print
2010 Mar.

Novel gene rearrangements in transformed breast cells identified by
high-resolution breakpoint analysis of chromosomal aberrations.

Unger K(1), Wienberg J, Riches A, Hieber L, Walch A, Brown A, O'Brien PC, Briscoe
C, Gray L, Rodriguez E, Jackl G, Knijnenburg J, Tallini G, Ferguson-Smith M,
Zitzelsberger H.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health
(GmbH), Department of Radiation Cytogenetics, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, D-85764
Neuherberg, Germany.

Chromosomal copy number alterations and chromosomal rearrangements are frequent
mutations in human cancer. Unlike copy number alterations, little is known about 
the role and occurrence of chromosomal rearrangements in breast cancer. This may 
be due to the fact that chromosome-based breakpoint analysis is widely restricted
to cultured cells. In order to identify gene rearrangements in breast cancer, we 
studied the chromosomal breakpoints in radiation-transformed epithelial breast
cell lines using a high-resolution array-based approach using 1 Mb bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) arrays. The breakpoints were further narrowed down by
fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) with clones from the 32 k BAC library. 
The analysis of the cell lines B42-11 and B42-16 revealed rearrangements of
chromosomes 7, 8, 10 and 12. We identified the genes Has2, Grid1, Ret, Cpm, Tbx3,
Tbx5, Tuba1a, Wnt1 and Arf3 within the breakpoint regions. Quantitative RT-PCR
showed a deregulated expression of all of these candidate genes except for Tbx5
and Tbx3. This is the first study demonstrating gene rearrangements and their
deregulated mRNA expression in radiation-transformed breast cells. Since the gene
rearrangements occurred in the transformed and tumourigenic cell lines only, it
is likely that these were generated in conjunction with malignant transformation 
of the epithelial breast cells and therefore might reflect early molecular events
in breast carcinogenesis. Initial studies indicate that these gene alterations
are also found in sporadic breast cancers.

PMID: 19858224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Mech Dev. 2010 Jan-Feb;127(1-2):62-72. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.10.006. Epub 2009 
Oct 23.

Sonic hedgehog is involved in formation of the ventral optic cup by limiting Bmp4
expression to the dorsal domain.

Zhao L(1), Saitsu H, Sun X, Shiota K, Ishibashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Yoshida, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

Accumulating evidence suggests that Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays a
crucial role in eye vesicle patterning in vertebrates. Shh promotes expression of
Pax2 in the optic stalk and represses expression of Pax6 in the optic cup. Shh
signaling contributes to establishment of both proximal-distal and dorsal-ventral
axes by activating Vax1, Vax2, and Pax2. In the dorsal part of the developing
retina, Bmp4 is expressed and antagonizes the ventralizing effects of Shh
signaling through the activation of Tbx5 expression in chick and Xenopus. To
examine the roles of Shh signaling in optic cup formation and optic stalk
development, we utilized the Smoothened (Smo) conditional knockout (CKO) mouse
line. Smo is a membrane protein which mediates Shh signaling into inside of
cells. Cre expression was driven by Fgf15 enhancer. The ventral evagination of
the optic cup deteriorated from E10 in the Smo-CKO, whereas the dorsal optic cup 
and optic stalk develop normally until E11. We analyzed expression of various
genes such as Pax family (Pax2/Pax6), Vax family (Vax1/Vax2) and Bmp4. Bmp4
expression was greatly upregulated in the optic vesicle by the 21-somite stage.
Then Vax1/2 expression was decreased at the 20- to 24-somite stages. Pax2/6
expression was affected at the 27- to 32-somite stages. Our data suggest that the
effects of the absence of Shh signaling on Vax1/Vax2 are mediated through
increased Bmp4 expression throughout the optic cup. Also unchanged patterns of
Raldh2 and Raldh3 suggest that retinoic acid is not the downstream to Shh
signaling to control the ventral optic cup morphology.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19854269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Int J Cardiol. 2011 Feb 17;147(1):95-111. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2009.08.021. Epub
2009 Sep 22.

Differentiation induction of mouse embryonic stem cells into sinus node-like
cells by suramin.

Wiese C(1), Nikolova T, Zahanich I, Sulzbacher S, Fuchs J, Yamanaka S, Graf E,
Ravens U, Boheler KR, Wobus AM.

Author information: 
(1)In Vitro Differentiation Group, Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop
Plant Research IPK, Corrensstrasse 3, D-06466 Gatersleben, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Embryonic stem (ES) cells differentiate into cardiac phenotypes
representing early pacemaker-, atrial-, ventricular-, and sinus node-like cells, 
however, ES-derived specification into sinus nodal cells is not yet known. By
using the naphthylamine derivative of urea, suramin, we were able to follow the
process of cardiac specialization into sinus node-like cells.
METHODS: Differentiating mouse ES cells were treated with suramin (500 µM) from
day 5 to 7 of embryoid body formation, and cells were analysed for their
differentiation potential via morphological analysis, flow cytometry, RT-PCR,
immunohistochemistry and patch clamp analysis.
RESULTS: Application of suramin resulted in an increased number of cardiac cells,
but inhibition of neuronal, skeletal muscle and definitive endoderm
differentiation. Immediately after suramin treatment, a decreased mesendoderm
differentiation was found. Brachyury, FGF10, Wnt8 and Wnt3a transcript levels
were significantly down-regulated, followed by a decrease in mesoderm- and
cardiac progenitor-specific markers BMP2, GATA4/5, Wnt11, Isl1, Nkx2.5 and Tbx5
immediately after removal of the substance. With continued differentiation, a
significant up-regulation of Brachyury, FGF10 and GATA5 transcript levels was
observed, whereas Nkx2.5, Isl1, Tbx5, BMP2 and Wnt11 levels were normalized to
control levels. At advanced differentiation stages, sinus node-specific HCN4,
Tbx2 and Tbx3 transcript levels were significantly up-regulated.
Immunofluorescence and patch-clamp analysis confirmed the increased number of
sinus node-like cells, and electrophysiological analysis revealed a lower number 
of atrial- and ventricular-like cardiomyocytes following suramin treatment.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the interference of suramin with the cardiac
differentiation process modified mesoderm- and cardiac-specific gene expression
resulting in enhanced formation of sinus node-like cells.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4751033
PMID: 19775764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. FEBS J. 2009 Oct;276(20):5998-6010. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07310.x. Epub
2009 Sep 15.

Ocular abnormalities in mice lacking the immunoglobulin superfamily member Cdo.

Zhang W(1), Mulieri PJ, Gaio U, Bae GU, Krauss RS, Kang JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Erratum in
    FEBS J. 2009 Dec;276(23)7202.

Vertebrate eye development requires a series of complex morphogenetic and
inductive events to produce a lens vesicle centered within the bilayered optic
cup and a posteriorly positioned optic stalk. Multiple congenital eye defects,
including microphthalmia and coloboma, result from defects in early eye
morphogenesis. Cdo is a multifunctional cell surface immunoglobulin superfamily
member that interacts with and mediates signaling by cadherins and netrins to
regulate myogenesis. In addition, Cdo plays an essential role in early forebrain 
development by functioning as coreceptor for sonic hedgehog. It is reported here 
that Cdo is expressed in a dynamic, but dorsally restricted, fashion during early
eye development, and that mice lacking Cdo display multiple eye defects.
Anomalies seen in Cdo(-/-) mice include coloboma (failure to close the optic
fissure); failure to form a proper boundary between the retinal pigmented
epithelium and optic stalk; defective lens formation, including failure to
separate from the surface ectoderm; and microphthalmia. Consistent with this wide
array of defects, developing eyes of Cdo(-/-) mice show altered expression of
several regulators of dorsoventral eye patterning, including Pax6, Pax2, and
Tbx5. Taken together, these findings show that Cdo is required for normal eye
development and is required for normal expression of patterning genes in both the
ventral and dorsal domains. The multiple eye development defects seen in Cdo(-/-)
mice suggest that mutations in human Cdo could contribute to congenital eye
anomalies, such as Jacobsen syndrome, which is frequently associated with ocular 
defects, including coloboma and Peters' anomaly.

PMID: 19754878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Nature. 2009 Sep 3;461(7260):95-8. doi: 10.1038/nature08324.

Reptilian heart development and the molecular basis of cardiac chamber evolution.

Koshiba-Takeuchi K(1), Mori AD, Kaynak BL, Cebra-Thomas J, Sukonnik T, Georges
RO, Latham S, Beck L, Henkelman RM, Black BL, Olson EN, Wade J, Takeuchi JK,
Nemer M, Gilbert SF, Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California
94158, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2009 Sep 24;461(7263):550. Beck, Laural [corrected to Beck, Laurel].

The emergence of terrestrial life witnessed the need for more sophisticated
circulatory systems. This has evolved in birds, mammals and crocodilians into
complete septation of the heart into left and right sides, allowing separate
pulmonary and systemic circulatory systems, a key requirement for the evolution
of endothermy. However, the evolution of the amniote heart is poorly understood. 
Reptilian hearts have been the subject of debate in the context of the evolution 
of cardiac septation: do they possess a single ventricular chamber or two
incompletely septated ventricles? Here we examine heart development in the
red-eared slider turtle, Trachemys scripta elegans (a chelonian), and the green
anole, Anolis carolinensis (a squamate), focusing on gene expression in the
developing ventricles. Both reptiles initially form a ventricular chamber that
homogenously expresses the T-box transcription factor gene Tbx5. In contrast, in 
birds and mammals, Tbx5 is restricted to left ventricle precursors. In later
stages, Tbx5 expression in the turtle (but not anole) heart is gradually
restricted to a distinct left ventricle, forming a left-right gradient. This
suggests that Tbx5 expression was refined during evolution to pattern the
ventricles. In support of this hypothesis, we show that loss of Tbx5 in the mouse
ventricle results in a single chamber lacking distinct identity, indicating a
requirement for Tbx5 in septation. Importantly, misexpression of Tbx5 throughout 
the developing myocardium to mimic the reptilian expression pattern also results 
in a single mispatterned ventricular chamber lacking septation. Thus ventricular 
septation is established by a steep and correctly positioned Tbx5 gradient. Our
findings provide a molecular mechanism for the evolution of the amniote
ventricle, and support the concept that altered expression of developmental
regulators is a key mechanism of vertebrate evolution.

PMCID: PMC2753965
PMID: 19727199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 18;284(38):25653-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.041368. Epub
2009 Jul 31.

Functional role of transcriptional factor TBX5 in pre-mRNA splicing and Holt-Oram
syndrome via association with SC35.

Fan C(1), Chen Q, Wang QK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Molecular Cardiology, Lerner
Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

TBX5 is a T-box transcriptional factor required for cardiogenesis and limb
development. TBX5 mutations cause Holt-Oram syndrome characterized by congenital 
heart defects and upper limb deformations. Here we establish a novel function for
TBX5 in pre-mRNA splicing, and we show that this function is relevant to the
pathogenesis of Holt-Oram syndrome, providing a novel pathogenic mechanism for
the disease. Proteomics in combination with affinity purification identifies
splicing factor SC35 as a candidate TBX5-associating protein.
Co-immunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase pulldown assays confirm the 
complex formation between TBX5 and SC35. TBX5 can bind to RNA homopolymers
(polyribonucleotides) and to the 5'-splice site, which overrides the binding of
SC35 to the same RNA. Overexpression of TBX5 increases the efficiency of pre-mRNA
splicing and regulates alternative splice site selection. However, co-expression 
of TBX5 and SC35 antagonizes each other's positive effect on splicing. The most
severe TBX5 mutation, G80R, with complete penetrance of the cardiac phenotype,
strongly affects pre-mRNA splicing, whereas other mutations with incomplete
penetrance of the cardiac phenotype, including R237Q, do not alter the splicing
activity of TBX5. This study establishes TBX5 as the first cardiac gene and the
first human disease gene with dual roles in both transcriptional activation and
pre-mRNA splicing.

PMCID: PMC2757967
PMID: 19648116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Development. 2009 Aug;136(15):2665-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.038562.

Cx30.2 enhancer analysis identifies Gata4 as a novel regulator of
atrioventricular delay.

Munshi NV(1), McAnally J, Bezprozvannaya S, Berry JM, Richardson JA, Hill JA,
Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

The cardiac conduction system comprises a specialized tract of electrically
coupled cardiomyocytes responsible for impulse propagation through the heart.
Abnormalities in cardiac conduction are responsible for numerous forms of cardiac
arrhythmias, but relatively little is known about the gene regulatory mechanisms 
that control the formation of the conduction system. We demonstrate that a distal
enhancer for the connexin 30.2 (Cx30.2, also known as Gjd3) gene, which encodes a
gap junction protein required for normal atrioventricular (AV) delay in mice, is 
necessary and sufficient to direct expression to the developing AV conduction
system (AVCS). Moreover, we show that this enhancer requires Tbx5 and Gata4 for
proper expression in the conduction system, and Gata4(+/-) mice have short PR
intervals indicative of accelerated AV conduction. Thus, our results implicate
Gata4 in conduction system function and provide a clearer understanding of the
transcriptional pathways that impact normal AV delay.

PMCID: PMC2709072
PMID: 19592579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Yi Chuan. 2009 Apr;31(4):374-80.

[The mechanism of TBX5 abnormal expression in simple congenital heart disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Xin N(1), Qiu GR, Gong LG, Xu XY, Sun KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001,
China. znnadi@163.com

To explore the mechanism of TBX5 abnormal expression in simple congenital heart
disease (CHD), 100 CHD venous blood, 50 CHD heart tissues, and 5 non-CHD heart
tissues were involved in this study. The mutation and methylation in the 1 200 bp
region upstream of TBX5 gene were detected by high-performance liquid
chromatography (DHPLC) and methylation-sensitive restriction endonuclease
(MS-RE), respectively. The binding site of NKX2-5 to Tbx5 predicted by P-MATCH
software was validated by EMSA (Electrophoretic mobility shift assay). Tbx5 gene 
expression in mouse cardiac muscle cell H9C2(2-1) transfected with NKX2-5
expression vector was evaluated. No mutation was found in all patients. Both
non-CHD and CHD heart tissues had the same methylation in the two CpG islands.
Exogenous Nkx2-5 efficiently activated the transcription of the endogenous Tbx5
gene in H9C2 (2-1) cells. EMSA showed that the special binding band appeared when
Nkx2-5 existed. These results indicates that the down expression of TBX5 might
not be caused by mutation and methylation in the 1 200 bp region upstream of
gene, and might be regulated by abnormal expression of NKX2-5 gene in heart
muscle of CHD.

PMID: 19586889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Pediatr Res. 2009 Oct;66(4):386-90. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181b45580.

Fibroblast growth factor 10 plays a causative role in the tracheal cartilage
defects in a mouse model of Apert syndrome.

Tiozzo C(1), De Langhe S, Carraro G, Alam DA, Nagy A, Wigfall C, Hajihosseini MK,
Warburton D, Minoo P, Bellusci S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Women's and Children's Hospital, University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

Patients with Apert syndrome (AS) display a wide range of congenital
malformations including tracheal stenosis, which is a disease characterized by a 
uniform cartilaginous sleeve in place of a normally ribbed cartilagenous trachea.
We have studied the cellular and molecular basis of this phenotype in a mouse
model of AS (Fgfr2c(+/Delta) mice), which shows ectopic expression of Fgfr2b in
mesenchymal tissues. Here we report that tracheal stenosis is associated with
increased proliferation of mesenchymal cells, where the expression of Fgf10 and
its upstream regulators Tbx4 and Tbx5 are abnormally elevated. We show that Fgf10
has a critical inductive role in tracheal stenosis, as genetic knockdown of Fgf10
in Fgfr2c(+/Delta) mice rescues this phenotype. These novel findings demonstrate 
a regulatory role for Fgf10 in tracheal development and shed more light on the
underlying cause of tracheal defects in AS.

PMCID: PMC3725279
PMID: 19581825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Dev Biol. 2009 Sep 15;333(2):360-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.06.026. Epub 2009 
Jul 1.

Loss of Tbx2 delays optic vesicle invagination leading to small optic cups.

Behesti H(1), Papaioannou VE, Sowden JC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, London, WC1N 1EH, UK.

Tbx2 is a T-box transcription factor gene that is dynamically expressed in the
presumptive retina during optic vesicle invagination. Several findings implicate 
Tbx2 in cell cycle regulation, including its overexpression in tumours and
regulation of proliferation during heart development. We investigated the role of
Tbx2 in optic cup formation by analysing mice with a targeted homozygous mutation
in Tbx2. Loss of Tbx2 caused a reduced presumptive retinal volume due to
increased apoptosis, and a delay in ventral optic vesicle invagination leading to
the formation of small and abnormally shaped optic cups. Tbx2 is essential for
maintenance, but not induction of expression of the dorsal retinal determinant,
Tbx5, and acts downstream of Bmp4, a dorsally expressed gene implicated in human 
microphthalmia. The small retina showed a hypocellular ventral region, loss of
Fgf15, normally expressed in proliferating central retinal cells, and increased
numbers of mitotic cells in the dorsal region, indicating that Tbx2 is required
for normal growth and development across the D-V axis. Dorsal expression of
potential regulators of retinal growth, Cyp1b1 and Cx43, and the topographic
guidance molecule ephrinB2, was increased, and intraretinal axons were
disorganised resulting in a failure of optic nerve formation. Our data provide
evidence that Tbx2 is required for proper optic cup formation and plays a
critical early role in regulating regional retinal growth and the acquisition of 
shape during optic vesicle invagination.

PMCID: PMC2735611
PMID: 19576202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Nat Genet. 2009 Jun;41(6):677-87. doi: 10.1038/ng.384. Epub 2009 May 10.

Genome-wide association study of blood pressure and hypertension.

Levy D(1), Ehret GB, Rice K, Verwoert GC, Launer LJ, Dehghan A, Glazer NL,
Morrison AC, Johnson AD, Aspelund T, Aulchenko Y, Lumley T, Köttgen A, Vasan RS, 
Rivadeneira F, Eiriksdottir G, Guo X, Arking DE, Mitchell GF, Mattace-Raso FU,
Smith AV, Taylor K, Scharpf RB, Hwang SJ, Sijbrands EJ, Bis J, Harris TB, Ganesh 
SK, O'Donnell CJ, Hofman A, Rotter JI, Coresh J, Benjamin EJ, Uitterlinden AG,
Heiss G, Fox CS, Witteman JC, Boerwinkle E, Wang TJ, Gudnason V, Larson MG,
Chakravarti A, Psaty BM, van Duijn CM.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Framingham Heart Study,
Framingham, Massachusetts, USA. levyd@nhlbi.nih.gov

Blood pressure is a major cardiovascular disease risk factor. To date, few
variants associated with interindividual blood pressure variation have been
identified and replicated. Here we report results of a genome-wide association
study of systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP) blood pressure and hypertension in
the CHARGE Consortium (n = 29,136), identifying 13 SNPs for SBP, 20 for DBP and
10 for hypertension at P < 4 × 10(-7). The top ten loci for SBP and DBP were
incorporated into a risk score; mean BP and prevalence of hypertension increased 
in relation to the number of risk alleles carried. When ten CHARGE SNPs for each 
trait were included in a joint meta-analysis with the Global BPgen Consortium (n 
= 34,433), four CHARGE loci attained genome-wide significance (P < 5 × 10(-8))
for SBP (ATP2B1, CYP17A1, PLEKHA7, SH2B3), six for DBP (ATP2B1, CACNB2, CSK-ULK3,
SH2B3, TBX3-TBX5, ULK4) and one for hypertension (ATP2B1). Identifying genes
associated with blood pressure advances our understanding of blood pressure
regulation and highlights potential drug targets for the prevention or treatment 
of hypertension.

PMCID: PMC2998712
PMID: 19430479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Med Genet. 2009 Nov;46(11):730-5. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.066027. Epub 2009 May
7.

Genetic screening of 202 individuals with congenital limb malformations and
requiring reconstructive surgery.

Furniss D(1), Kan SH, Taylor IB, Johnson D, Critchley PS, Giele HP, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.

BACKGROUND: Congenital limb malformations (CLMs) are common and present to a
variety of specialties, notably plastic and orthopaedic surgeons, and clinical
geneticists. The authors aimed to characterise causative mutations in an
unselected cohort of patients with CLMs requiring reconstructive surgery.
METHODS: 202 patients presenting with CLM were recruited. The authors obtained
G-banded karyotypes and screened EN1, GLI3, HAND2, HOXD13, ROR2, SALL1, SALL4,
ZRS of SHH, SPRY4, TBX5, TWIST1 and WNT7A for point mutations using denaturing
high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and direct sequencing. Multiplex
ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA) kits were developed and used to
measure copy number in GLI3, HOXD13, ROR2, SALL1, SALL4, TBX5 and the ZRS of SHH.
RESULTS: Within the cohort, causative genetic alterations were identified in 23
patients (11%): mutations in GLI3 (n = 5), HOXD13 (n = 5), the ZRS of SHH (n =
4), and chromosome abnormalities (n = 4) were the most common lesions found.
Clinical features that predicted the discovery of a genetic cause included a
bilateral malformation, positive family history, and having increasing numbers of
limbs affected (all p<0.01). Additionally, specific patterns of malformation
predicted mutations in specific genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on higher mutation prevalence the authors propose that GLI3,
HOXD13 and the ZRS of SHH should be prioritised for introduction into molecular
genetic testing programmes for CLM. The authors have developed simple criteria
that can refine the selection of patients by surgeons for referral to clinical
geneticists. The cohort also represents an excellent resource to test for
mutations in novel candidate genes.

PMCID: PMC2764122
PMID: 19429598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Dev Biol. 2009 Aug 1;332(1):82-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.04.031. Epub 2009 May
3.

Axial patterning in snakes and caecilians: evidence for an alternative
interpretation of the Hox code.

Woltering JM(1), Vonk FJ, Müller H, Bardine N, Tuduce IL, de Bakker MA, Knöchel
W, Sirbu IO, Durston AJ, Richardson MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biology, Leiden University,
2333 AL, Leiden, the Netherlands. jmwoltering@hotmail.com

It is generally assumed that the characteristic deregionalized body plan of
species with a snake-like morphology evolved through a corresponding
homogenization of Hox gene expression domains along the primary axis. Here, we
examine the expression of Hox genes in snake embryos and show that a collinear
pattern of Hox expression is retained within the paraxial mesoderm of the trunk. 
Genes expressed at the anterior and most posterior, regionalized, parts of the
skeleton correspond to the expected anatomical boundaries. Unexpectedly however, 
also the dorsal (thoracic), homogenous rib-bearing region of trunk, is
regionalized by unconventional gradual anterior limits of Hox expression that are
not obviously reflected in the skeletal anatomy. In the lateral plate mesoderm we
also detect regionalized Hox expression yet the forelimb marker Tbx5 is not
restricted to a rudimentary forelimb domain but is expressed throughout the
entire flank region. Analysis of several Hox genes in a caecilian amphibian,
which convergently evolved a deregionalized body plan, reveals a similar global
collinear pattern of Hox expression. The differential expression of posterior,
vertebra-modifying or even rib-suppressing Hox genes within the dorsal region is 
inconsistent with the homogeneity in vertebral identity. Our results suggest that
the evolution of a deregionalized, snake-like body involved not only alterations 
in Hox gene cis-regulation but also a different downstream interpretation of the 
Hox code.

PMID: 19409887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Ir Med J. 2009 Feb;102(2):54-6.

Berry syndrome in association with familial limb malformation.

Shahdadpuri R(1), Prendiville T, Nölke L, McMahon CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Crumlin, 
Dublin. raveenshahdadpuri@yahoo.com

We describe a newborn boy diagnosed with Berry syndrome consisting of a distal
aortopulmonary septal defect, aortic origin of the right pulmonary artery, and
interruption of the aorta. The child was noted to have reduplication of the right
thumb. The child's mother had a claw malformation of her left hand but a normal
cardiovascular status. Genetic analysis for TBX5 and SALL4 mutations were
negative in both the patient and his mother. This case describes the first ever
report of Berry syndrome in an infant with reduplication of the right thumb and
familial limb malformation.

PMID: 19405322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Nature. 2009 Jun 4;459(7247):708-11. doi: 10.1038/nature08039. Epub 2009 Apr 26.

Directed transdifferentiation of mouse mesoderm to heart tissue by defined
factors.

Takeuchi JK(1), Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California
94158, USA. takeuchi.j.ab@m.titech.ac.jp

Comment in
    Nature. 2009 Jun 4;459(7247):654-5.

Heart disease is the leading cause of mortality and morbidity in the western
world. The heart has little regenerative capacity after damage, leading to much
interest in understanding the factors required to produce new cardiac myocytes.
Despite a robust understanding of the molecular networks regulating cardiac
differentiation, no single transcription factor or combination of factors has
been shown to activate the cardiac gene program de novo in mammalian cells or
tissues. Here we define the minimal requirements for transdifferentiation of
mouse mesoderm to cardiac myocytes. We show that two cardiac transcription
factors, Gata4 and Tbx5, and a cardiac-specific subunit of BAF
chromatin-remodelling complexes, Baf60c (also called Smarcd3), can direct ectopic
differentiation of mouse mesoderm into beating cardiomyocytes, including the
normally non-cardiogenic posterior mesoderm and the extraembryonic mesoderm of
the amnion. Gata4 with Baf60c initiated ectopic cardiac gene expression. Addition
of Tbx5 allowed differentiation into contracting cardiomyocytes and repression of
non-cardiac mesodermal genes. Baf60c was essential for the ectopic cardiogenic
activity of Gata4 and Tbx5, partly by permitting binding of Gata4 to cardiac
genes, indicating a novel instructive role for BAF complexes in tissue-specific
regulation. The combined function of these factors establishes a robust mechanism
for controlling cellular differentiation, and may allow reprogramming of new
cardiomyocytes for regenerative purposes.

PMCID: PMC2728356
PMID: 19396158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Dev Biol. 2009 Jun 1;330(1):175-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.03.024. Epub 2009
Apr 1.

Tbx5-mediated expression of Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II is
necessary for zebrafish cardiac and pectoral fin morphogenesis.

Rothschild SC(1), Easley CA 4th, Francescatto L, Lister JA, Garrity DM, Tombes
RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA
23284-2012, USA.

Mutations in the T-box transcription factor, TBX5, result in Holt-Oram syndrome
(HOS), a human condition in which cardiac development is defective and forelimbs 
are stunted. Similarly, zebrafish tbx5 morphants and mutants (heartstrings; hst) 
lack pectoral fins and exhibit a persistently elongated heart that does not
undergo chamber looping. Tbx5 is expressed in the developing atrium, ventricle
and in pectoral fin fields, but its genetic targets are still being uncovered. In
this study, evidence is provided that Tbx5 induces the expression of a specific
member of the CaMK-II (the type II multifunctional Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase) family; this CaMK-II is necessary for proper heart and fin
development. Morphants of beta2 CaMK-II (camk2b2), but not the beta1 CaMK-II
(camk2b1) paralog, exhibit bradycardia, elongated hearts and diminished pectoral 
fin development. Normal cardiac phenotypes can be restored by ectopic cytosolic
CaMK-II expression in tbx5 morphants. Like tbx5, camk2b2 is expressed in the
pectoral fin and looping heart, but this expression is diminished in both tbx5
morphant and hst embryos. Conversely, the introduction of excess Tbx5 into
zebrafish embryos and mouse fibroblasts doubles CaMK-II expression. We conclude
that beta CaMK-II expression and activity are necessary for proper cardiac and
limb morphogenesis. These findings not only identify a morphogenic target for
Ca(2+) during heart development, but support implied roles for CaMK-II in adult
heart remodeling.

PMID: 19345202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Biotechniques. 2009 Feb;46(2):101-13. doi: 10.2144/000113078.

A new method for detection and quantification of heartbeat parameters in
Drosophila, zebrafish, and embryonic mouse hearts.

Fink M(1), Callol-Massot C, Chu A, Ruiz-Lozano P, Izpisua Belmonte JC, Giles W,
Bodmer R, Ocorr K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92037, USA.

The genetic basis of heart development is remarkably conserved from Drosophila to
mammals, and insights from flies have greatly informed our understanding of
vertebrate heart development. Recent evidence suggests that many aspects of heart
function are also conserved and the genes involved in heart development also play
roles in adult heart function. We have developed a Drosophila heart preparation
and movement analysis algorithm that allows quantification of functional
parameters. Our methodology combines high-speed optical recording of beating
hearts with a robust, semi-automated analysis to accurately detect and quantify, 
on a beat-to-beat basis, not only heart rate but also diastolic and systolic
intervals, systolic and diastolic diameters, percent fractional shortening,
contraction wave velocity, and cardiac arrhythmicity. Here, we present a detailed
analysis of hearts from adult Drosophila, 2-3-day-old zebrafish larva, and
8-day-old mouse embryos, indicating that our methodology is potentially
applicable to an array of biological models. We detect progressive age-related
changes in fly hearts as well as subtle but distinct cardiac deficits in Tbx5
heterozygote mutant zebrafish. Our methodology for quantifying cardiac function
in these genetically tractable model systems should provide valuable insights
into the genetics of heart function.

PMCID: PMC2855226
PMID: 19317655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Biochem Cell Biol. 2009 Feb;87(1):77-91. doi: 10.1139/O08-114.

YAP, TAZ, and Yorkie: a conserved family of signal-responsive transcriptional
coregulators in animal development and human disease.

Wang K(1), Degerny C, Xu M, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QCH3A1A1,
Canada.

How extracellular cues are transduced to the nucleus is a fundamental issue in
biology. The paralogous WW-domain proteins YAP (Yes-associated protein) and TAZ
(transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif; also known as WWTR1, for
WW-domain containing transcription regulator 1) constitute a pair of transducers 
linking cytoplasmic signaling events to transcriptional regulation in the
nucleus. A cascade composed of mammalian Ste20-like (MST) and large tumor
suppressor (LATS) kinases directs multisite phosphorylation, promotes 14-3-3
binding, and hinders nuclear import of YAP and TAZ, thereby inhibiting their
transcriptional coactivator and growth-promoting activities. A similar cascade
regulates the trafficking and function of Yorkie, the fly orthologue of YAP.
Mammalian YAP and TAZ are expressed in various tissues and serve as coregulators 
for transcriptional enhancer factors (TEFs; also referred to as TEADs, for
TEA-domain proteins), runt-domain transcription factors (Runxs), peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma), T-box transcription factor 5
(Tbx5), and several others. YAP and TAZ play distinct roles during mouse
development. Both, and their upstream regulators, are intimately linked to
tumorigenesis and other pathogenic processes. Here, we review studies on this
family of signal-responsive transcriptional coregulators and emphasize how
relative sequence conservation predicates their function and regulation, to
provide a conceptual framework for organizing available information and seeking
new knowledge about these signal transducers.

PMID: 19234525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Apr;29(8):2205-18. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01923-08. Epub 2009 Feb
9.

Physical interaction between TBX5 and MEF2C is required for early heart
development.

Ghosh TK(1), Song FF, Packham EA, Buxton S, Robinson TE, Ronksley J, Self T,
Bonser AJ, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, School of Biology, University of Nottingham, Queen's
Medical Centre, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

TBX5 is a transcription factor which plays important roles in the development of 
the heart and upper limbs. Mutations in this gene produce the inherited disorder 
Holt-Oram syndrome. Here, we report a physical interaction between TBX5 and MEF2C
leading to a synergistic activation of the alpha-cardiac myosin heavy chain
(MYH6). Mutants of TBX5, TBX5G80R, and TBX5R279X that produce severe cardiac
phenotypes impair the synergy. Using fluorescence resonance energy transfer, we
demonstrate the interaction of TBX5 and MEF2C in living cells. We also show that 
they physically associate through their DNA-binding domains to form a complex on 
the MYH6 promoter. Morpholino-mediated knockdowns of Tbx5 and Mef2c in zebrafish 
suggest that the genetic interaction of these proteins is not only required for
MYH6 expression but also essential for the early stages of heart development and 
survival. This is the first report of a functional interaction between a T-box
protein and a MADS box factor that may be crucial in cardiomyocyte
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2663302
PMID: 19204083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Chin Med J (Engl). 2009 Jan 5;122(1):30-4.

Association of TBX5 gene polymorphism with ventricular septal defect in the
Chinese Han population.

Liu CX(1), Shen AD, Li XF, Jiao WW, Bai S, Yuan F, Guan XL, Zhang XG, Zhang GR,
Li ZZ.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Heart Centre, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Congenital heart disease is a diverse group of diseases determined by
genetic and environmental factors. Considerable research has been done on genes
associated with development of the heart. A recent focus is the role of
transcription factor TBX5 in the development of atria, left ventricle and
conduction system. As part of a larger study, high density, single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) scanning was used to explore the relationship between TBX5
gene polymorphism and susceptibility to ventricular septal defect not associated 
with forelimb malformation in the Chinese Han population.
METHODS: One hundred and ninety two paediatric patients with congenital
ventricular septal defect and 192 matched healthy control subjects were studied. 
The haplotype reconstructions were calculated by PHASE2.0 software. Haploview
software was used to perform linkage disequilibrium assessment and defining of
haplotype blocks. The algorithm used for defining of blocks was the confidence
interval method.
RESULTS: The TBX5 gene region can be divided into 3 haplotype blocks of 27, 15
and 2 SNPs. Strong linkage disequilibrium exists within each block. SNP
rs11067075 within the TBX5 gene had significant correlation with ventricular
septal defect (P = 0.0037) by single marker association analysis. In addition, a 
20 kb haplotype composed of 27 SNPs correlated with ventricular septal defect (P 
= 0.05, multiple loci regression analyses based on reconstructed haplotype
blocks).
CONCLUSIONS: TBX5 is associated with the occurrence of ventricular septal defect 
and may be a predisposing gene to congenital heart disease in Han Chinese. This
finding has set a direction for further genetic and functional studies.

PMID: 19187613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 17;106(7):2236-41. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0803202106. Epub 2009 Jan 21.

An essential role for Radar (Gdf6a) in inducing dorsal fate in the zebrafish
retina.

Gosse NJ(1), Baier H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Program in Developmental Biology, Genetics,
University of California, 1550 Fourth Street, San Francisco, CA 94158-2722, USA.

Retinal ganglion cells form orderly topographic connections with the tectum,
establishing a continuous neural representation of visual space. Mapping along
the dorsal-ventral axis requires interactions between EphB and ephrin-B
cell-surface molecules expressed as countergradients in both retina and tectum.
We have discovered that the diffusible TGFss-related factor Radar (Gdf6a) is
necessary and sufficient for activation of dorsal markers, such as Bmp4, Tbx5,
Tbx2b, and Ephrin-B2, and suppression of the ventral marker Vax2 in the zebrafish
retina. Radar mutant axons innervate only the dorsal half of the tectum, where
they form a compressed retinotectal map. Wild-type cells transplanted into the
dorsal retina are able to rescue the dorsal identity of nearby mutant cells.
Moreover, Radar overexpression "dorsalizes" retinal ganglion cell identity in the
ventral retina. We conclude that Radar is near the top of a signaling cascade
that establishes dorsal-ventral positional information in the retina and controls
the formation of the retinotectal map.

PMCID: PMC2650138
PMID: 19164594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2008 Sep;24(9):1582-7.

[Differentiation of human amniotic fluid stem cells into cardiomyocytes through
embryonic body formation].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang H(1), Chen S, Cheng X, Dou Z, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Northwest A & F University, College of Veterinary Medicine, Shaanxi Key
Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Shaanxi Stem Cell Engineering
and Technology Research Center, Yangling 712100, China.

To isolate human amniotic fluid stem cells (hASCs) and induce hASCs into
cardiomyocytes after forming the embryonic bodies. We cultivated hASCs isolated
from the amniotic fluid continually for over 42 passages. The biological
characteristics of hASCs were detected by immunocytochemistry, RT-PCR and flow
cytometer, hASCs at 10-15th passage were suspension cultured to form embryonic
bodies that were induced to cardiomyocytes. Fibroblastoid-type hASCs were
obtained. Immunocytochemistry, RT-PCR and flow cytometry analysis demonstrated
that hASCs were positive for some specific makers of the embryonic stem cell.
hASCs could form embryonic bodies that were alkaline-phosphatase positive and
expressed fgf5, zeta-globin and alpha-fetoprotein. The embryonic bodies could
differentiate into cardiomyocytes showing alpha-actin positive and Tbx5, Nkx2.5, 
GATA4 and alpha-MHC positive. We conclued that hASCs obtained from human amniotic
fluid could differentiate into cardiomyocytes through the formation of embryonic 
bodies.

PMID: 19160841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. PLoS One. 2009;4(1):e4249. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004249. Epub 2009 Jan 22.

Nkx2.7 and Nkx2.5 function redundantly and are required for cardiac morphogenesis
of zebrafish embryos.

Tu CT(1), Yang TC, Tsai HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Nkx2.7 is the tinman-related gene, as well as orthologs of Nkx2.5 and
Nkx-2.3. Nkx2.7 and Nkx2.5 express in zebrafish heart fields of lateral plate
mesoderm. The temporal and spatial expression patterns of Nkx2.7 are similar to
those of Nkx2.5, but their functions during cardiogenesis remain unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, Nkx2.7 is demonstrated to compensate for
Nkx2.5 loss of function and play a predominant role in the lateral development of
the heart, including normal cardiac looping and chamber formation. Knocking down 
Nkx2.5 showed that heart development was normal from 24 to 72 hpf. However, when 
knocking down either Nkx2.7 or Nkx2.5 together with Nkx2.7, it appeared that the 
heart failed to undergo looping and showed defective chambers, although embryos
developed normally before the early heart tube stage. Decreased ventricular
myocardium proliferation and defective myocardial differentiation appeared to
result from late-stage up-regulation of bmp4, versican, tbx5 and tbx20, which
were all expressed normally in hearts at an early stage. We also found that tbx5 
and tbx20 were modulated by Nkx2.7 through the heart maturation stage because an 
inducible overexpression of Nkx2.7 in the heart caused down-regulation of tbx5
and tbx20. Although heart defects were induced by overexpression of an injection 
of 150-pg Nkx2.5 or 5-pg Nkx2.7 mRNA, either Nkx2.5 or Nkx2.7 mRNA rescued the
defects induced by Nkx2.7-morpholino(MO) and Nkx2.5-MO with Nkx2.7-MO.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: Therefore, we conclude that redundant activities of
Nkx2.5 and Nkx2.7 are required for cardiac morphogenesis, but that Nkx2.7 plays a
more critical function, specifically indicated by the gain-of-function and
loss-of- function experiments where Nkx2.7 is observed to regulate the
expressions of tbx5 and tbx20 through the maturation stage.

PMCID: PMC2626283
PMID: 19158954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Dev Biol. 2009 Feb 15;326(2):368-77. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.11.004. Epub 2008 
Nov 20.

Interaction of Gata4 and Gata6 with Tbx5 is critical for normal cardiac
development.

Maitra M(1), Schluterman MK, Nichols HA, Richardson JA, Lo CW, Srivastava D, Garg
V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Congenital heart disease is the most common type of birth defect with an
incidence of 1%. Previously, we described a point mutation in GATA4 that
segregated with cardiac defects in a family with autosomal dominant disease. The 
mutation (G296S) exhibited biochemical deficits and disrupted a novel interaction
between Gata4 and Tbx5. To determine if Gata4 and Tbx5 genetically interact in
vivo, we generated mice heterozygous for both alleles. We found that nearly 100% 
of mice heterozygous for Gata4 and Tbx5 were embryonic or neonatal lethal and had
complete atrioventricular (AV) septal defects with a single AV valve and
myocardial thinning. Consistent with this phenotype, Gata4 and Tbx5 are
co-expressed in the developing endocardial cushions and myocardium. In mutant
embryos, cardiomyocyte proliferation deficits were identified compatible with the
myocardial hypoplasia. Similar to Gata4, Gata6 and Tbx5 are co-expressed in the
embryonic heart, and the transcription factors synergistically activate the
atrial natiuretic factor promoter. We demonstrate a genetic interaction between
Gata6 and Tbx5 with an incompletely penetrant phenotype of neonatal lethality and
thin myocardium. Gene expression analyses were performed on both sets of compound
heterozygotes and demonstrated downregulation of alpha-myosin heavy chain only in
Gata4/Tbx5 heterozygotes. These findings highlight the unique genetic
interactions of Gata4 and Gata6 with Tbx5 for normal cardiac morphogenesis in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC2651674
PMID: 19084512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 16;105(50):19833-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0808705105. Epub 2008 Dec 11.

Transcription factor neuromancer/TBX20 is required for cardiac function in
Drosophila with implications for human heart disease.

Qian L(1), Mohapatra B, Akasaka T, Liu J, Ocorr K, Towbin JA, Bodmer R.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Aging Program, Del E. Webb Neuroscience, Aging and Stem Cell
Research Center (NASCR), Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 10901 North
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jul 28;106(30):12561.

neuromancer/Tbx20 (nmr) genes are cardiac T-box transcription factors that are
evolutionarily conserved from flies to humans. Along with other known congenital 
heart disease genes, including tinman/Nkx2-5, dorsocross/Tbx5/6, and
pannier/Gata4/6, they are important for specification and morphogenesis of the
embryonic heart. The Drosophila heart has proven to be an excellent model to
study genes involved in establishing and maintaining the structural integrity of 
the adult heart, as well as genes involved in maintaining physiological function.
Using this model, we have identified nmr as a gene required in adult fly hearts
for the maintenance of both normal myofibrillar architecture and cardiac
physiology. Moreover, we have discovered synergistic interactions between nmr and
other cardiac transcription factors, including tinman/Nkx2-5, in regulating
cardiac performance, rhythmicity, and cardiomyocyte structure, reminiscent of
similar interactions in mice. This suggests a remarkably conserved role for this 
network of cardiac transcription factors in the genetic control of the adult
heart. In addition, nmr-tinman interactions also influence the expression of
potential downstream effectors, such as ion channels. Interestingly, genetic
screening of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and congenital heart disease
has revealed TBX20 variants in three sporadic and two familial cases that were
not found in controls. These findings suggest that the fly heart might serve as
an identifier of candidate genes involved in human heart disease.

PMCID: PMC2605007
PMID: 19074289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 16;105(50):19762-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0808393105. Epub 2008 Dec 10.

Beta-Catenin downregulation attenuates ischemic cardiac remodeling through
enhanced resident precursor cell differentiation.

Zelarayán LC(1), Noack C, Sekkali B, Kmecova J, Gehrke C, Renger A, Zafiriou MP, 
van der Nagel R, Dietz R, de Windt LJ, Balligand JL, Bergmann MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Campus-Buch and Campus Virchow-Klinikum,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Franz Volhard Klinik, Germany.

We analyzed the effect of conditional, alphaMHC-dependent genetic beta-catenin
depletion and stabilization on cardiac remodeling following experimental infarct.
beta-Catenin depletion significantly improved 4-week survival and left
ventricular (LV) function (fractional shortening: CT(Deltaex3-6): 24 +/- 1.9%;
beta-cat(Deltaex3-6): 30.2 +/- 1.6%, P < 0.001). beta-Catenin stabilization had
opposite effects. No significant changes in adult cardiomyocyte survival or
hypertrophy were observed in either transgenic line. Associated with the
functional improvement, LV scar cellularity was altered: beta-catenin-depleted
mice showed a marked subendocardial and subepicardial layer of small cTnT(pos)
cardiomyocytes associated with increased expression of cardiac lineage markers
Tbx5 and GATA4. Using a Cre-dependent lacZ reporter gene, we identified a
noncardiomyocyte cell population affected by alphaMHC-driven gene recombination
localized to these tissue compartments at baseline. These cells were found to be 
cardiac progenitor cells since they coexpressed markers of proliferation (Ki67)
and the cardiomyocyte lineage (alphaMHC, GATA4, Tbx5) but not cardiac Troponin T 
(cTnT). The cell population overlaps in part with both the previously described
c-kit(pos) and stem cell antigen-1 (Sca-1)(pos) precursor cell population but not
with the Islet-1(pos) precursor cell pool. An in vitro coculture assay of highly 
enriched (>95%) Sca-1(pos) cardiac precursor cells from beta-catenin-depleted
mice compared to cells isolated from control littermate demonstrated increased
differentiation toward alpha-actin(pos) and cTnT(pos) cardiomyocytes after 10
days (CT(Deltaex3-6): 38.0 +/- 1.0% alpha-actin(pos); beta-cat(Deltaex3-6): 49.9 
+/- 2.4% alpha-actin(pos), P < 0.001). We conclude that beta-catenin depletion
attenuates postinfarct LV remodeling in part through increased differentiation of
GATA4(pos)/Sca-1(pos) resident cardiac progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2604963
PMID: 19073933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2009 Jan;296(1):H159-70. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00375.2008. Epub 2008 Nov 14.

Na+/H+ exchanger isoform 1 facilitates cardiomyocyte embryonic stem cell
differentiation.

Li X(1), Karki P, Lei L, Wang H, Fliegel L.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biochemistry, Univ. of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Embryonic stem cells provide one potential source of cardiomyocytes for cardiac
transplantation; however, after differentiation of stem cells in vitro,
cardiomyocytes usually account for only a minority of cells present. To gain
insights into improving cardiomyocyte development from stem cells, we examined
the role of the Na(+)/H(+) exchanger isoform 1 (NHE1) in cardiomyocyte
differentiation. NHE1 protein and message levels were induced by treatment of
CGR8 cells to form embryoid bodies and cardiomyocytes. The NHE1 protein was
present on the cell surface and NHE1 inhibitor-sensitive activity was detected.
Inhibition of NHE1 activity during differentiation of CGR8 cells prevented
cardiomyocyte differentiation as indicated by decreased message for transcription
factors Nkx2-5 and Tbx5 and decreased levels of alpha-myosin heavy chain protein.
Increased expression of NHE1 from an adenoviral vector facilitated cardiomyocyte 
differentiation. Similar results were found with cardiomyocyte differentiation of
P19 embryonal carcinoma cells. CGR8 cells were treated to induce differentiation,
but when differentiation was inhibited by dispersing the EBs, myocardial
development was inhibited. The results demonstrate that NHE1 activity is
important in facilitating stem cell differentiation to cardiomyocyte lineage.
Elevated NHE1 expression appears to be triggered as part of the process that
facilitates cardiomyocyte development.

PMID: 19011045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Development. 2008 Dec;135(24):4101-11. doi: 10.1242/dev.027367. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Canonical Wnt signaling is required for the maintenance of dorsal retinal
identity.

Veien ES(1), Rosenthal JS, Kruse-Bend RC, Chien CB, Dorsky RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah, 401 MREB, 20 N.
1900 E., Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

Accurate retinotectal axon pathfinding depends upon the correct establishment of 
dorsal-ventral retinal polarity. We show that dorsal retinal gene expression is
regulated by Wnt signaling in the dorsal retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). We
find that a Wnt reporter transgene and Wnt pathway components are expressed in
the dorsal RPE beginning at 14-16 hours post-fertilization. In the absence of Wnt
signaling, tbx5 and Bmp genes initiate normal dorsal retinal expression but are
not maintained. The expression of these genes is rescued by the downstream
activation of Wnt signaling, and tbx5 is rescued by Bmp signaling. Furthermore,
activation of Wnt signaling cannot rescue tbx5 in the absence of Bmp signaling,
suggesting that Wnt signaling maintains dorsal retinal gene expression by
regulating Bmp signaling. We present a model in which dorsal RPE-derived Wnt
activity maintains the expression of Bmp ligands in the dorsal retina, thus
coordinating the patterning of these two ocular tissues.

PMCID: PMC2667153
PMID: 19004855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Dev Dyn. 2008 Dec;237(12):3681-9. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21770.

Ocular coloboma and dorsoventral neuroretinal patterning defects in Lrp6 mutant
eyes.

Zhou CJ(1), Molotkov A, Song L, Li Y, Pleasure DE, Pleasure SJ, Wang YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University of California,
Davis, California, USA. cjzhou@ucdavis.edu

Coloboma, an ocular birth defect seen in humans and other species, is caused by
incomplete closure of the optic fissure. Here, we demonstrate that genetic
deletion of Lrp6, a bottleneck coreceptor in the canonical Wnt signaling pathway,
results in ocular coloboma and neuroretinal patterning defects in mice. The
expression of ventral neuroretinal patterning gene Vax2 was conserved but with
dorsally shifted expression domains; however, the dorsal neuroretinal patterning 
gene Tbx5 was lost in the Lrp6-mutant eyes at embryonic day 10.5. Both Bmp4 and
phosphorylated Smad 1/5/8 were also significantly attenuated in the dorsal
neuroretina. In addition, the retinoic acid synthesizing enzymes Raldh1 and
Raldh3 were significantly changed in the mutant eyes. Our findings suggest that
defective retinal patterning causes coloboma in the Lrp6-deficient mice, and that
canonical Wnt signaling plays a primary role in dorsal neuroretinal patterning
and related morphogenetic movements by regulation of both Bmp and retinoic acid
signaling pathways.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2727282
PMID: 18985738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Arch Cardiol Mex. 2007 Oct-Dec;77 Suppl 4:S4-58-62.

[Genetic and congenital heart defects].

[Article in Spanish]

Calderón Colmenero J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Cardiología Pediátrica, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología "Ignacio
Chávez", INCICH, Juan Badiano Número 1, Col. Sección XVI, Tlalpan 14080, México, 
DF. juanecalderon@yahoo.com.mx

The understanding of the etiology of congenital heart disease is rapidly
progressing from the recognition of embryologic origins to insight into the
genetic basis for these disorders. Better understanding of the clinical
implications of specific mutations should allow not only for more sensitive and
specific diagnoses to be made but also for improvements in therapeutics options
an efficacy. Mutations in the T-box transcription factor TBX5 cause Holt-Oram
syndrome, an autosomal-dominant condition characterized by a familial history of 
congenital heart disease and upper limb defects. This review summarizes recent
developments in the study of Holt-Oram Syndrome.

PMID: 18938699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Circ Res. 2008 Nov 7;103(10):1139-46. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000338613.89841.c1.
Epub 2008 Oct 10.

Essential role of developmentally activated hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha for
cardiac morphogenesis and function.

Krishnan J(1), Ahuja P, Bodenmann S, Knapik D, Perriard E, Krek W, Perriard JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, Zürich,
Switzerland.

Development of the mammalian heart is governed by precisely orchestrated
interactions between signaling pathways integrating environmental cues and a core
cardiac transcriptional network that directs differentiation, growth and
morphogenesis. Here we report that in mice, at about embryonic day (E)8.5 to
E10.0, cardiac development proceeds in an environment that is hypoxic and
characterized by high levels of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)1alpha protein.
Mice lacking HIF1alpha in ventricular cardiomyocytes exhibit aborted development 
at looping morphogenesis and embryonic lethality between E11.0 to E12.0.
Intriguingly, HIF1alpha-deficient hearts display reduced expression of the core
cardiac transcription factors Mef2C and Tbx5 and of titin, a giant protein that
serves as a template for the assembly and organization of the sarcomere.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that Mef2C, Tbx5, and titin
are direct target genes of HIF1alpha in vivo. Thus, hypoxia signaling controls
cardiac development through HIF1alpha-mediated transcriptional regulation of key 
components of myofibrillogenesis and the cardiac transcription factor network,
thereby providing a mechanistic basis of how heart development, morphogenesis,
and function is coupled to low oxygen tension during early embryogenesis.

PMID: 18849322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Oct 1;9:88. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-88.

Functional analysis of the novel TBX5 c.1333delC mutation resulting in an
extended TBX5 protein.

Böhm J(1), Heinritz W, Craig A, Vujic M, Ekman-Joelsson BM, Kohlhase J, Froster
U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Universität Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany. Johann.Boehm@titus.u-strasbg.fr

BACKGROUND: Autosomal dominant Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is caused by mutations in
the TBX5 gene and is characterized by congenital heart and preaxial radial ray
upper limb defects. Most of the TBX5 mutations found in patients with HOS cause
premature truncation of the primary TBX5 transcript. TBX5 missense mutations
alter the three-dimensional structure of the protein and result in failed nuclear
localization or reduced binding to target DNA. In this study we present our
functional analyses of the novel and unusual c.1333delC mutation found in a
patient with classical HOS.
METHODS: The functional impact of this novel mutation was assessed by
investigating the intracellular localization of the resulting TBX5 protein and
its ability to activate the expression of its downstream target ANF.
RESULTS: The deletion of the cytosine is the first TBX5 frameshift mutation
predicted to result in an elongated TBX5 protein with 74 miscoding amino acids
and 62 supernumerary C-terminal amino acids. The c.1333delC mutation affects
neither the nuclear localization, nor its colocalization with SALL4, but severely
affects the activation of the ANF promoter.
CONCLUSION: The mutation c.1333delC does not locate within functional domains,
but impairs the activation of the downstream target. This suggests that
misfolding of the protein prevents its biological function.

PMCID: PMC2567295
PMID: 18828908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Circ Res. 2008 Sep 26;103(7):e96. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.181834.

Atrial Fibrillation and Other Clinical Manifestations of Altered TBX5 Dosage in
Typical Holt-Oram Syndrome.

McDermott DA, Hatcher CJ, Basson CT.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2008 Jun 6;102(11):1433-42.

PMCID: PMC2740619
PMID: 18818409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Dev Genes Evol. 2008 Dec;218(11-12):613-28. doi: 10.1007/s00427-008-0249-5. Epub 
2008 Sep 25.

Conservation of linkage and evolution of developmental function within the
Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily of T-box genes: implications for the origin of vertebrate
limbs.

Horton AC(1), Mahadevan NR, Minguillon C, Osoegawa K, Rokhsar DS, Ruvinsky I, de 
Jong PJ, Logan MP, Gibson-Brown JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis, 1 Brookings Drive, 
St. Louis, MO 63130, USA.

T-box genes encode a family of DNA-binding transcription factors implicated in
numerous developmental processes in all metazoans. The Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily genes
are especially interesting because of their key roles in the evolution of
vertebrate appendages, eyes, and the heart, and, like the Hox genes, the
longevity of their chromosomal linkage. A BAC library derived from the single
male amphioxus (Branchiostoma floridae) used to sequence the amphioxus genome was
screened for AmphiTbx2/3 and AmphiTbx4/5, yielding two independent clones
containing both genes. Using comparative expression, genomic linkage, and
phylogenetic analyses, we have reconstructed the evolutionary histories of these 
members of the T-box gene family. We find that the Tbx2-Tbx4 and Tbx3-Tbx5 gene
pairs have maintained tight linkage in most animal lineages since their birth by 
tandem duplication, long before the divergence of protostomes and deuterostomes
(e.g., arthropods and vertebrates) at least 600 million years ago, and possibly
before the divergence of poriferans and cnidarians (e.g., sponges and jellyfish).
Interestingly, we find that the gene linkage detected in all vertebrate genomes
has been maintained in the primitively appendage-lacking, basal chordate,
amphioxus. Although all four genes have been involved in the evolution of
developmental programs regulating paired fin and (later) limb outgrowth and
patterning, and most are also implicated in eye and heart development, linkage
maintenance--often considered due to regulatory constraints imposed by limb, eye,
and/or heart associated gene expression--is undoubtedly a consequence of other,
much more ancient functional constraints.

PMID: 18815807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Pediatr Res. 2009 Feb;65(2):193-7. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e31818d1dbd.

Genetic contributions to the development of retinopathy of prematurity.

Mohamed S(1), Schaa K, Cooper ME, Ahrens E, Alvarado A, Colaizy T, Marazita ML,
Murray JC, Dagle JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa 52242, USA.

There is growing support for the role of genetic factors in the development of
retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), a serious visual morbidity resulting from
preterm birth. We used both candidate gene and data-mining approaches to
investigate the role of genetic polymorphisms in the development of ROP. Our
study population consisted of 330 infants, less than 32 wk gestation, and their
parents. We initially studied 24 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 11
candidate genes. Using a family-based analysis strategy, we found an association 
between SNPs in the EPAS1 gene and the development of ROP (p = 0.007). Logistic
regression analysis showed three SNPs associated with development of ROP, two in 
the CFH gene (p = 0.01) and one in the EPAS1 gene (p = 0.001). Extending this
analysis to include genotyping data from a larger genetic study of prematurity
(455 SNPs in 153 genes), we found SNPs in five genes associated with the
development of ROP: IHH (p = 0.003), AGTR1 (p = 0.005), TBX5 (p = 0.003), CETP (p
= 0.004), and GP1BA (p = 0.005). Our data suggest that genetic risk factors
contribute to the development of ROP.

PMCID: PMC2671288
PMID: 18787502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2008;120(13-14):435-9. doi: 10.1007/s00508-008-0995-4.

Genetic analyses in a variant of Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome (MURCS
association).

Hofstetter G(1), Concin N, Marth C, Rinne T, Erdel M, Janecke A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Innsbruck Medical University,
Innsbruck, Austria. gerda.hofstetter@i-med.ac.at

Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome is characterized by the congenital
absence of uterus and upper part of the vagina as a result of Mullerian duct
agenesis. The combination of MRKH syndrome with renal anomalies and
cervicothoracic dysplasia is known as MURCS association (Mullerian aplasia, Renal
anomalies, and Cervicothoracic Somite dysplasia). The etiology remains poorly
understood. We delineate this disease by reporting on a 16-year-old patient
showing the cardinal features of MURCS association accompanied by a persistent
left superior vena cava and atrial septal defect, orofacial clefting, and mild
reduction deformities of the left hand. Fluorescence in situ hybridization did
not show major deletions or duplications of the DiGeorge/VCFS (velocardiofacial
syndrome) region at chromosome 22q11.1 as well as the TBX5/TBX3 region at
12q24.1. In addition, sequencing of the TP63L (p63) gene, residing at 3q27,
remained normal in the presented patient. Thus, we provide further evidence for
the genetic heterogeneity of MURCS association.

PMID: 18726671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Int J Cardiol. 2008 Oct 30;130(1):30-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2008.06.090. Epub
2008 Aug 15.

A novel TBX5 missense mutation (V263M) in a family with atrial septal defects and
postaxial hexodactyly.

Faria MH(1), Rabenhorst SH, Pereira AC, Krieger JE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology and Forensic Medicine, 
School of Medicine, Federal University of Ceará, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil.
mariofaria@doctor.com

BACKGROUND: Congenital heart diseases are the most frequent birth defects and are
commonly associated with skeletal malformations. Mutations in the TBX5 gene, a
T-box transcription factor located on chromosome 12q24.1, have been demonstrated 
to be the underlying molecular alteration in individuals with different
congenital cardiac disorders, notably the Holt-Oram syndrome.
METHODS: Six members from a two-generation family from a consanguineous couple,
which had atrial septal defects associated with postaxial hexodactyly in all
extremities were clinically assessed and submitted to TBX5 mutational analysis
performed by direct sequencing.
RESULTS: We detected a new TBX5 missense mutation (V263M) in all four individuals
studied with cardiac abnormalities. The genotype-phenotype correlations in light 
of unusual features are extensively discussed, as well as the possible
significance of these atypical findings.
CONCLUSIONS: These new data extend our clinical and molecular knowledge of TBX5
gene mutations and also raise interesting questions about the phenotype
heterogeneity regarding these gene alterations.

PMID: 18706711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Chin Med J (Engl). 2008 Apr 20;121(8):762-5.

Functional implications of C-terminus of TBX5 with high homology to C-terminal
domain of yeast DNA-directed RNA polymerase II largest subunit.

Zhou ZR(1), Gong LG, Geng WQ, Qiu GR, Sun KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning
110001, China.

PMID: 18701034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Hong Kong Med J. 2008 Aug;14(4):317-20.

Prenatal sonographic diagnosis of familial Holt-Oram syndrome associated with
type B interrupted aortic arch.

Law KM(1), Tse KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kowloon,
Hong Kong. lawkm@hkstar.com

We present a rare case of familial Holt-Oram syndrome diagnosed sonographically
at 18 weeks of gestation. The foetus had serious bilateral upper limb
malformations, a ventricular septal defect and a type B interrupted aortic arch, 
while the mother had bilateral upper limb malformations only. The pregnancy was
terminated. A pathological and radiological examination of the foetus confirmed
the prenatal sonographic findings. Although genetic investigation of TBX5
mutations was not available in our locality at the time of diagnosis, the
geneticists made a clinical diagnosis of familial Holt-Oram syndrome. The
clinical features of our case completely fulfilled the strict diagnostic criteria
for the syndrome. The cardiac malformations most commonly associated with
Holt-Oram syndrome are atrial or ventricular septal defects. To the best of our
knowledge, a prenatal diagnosis of Holt-Oram syndrome in association with a type 
B interrupted aortic arch has not been reported in the English literature before.

PMID: 18685167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 26;283(39):26705-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801485200. Epub 2008
Jul 28.

Crossveinless-2 controls bone morphogenetic protein signaling during early
cardiomyocyte differentiation in P19 cells.

Harada K(1), Ogai A, Takahashi T, Kitakaze M, Matsubara H, Oh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, Translational Research Center, Kyoto 
University Hospital, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. kharada_kuhp@yahoo.co.jp

Increasing evidence indicates that bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are crucial
for cardiac induction, specification, and development. Although signaling of BMPs
is tightly regulated through soluble BMP-binding proteins, how they regulate BMP 
signaling during cardiac differentiation remains unknown. To identify molecules
responsible for BMP signaling during early cardiomyocyte differentiation of P19
cells, cDNA subtraction was performed. We found a bimodal expression of the
BMP-binding protein Crossveinless-2 (Cv2) during cardiomyocyte differentiation;
Cv2 is temporally expressed earlier than cardiac transcription factors such as
Nkx2.5 and Tbx5 and acts as a suppressor for BMP signaling in P19 cells. We
established a P19 clonal cell line harboring a cardiac alpha-myosin heavy chain
promoter-driven enhanced green fluorescent protein gene to monitor cardiac
differentiation by flow cytometry. Treatment with BMP2 during the first 2 days of
differentiation suppressed cardiomyocyte differentiation through activation of
down-stream targets Smad1/5/8 protein and Id1 gene, whereas treatment with Cv2
conversely inhibited Smad1/5/8 activation and Id1 expression, leading to
increased generation of cardiac cells. RNA interference-mediated knockdown (KD)
of endogenous Cv2 showed increased Smad1/5/8 activation and impaired
cardiomyocyte differentiation. Expression of cardiac mesoderm markers was
reduced, whereas expression of Id1 and endoderm markers such as Sox7, Hnf4, and
E-cadherin was induced in Cv2-kinase dead cells. These phenotypes were rescued by
the addition of Cv2 protein to the culture media during the first 2 days of
differentiation or co-culture with parental cells. These data suggest that Cv2
may specify cardiac mesodermal lineage through inhibition of BMP signaling at
early stage of cardiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3258913
PMID: 18662983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Biomed Sci. 2008 Nov;15(6):779-87. doi: 10.1007/s11373-008-9268-5. Epub 2008
Jul 26.

Cascade effect of cardiac myogenesis gene expression during cardiac looping in
tbx5 knockdown zebrafish embryos.

Lu JH(1), Lu JK, Choo SL, Li YC, Yeh HW, Shiue JF, Yeh VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics & Pediatric Cardiology, Veterans General
Hospital-Taipei, National Yang Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
jhlu1234@ms15.hinet.net

Zebrafish tbx5 expresses in the heart, pectoral fins and eyes of zebrafish during
embryonic development. In zebrafish, injection of tbx5 morpholino antisense RNA
caused changes of heart conformation, defect of heart looping, pericardium
effusion, dropsy of ventral position and decreased heart rate. We suggested that 
cardiac myogenesis genes might be responsible for this phenomenon. Morpholino
antisense RNA which against the initiation site of tbx5 gene was designed in
order to knockdown the expression of tbx5, and the results were analyzed by
whole-mount in situ hybridization and quantitative real-time PCR. Expression of
cardiac myogenesis genes amhc, vmhc and cmlc2 were expressed constantly at the
early embryonic development and reached its highest rate right before cardiac
looping initiated. These cardiac myogenesis genes showed insufficient expressions
within different heart defect embryos. Moreover, vmhc showed ectopic expression
in addition to heart looping defect in heart defective embryos at 36 hpf. Our
data suggests that the heart failure caused by the knockdown of tbx5 gene might
result from the down-regulation of cardiac myogenesis genes.

PMID: 18661250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Circulation. 2008 Jul 29;118(5):507-17. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.778795.
Epub 2008 Jul 14.

Generation of functional murine cardiac myocytes from induced pluripotent stem
cells.

Mauritz C(1), Schwanke K, Reppel M, Neef S, Katsirntaki K, Maier LS, Nguemo F,
Menke S, Haustein M, Hescheler J, Hasenfuss G, Martin U.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Research Laboratories for Biotechnology and Artificial Organs,
Carl-Neuberg Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2008 Jul 29;118(5):472-5.

BACKGROUND: The recent breakthrough in the generation of induced pluripotent stem
(iPS) cells, which are almost indistinguishable from embryonic stem (ES) cells,
facilitates the generation of murine disease- and human patient-specific stem
cell lines. The aim of this study was to characterize the cardiac differentiation
potential of a murine iPS cell clone in comparison to a well-established murine
ES cell line.
METHODS AND RESULTS: With the use of a standard embryoid body-based
differentiation protocol for ES cells, iPS cells as well as ES cells were
differentiated for 24 days. Although the analyzed iPS cell clone showed a delayed
and less efficient formation of beating embryoid bodies compared with the ES cell
line, the differentiation resulted in an average of 55% of spontaneously
contracting iPS cell embryoid bodies. Analyses on molecular, structural, and
functional levels demonstrated that iPS cell-derived cardiomyocytes show typical 
features of ES cell-derived cardiomyocytes. Reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction analyses demonstrated expression of marker genes typical for
mesoderm, cardiac mesoderm, and cardiomyocytes including Brachyury, mesoderm
posterior factor 1 (Mesp1), friend of GATA2 (FOG-2), GATA-binding protein 4
(GATA4), NK2 transcription factor related, locus 5 (Nkx2.5), T-box 5 (Tbx5),
T-box 20 (Tbx20), atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), myosin light chain 2 atrial
transcripts (MLC2a), myosin light chain 2 ventricular transcripts (MLC2v),
alpha-myosin heavy chain (alpha-MHC), and cardiac troponin T in differentiation
cultures of iPS cells. Immunocytology confirmed expression of
cardiomyocyte-typical proteins including sarcomeric alpha-actinin, titin, cardiac
troponin T, MLC2v, and connexin 43. iPS cell cardiomyocytes displayed spontaneous
rhythmic intracellular Ca(2+) fluctuations with amplitudes of Ca(2+) transients
comparable to ES cell cardiomyocytes. Simultaneous Ca(2+) release within clusters
of iPS cell-derived cardiomyocytes indicated functional coupling of the cells.
Electrophysiological studies with multielectrode arrays demonstrated
functionality and presence of the beta-adrenergic and muscarinic signaling
cascade in these cells.
CONCLUSIONS: iPS cells differentiate into functional cardiomyocytes. In contrast 
to ES cells, iPS cells allow derivation of autologous functional cardiomyocytes
for cellular cardiomyoplasty and myocardial tissue engineering.

PMID: 18625890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Dev Dyn. 2008 Jun;237(6):1553-64. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21568.

All-trans retinoic acid-induced ectopic limb and caudal structures: murine strain
sensitivities and pathogenesis.

Liao X(1), Collins MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, University of California, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Treatment of pregnant mice at the egg cylinder stage with retinoic acid (RA) has 
caused ectopic hindlimbs in the offspring. Proposed causes of ectopic hindlimbs
include homeotic transformation or multiple axis formation. Two mouse strains
were determined to be divergent in susceptibility to this malformation (C57BL/6N,
highly sensitive; SWV/Fnn, less sensitive). Ectopic limbs were hindlimbs
(expressing Pitx1 and Tbx4 but not Tbx5), yet they also expressed the
predominantly forelimb Hoxb8. Ectopic body axis formation was indicated by gene
expression for ectopic primitive streaks, notochords, and nodes, as well as
inhibition of anterior visceral endoderm and mesodermal migration. The earlier in
development that embryos were examined, the higher the rate of ectopic hindlimb
development and axis formation. Ectopic axis formation and cell migration
inhibition had the same strain susceptibility as the dysmorphogenesis. We propose
that all extra hindlimbs were derived from ectopic axis formation, perturbation
of which is genetic background dependent.

PMID: 18498097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Dev Dyn. 2008 Jun;237(6):1627-35. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21570.

Retinoic acid controls heart anteroposterior patterning by down-regulating Isl1
through the Fgf8 pathway.

Sirbu IO(1), Zhao X, Duester G.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, Development and Aging Program, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Distinct progenitor cell populations exist in cardiac mesoderm important for
patterning of the heart. During heart tube formation in mouse, Tbx5 is expressed 
in progenitors located more laterally, whereas Isl1 and Fgf8 are expressed in
progenitors located more medially. Signals that drive mesodermal progenitors into
various cardiac lineages include Fgf8, which functions to induce Isl1. Studies in
chick and zebrafish have shown that retinoic acid restricts the number of cardiac
progenitors, but its role in mammalian cardiac development is unclear. Here, we
demonstrate that Raldh2(-/-) mouse embryos lacking retinoic acid signaling
exhibit a posterior expansion of the cardiac Fgf8 expression domain as well as an
expansion of Isl1 expression into mesoderm lying posterior to the cardiac field. 
We provide evidence that retinoic acid acts specifically in the posterior-medial 
region of the cardiac field to establish the heart posterior boundary potentially
by reducing Fgf8 expression which restricts the Isl1 domain.

PMCID: PMC2614402
PMID: 18498088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Circ Res. 2008 Jun 6;102(11):1433-42. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.168294. Epub
2008 May 1.

A gain-of-function TBX5 mutation is associated with atypical Holt-Oram syndrome
and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.

Postma AV(1), van de Meerakker JB, Mathijssen IB, Barnett P, Christoffels VM,
Ilgun A, Lam J, Wilde AA, Lekanne Deprez RH, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Failure Research Center, L2-108-1, Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef
15, 1105 AZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. a.v.postma@amc.uva.nl

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 Sep 26;103(7):e96.
    Circ Res. 2008 Jun 6;102(11):1304-6.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a heart/hand syndrome clinically characterized by
upper limb and cardiac malformations. Mutations in T-box transcription factor 5
(TBX5) underlie this syndrome. Here, we describe a large atypical HOS family in
which affected patients have mild skeletal deformations and paroxysmal atrial
fibrillation, but few have congenital heart disease. Sequencing of TBX5 revealed 
a novel mutation, c.373G>A, resulting in the missense mutation p.Gly125Arg, in
all investigated affected family members, cosegregating with the disease. We
demonstrate that the mutation results in normal Nkx2-5 interaction, is correctly 
targeted to the nucleus, has significantly enhanced DNA binding and activation of
both the Nppa(Anf) and Cx40 promoter, and significantly augments expression of
Nppa, Cx40, Kcnj2, and Tbx3 in comparison with wild-type TBX5. Thus, contrary to 
previously published HOS mutations, the p.G125R TBX5 mutation results in a
gain-of-function. We speculate that the gain-of-function mechanism underlies the 
mild skeletal phenotype and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and suggest a possible
role of TBX5 in the development of (paroxysmal) atrial fibrillation based on a
gain-of-function either through a direct stimulation of target genes via TBX5 or 
indirectly via TBX5 stimulated TBX3. These findings may warrant a renewed look at
the phenotypes of families and individuals hitherto not classified as HOS or as
atypical but presenting with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, because these may
possibly be the result of additional TBX5 gain-of-function mutations.

PMID: 18451335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Cell Cycle. 2008 May 1;7(9):1121-7. Epub 2008 Feb 14.

Shedding light on an old mystery: thalidomide suppresses survival pathways to
induce limb defects.

Knobloch J(1), Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Developmental and Molecular Biology,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany. juergen.knobloch@uk-koeln.de

Many hypotheses have been proposed to explain the molecular mechanism of
thalidomide teratogenicity, in particular regarding to limb defects. Most
experimental evidence in vivo has been provided for a model that suggests the
generation of oxidative stress by thalidomide with subsequent downregulation of
Wnt and Akt survival pathways. As a consequence apoptosis is induced during early
embryonic limb development resulting in limb truncations. Here we summarize and
discuss the relevant data supporting this hypothesis. We extend this model by
presenting new data demonstrating an involvement of the transcription factors
Tbx5 and Sall4 in thalidomide-induced molecular pathology. Finally, we discuss a 
possible participation of other stress-responsive and/or pro-apoptotic
transcription factors in the mechanism of thalidomide teratogenicity.

PMID: 18418038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Dev Biol. 2008 May 15;317(2):486-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.044. Epub 2008 
Mar 6.

Ndrg4 is required for normal myocyte proliferation during early cardiac
development in zebrafish.

Qu X(1), Jia H, Garrity DM, Tompkins K, Batts L, Appel B, Zhong TP, Baldwin HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

NDRG4 is a novel member of the NDRG family (N-myc downstream-regulated gene). The
roles of NDRG4 in development have not previously been evaluated. We show that,
during zebrafish embryonic development, ndrg4 is expressed exclusively in the
embryonic heart, the central nervous system (CNS) and the sensory system. Ndrg4
knockdown in zebrafish embryos causes a marked reduction in proliferative
myocytes and results in hypoplastic hearts. This growth defect is associated with
cardiac phenotypes in morphogenesis and function, including abnormal heart
looping, inefficient circulation and weak contractility. We reveal that ndrg4 is 
required for restricting the expression of versican and bmp4 to the developing
atrioventricular canal. This constellation of ndrg4 cardiac defects phenocopies
those seen in mutant hearts of heartstrings (hst), the tbx5 loss-of-function
mutants in zebrafish. We further show that ndrg4 expression is significantly
decreased in hearts with reduced tbx5 activities. Conversely, increased
expression of tbx5 that is due to tbx20 knockdown leads to an increase in ndrg4
expression. Together, our studies reveal an essential role of ndrg4 in regulating
proliferation and growth of cardiomyocytes, suggesting that ndrg4 may function
downstream of tbx5 during heart development and growth.

PMCID: PMC2800102
PMID: 18407257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2008 Aug;26(5):435-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2008.03.003.
Epub 2008 Mar 14.

Regulation of RALDH-1, RALDH-3 and CYP26A1 by transcription factors cVax/Vax2 and
Tbx5 in the embryonic chick retina.

Golz S(1), Mühleisen T, Schulte D, Mey J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie II, RWTH Aachen, Kopernikusstrasse 16, Aachen, Germany.

In vertebrate development, polarity of the dorsal-ventral eye axis is determined 
by the spatially restricted expression of transcription factors cVax/Vax2 in the 
ventral retina and Tbx5 in the dorsal retina. In addition, an early gradient of
retinoic acid (RA) has been suggested to be involved in this process. Using
retroviral transfection of the early eye anlage of chick embryos we investigated 
whether cVax/Vax2 and Tbx5 regulate the expression of enzymes that determine the 
retinal distribution of RA. Transfection of cVax/Vax2 completely abolished the
spatial expression pattern of the RA synthesizing enzyme RALDH-1, of the RA
degrading enzyme Cyp26A1 and caused an ectopic expression of RALDH-3 in the
dorsal retina. Transfection of Tbx5 did not significantly alter the distribution 
of RALDH-1 and RALDH-3 but caused additional patches of Cyp26 outside of its
normal domain of expression. The distribution of RA was experimentally changed
either by ectopic expression of Cyp26A1, or by applications of RA. These
manipulations did not affect the distribution of cVax/Vax2 or interfere with
development of the retinotectal projection from dorsal retinal ganglion cells.
The results show that in the chick retina the compartmentalized expression of RA 
metabolizing enzymes requires the spatially restricted expression of the
transcription factors cVax/Vax2 and Tbx5. On the other hand, RA may not be
decisive for the correct retinal projection toward the optic tectum.

PMID: 18406560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;28(12):4052-67. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02100-07. Epub 2008 Apr 
7.

Distinct expression and function of alternatively spliced Tbx5 isoforms in cell
growth and differentiation.

Georges R(1), Nemer G, Morin M, Lefebvre C, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit in Cardiac Growth and Differentiation, Institut de Recherches
Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.

Mutations in the T-box transcription factor Tbx5 cause Holt-Oram syndrome, an
autosomal dominant disease characterized by a wide spectrum of cardiac and upper 
limb defects with variable expressivity. Tbx5 haploinsufficiency has been
suggested to be the underlying mechanism, and experimental models are consistent 
with a dosage-sensitive requirement for Tbx5 in heart development. Here, we
report that Tbx5 levels are regulated through alternative splicing that
generates, in addition to the known 518-amino-acid protein, a C-terminal
truncated isoform. This shorter isoform retains the capacity to bind DNA, but its
interaction with Tbx5 collaborators such as GATA-4 is altered. In vivo, the two
spliced isoforms are oppositely regulated in a temporal and growth
factor-dependent manner and are present in distinct DNA-binding complexes. The
expression of the long isoform correlates with growth stimulation, and its
reexpression in postnatal transgenic mouse hearts promotes hypertrophy.
Conversely, the upregulation of the short but not the long isoform in C2C12
myoblasts leads to growth arrest and cell death. The results provide novel
insight into posttranscriptional Tbx5 regulation and point to an important role
not only in cell differentiation but also in cell proliferation and organ growth.
The data may help analyze genotype-phenotype relations in patients with Holt-Oram
syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2423137
PMID: 18391012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Apr 8;105(14):5519-24. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0801779105. Epub 2008 Mar 31.

Tbx5-dependent pathway regulating diastolic function in congenital heart disease.

Zhu Y(1), Gramolini AO, Walsh MA, Zhou YQ, Slorach C, Friedberg MK, Takeuchi JK, 
Sun H, Henkelman RM, Backx PH, Redington AN, Maclennan DH, Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)Programme in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Division of Cardiology and
Labatt Family Heart Centre, Programme in Physiology and Experimental Medicine,
and Mouse Imaging Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.

At the end of every heartbeat, cardiac myocytes must relax to allow filling of
the heart. Impaired relaxation is a significant factor in heart failure, but all 
pathways regulating the cardiac relaxation apparatus are not known.
Haploinsufficiency of the T-box transcription factor Tbx5 in mouse and man causes
congenital heart defects (CHDs) as part of Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS). Here, we
show that haploinsufficiency of Tbx5 in mouse results in cell-autonomous defects 
in ventricular relaxation. Tbx5 dosage modulates expression of the
sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase isoform 2a encoded by Atp2a2 and Tbx5 
haploinsufficiency in ventricular myocytes results in impaired Ca(2+) uptake
dynamics and Ca(2+) transient prolongation. We also demonstrate that Tbx5 can
activate the Atp2a2 promoter. Furthermore, we find that patients with HOS have
significant diastolic filling abnormalities. These results reveal a direct
genetic pathway that regulates cardiac diastolic function, implying that patients
with structural CHDs may have clinically important underlying anomalies in heart 
function that merit treatment.

PMCID: PMC2291114
PMID: 18378906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Stem Cells. 2008 Jun;26(6):1464-73. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0808. Epub 2008
Mar 27.

CXCR4+/FLK-1+ biomarkers select a cardiopoietic lineage from embryonic stem
cells.

Nelson TJ(1), Faustino RS, Chiriac A, Crespo-Diaz R, Behfar A, Terzic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Marriott Heart Disease Research Program, Division of
Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Pluripotent stem cells demonstrate an inherent propensity for unrestricted
multi-lineage differentiation. Translation into regenerative applications
requires identification and isolation of tissue-specified progenitor cells. From 
a comprehensive pool of 11,272 quality-filtered genes, profiling embryonic stem
cells at discrete stages of cardiopoiesis revealed 736 transcripts encoding
membrane-associated proteins, where 306 were specifically upregulated with
cardiogenic differentiation. Bioinformatic dissection of exposed surface
biomarkers prioritized the chemokine receptor cluster as the most significantly
over-represented gene receptor family during pre cardiac induction, with CXCR4
uniquely associated with mesendoderm formation. CXCR4(+) progenitors were sorted 
from the embryonic stem cell pool into mesoderm-restricted progeny according to
co-expression with the early mesoderm marker Flk-1. In contrast to
CXCR4(-)/Flk-1(-) cells, the CXCR4(+)/Flk-1(+) subpopulation demonstrated
overexpressed cardiac lineage transcription factors (Mef2C, Myocardin, Nkx2.5),
whereas pluripotent genes (Oct4, Fgf4, Sox2) as well as neuroectoderm (Sox1) and 
endoderm alpha-fetoprotein markers were all depleted. In fact, the
CXCR4(+)/Flk-1(+) biomarker combination identified embryonic stem cell progeny
significantly enriched with Mesp-1, GATA-4, and Tbx5, indicative of pre cardiac
mesoderm and the primary heart field. Although the CXCR4(+)/Flk-1(+)
transcriptome shared 97% identity with the CXCR4(-)/Flk-1(-) counterpart, the 818
divergent gene set represented predominantly cardiovascular developmental
functions and formed a primitive cardiac network. Differentiation of
CXCR4(+)/Flk-1(+) progenitors yielded nuclear translocation of myocardial
transcription factors and robust sarcomerogenesis with nascent cardiac tissue
demonstrating beating activity and calcium transients. Thus, the CXCR4/Flk-1
biomarker pair predicts the emergence of cardiogenic specification within a
pluripotent stem cell pool, enabling targeted selection of cardiopoietic lineage.
Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest is found at the end of this
article.

PMID: 18369102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 May 1;146A(9):1185-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32170.

Holt-Oram syndrome associated with anomalies of the feet.

Garavelli L(1), De Brasi D, Verri R, Guareschi E, Cariola F, Melis D, Calcagno G,
Salvatore F, Unger S, Sebastio G, Albertini G, Rivieri F, Soli F, Superti-Furga
A, Gentile M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Unit, Obstetric and Pediatric Department, S. Maria Nuova
Hospital, Reggio Emilia, Italy.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) (OMIM 142900) is characterized by upper-extremity
malformations involving the radial, thenar, or carpal bones and a personal and/or
family history of congenital heart defects (CHDs). It is inherited in an
autosomal dominant manner. The TBX5 gene located on chromosome 12 (12q24.1) is
the only gene currently known to be associated with HOS and is associated with
variable phenotypes. We report on the clinical and molecular characterization of 
a HOS family with three affected individuals and a novel mutation (Lys88ter). We 
discuss genotype-phenotype correlations, the presence of foot anomalies in one
affected individual, and the role of atypical features in HOS differential
diagnosis.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18351627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 25;105(12):4763-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0708451105. Epub 2008 Mar 12.

Zebrafish early cardiac connexin, Cx36.7/Ecx, regulates myofibril orientation and
heart morphogenesis by establishing Nkx2.5 expression.

Sultana N(1), Nag K, Hoshijima K, Laird DW, Kawakami A, Hirose S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biological Sciences and Biological Information, Tokyo Institute
of Technology, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Heart development is a precisely coordinated process of cellular proliferation,
migration, differentiation, and integrated morphogenetic interactions, and
therefore it is highly susceptible to developmental anomalies such as the
congenital heart disease (CHD). One of the major causes of CHD has been shown to 
be the mutations in key cardiac transcription factors, including nkx2.5. Here, we
report the analysis of zebrafish mutant ftk that showed a progressive heart
malformation in the later stages of heart morphogenesis. Our analyses revealed
that the cardiac muscle maturation and heart morphogenesis in ftk mutants were
impaired because of the disorganization of myofibrils. Notably, we found that the
expression of nkx2.5 was down-regulated in the ftk heart despite the normal
expression of gata4 and tbx5, suggesting a common mechanism for the occurrence of
ftk phenotype and CHD. We identified ftk to be a loss-of-function mutation in a
connexin gene, cx36.7/early cardiac connexin (ecx), expressed during early heart 
development. We further showed by a rescue experiment that Nkx2.5 is the
downstream mediator of Ecx-mediated signaling. From these results, we propose
that the cardiac connexin Ecx and its downstream signaling are crucial for
establishing nkx2.5 expression, which in turn promotes unidirectional, parallel
alignment of myofibrils and the subsequent proper heart morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2290751
PMID: 18337497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 9;369(3):801-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.141. Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Common marmoset embryonic stem cell can differentiate into cardiomyocytes.

Chen H(1), Hattori F, Murata M, Li W, Yuasa S, Onizuka T, Shimoji K, Ohno Y,
Sasaki E, Kimura K, Hakuno D, Sano M, Makino S, Ogawa S, Fukuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine and Advanced Cardiac Therapeutics, Keio
University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582,
Japan.

Common marmoset monkeys have recently attracted much attention as a primate
research model, and are preferred to rhesus and cynomolgus monkeys due to their
small bodies, easy handling and efficient breeding. We recently reported the
establishment of common marmoset embryonic stem cell (CMESC) lines that could
differentiate into three germ layers. Here, we report that our CMESC can also
differentiate into cardiomyocytes and investigated their characteristics. After
induction, FOG-2 was expressed, followed by GATA4 and Tbx20, then Nkx2.5 and
Tbx5. Spontaneous beating could be detected at days 12-15. Immunofluorescent
staining and ultrastructural analyses revealed that they possessed
characteristics typical of functional cardiomyocytes. They showed sinus node-like
action potentials, and the beating rate was augmented by isoproterenol
stimulation. The BrdU incorporation assay revealed that CMESC-derived
cardiomyocytes retained a high proliferative potential for up to 24 weeks. We
believe that CMESC-derived cardiomyocytes will advance preclinical studies in
cardiovascular regenerative medicine.

PMID: 18331825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Dev Biol. 2008 Apr 15;316(2):524-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.01.037. Epub 2008 
Feb 13.

Identification of downstream genetic pathways of Tbx1 in the second heart field.

Liao J(1), Aggarwal VS, Nowotschin S, Bondarev A, Lipner S, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Ave., Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Tbx1, a T-box transcription factor, and an important gene for velo-cardio-facial 
syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS) in humans, causes outflow tract (OFT) heart
defects when inactivated in the mouse. Tbx1 is expressed in the second heart
field (SHF) and is required in this tissue for OFT development. To identify Tbx1 
regulated genetic pathways in the SHF, we performed gene expression profiling of 
the caudal pharyngeal region in Tbx1(-/-) and wild type embryos. Isl1, a key
marker for the SHF, as well as Hod and Nkx2-6, were downregulated in Tbx1(-/-)
mutants, while genes required for cardiac morphogenesis, such as Raldh2, Gata4,
and Tbx5, as well as a subset of muscle contractile genes, signifying myocardial 
differentiation, were ectopically expressed. Pan-mesodermal ablation of Tbx1
resulted in similar gene expression changes, suggesting cell-autonomous roles of 
Tbx1 in regulating these genes. Opposite expression changes concomitant with
SHF-derived cardiac defects occurred in TBX1 gain-of-function mutants, indicating
that appropriate levels of Tbx1 are required for heart development. When taken
together, our studies show that Tbx1 acts upstream in a genetic network that
positively regulates SHF cell proliferation and negatively regulates
differentiation, cell-autonomously in the caudal pharyngeal region.

PMCID: PMC2494702
PMID: 18328475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Dev Growth Differ. 2008 Mar;50(3):143-57. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2008.00987.x. 
Epub 2008 Feb 27.

Induction of initial heart alpha-actin, smooth muscle alpha-actin, in chick
pregastrula epiblast: the role of hypoblast and fibroblast growth factor-8.

Matsui H(1), Sakabe M, Sakata H, Yanagawa N, Ikeda K, Yamagishi T, Nakajima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
City University, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

During heart development at the gastrula stage, inhibition of bone morphogenetic 
protein (BMP) activity affects the heart specification but does not impair the
expression of smooth muscle alpha-actin (SMA), which is first expressed in the
heart mesoderm and recruited into initial heart myofibrils. Interaction of
tissues between posterior epiblast and hypoblast at the early blastula stage is
necessary to induce the expression of SMA, in which Nodal and Chordin are thought
to be involved. Here we investigated the role of fibroblast growth factor-8
(FGF8) in the expression of SMA. In situ hybridization and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction showed that Fgf8b is expressed
predominantly in the nascent hypoblast. Anti-FGF8b antibody inhibited the
expression of SMA, cTNT, and Tbx5, which are BMP-independent heart mesoderm/early
cardiomyocyte genes, but not Brachyury in cultured posterior blastoderm, and
combined FGF8b and Nodal, but neither factor alone induced the expression of SMA 
in association with heart specific markers in cultured epiblast. Although FGF8b
did not induce the upregulation of phospho-Smad2, anti-FGF8b properties
suppressed phospho-Smad2 in cultured blastoderm. FGF8b was able to reverse the
BMP-induced inhibition of cardiomyogenesis. The results suggest that FGF8b acts
on the epiblast synergistically with Nodal at the pregastrula stage and may play 
a role in the expression of SMA during early cardiogenesis.

PMID: 18312428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Dev Growth Differ. 2008 Mar;50(3):159-68. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2008.00996.x. 
Epub 2008 Feb 27.

Introduction of silencing-inducing transgene against Fgf19 does not affect
expression of Tbx5 and beta3-tubulin in the developing chicken retina.

Okamoto M(1), Tomonari S, Naito Y, Saigo K, Noji S, Ui-Tei K, Ohuchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Systems, Institute of Technology and Science, The
University of Tokushima, 2-1 Minami-Josanjima-cho, Tokushima City 770-8506,
Japan.

Fgf19 is known to be expressed in the developing chicken eye but its functions
during retinal development have remained elusive. Since Fgf19 is expressed in the
dorsal portion of the optic cup, it is intriguing to know whether FGF19 is
required for expression of dorso-ventral morphogenetic genes in the eye. To
clarify this, expression patterns of Tbx5 and Vax were examined in the developing
eye after in ovo RNA interference targeted against Fgf19. Quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) analysis showed that the short-hairpin RNAs (shRNAs)
targeted against Fgf19 could reduce its expression in the eye to less than 50% of
a relative amount of mRNA, compared with contralateral or untreated control eyes.
However, no obvious alteration in expression domains of Tbx5 or Vax was observed.
Misexpression of Tbx5 or Tbx5-RNAi did not alter the Fgf19 expression either.
Furthermore, although Fgf19 is expressed in the central retina before
neurogenesis occurs, beta3-tubulin, a marker for early retinal differentiation
was still detected in the central retina after knockdown of Fgf19. Thus,
knockdown of Fgf19 supports no obvious regulations between Fgf19 and Tbx5, or
exhibits no phenotypes that perturb early retinal differentiation.

PMID: 18312426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 25;283(17):11841-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M702563200. Epub 2008 
Feb 25.

HIF-1alpha signaling upstream of NKX2.5 is required for cardiac development in
Xenopus.

Nagao K(1), Taniyama Y, Kietzmann T, Doi T, Komuro I, Morishita R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Gene Therapy, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita 565-0871, Japan.

HIF-1alpha is originally identified as a transcription factor that activates gene
expression in response to hypoxia. In metazoans, HIF-1alpha functions as a master
regulator of oxygen homeostasis and regulates adaptive responses to change in
oxygen tension during embryogenesis, tissue ischemia, and tumorigenesis. Because 
Hif-1alpha-deficient mice exhibit a number of developmental defects, the precise 
role of HIF-1alpha in early cardiac morphogenesis has been uncertain. Therefore, 
to clarify the role of HIF-1alpha in heart development, we investigated the
effect of knockdown of HIF-1alpha in Xenopus embryos using antisense morpholino
oligonucleotide microinjection techniques. Knockdown of HIF-1alpha resulted in
defects of cardiogenesis. Whole mount in situ hybridization for cardiac troponin 
I (cTnI) showed the two separated populations of cardiomyocytes, which is
indicative of cardia bifida, in HIF-1alpha-depleted embryos. Furthermore, the
depletion of HIF-1alpha led to the reduction in cTnI expression, suggesting the
correlation between HIF-1alpha and cardiac differentiation. We further examined
the expression of several heart markers, nkx2.5, gata4, tbx5, bmp4, hand1, and
hand2 in HIF-1alpha-depleted embryos. Among them, the expression of nkx2.5 was
significantly reduced. Luciferase reporter assay using the Nkx2.5 promoter showed
that knockdown of HIF-1alpha decreased its promoter activity. The cardiac
abnormality in the HIF-1alpha-depleted embryo was restored with co-injection of
nkx2.5 mRNA. Collectively, these findings reveal that HIF-1alpha-regulated nkx2.5
expression is required for heart development in Xenopus.

PMID: 18303027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Cardiovasc Res. 2008 Jun 1;78(3):485-93. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn049. Epub 2008 Feb
19.

Msx1 and Msx2 are functional interacting partners of T-box factors in the
regulation of Connexin43.

Boogerd KJ(1), Wong LY, Christoffels VM, Klarenbeek M, Ruijter JM, Moorman AF,
Barnett P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Heart Failure Research Centre, Academic 
Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105AZ Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

AIMS: T-box factors Tbx2 and Tbx3 play key roles in the development of the
cardiac conduction system, atrioventricular canal, and outflow tract of the
heart. They regulate the gap-junction-encoding gene Connexin43 (Cx43) and other
genes critical for heart development and function. Discovering protein partners
of Tbx2 and Tbx3 will shed light on the mechanisms by which these factors
regulate these gene programs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Employing an yeast 2-hybrid screen and subsequent in vitro
pull-down experiments we demonstrate that muscle segment homeobox genes Msx1 and 
Msx2 are able to bind the cardiac T-box proteins Tbx2, Tbx3, and Tbx5. This
interaction, as that of the related Nkx2.5 protein, is supported by the T-box and
homeodomain alone. Overlapping spatiotemporal expression patterns of Msx1 and
Msx2 together with the T-box genes during cardiac development in mouse and
chicken underscore the biological significance of this interaction. We
demonstrate that Msx proteins together with Tbx2 and Tbx3 suppress Cx43 promoter 
activity and down regulate Cx43 gene activity in a rat heart-derived cell line.
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis we demonstrate that Msx1 can bind
the Cx43 promoter at a conserved binding site located in close proximity to a
previously defined T-box binding site, and that the activity of Msx proteins on
this promoter appears dependent in the presence of Tbx3.
CONCLUSION: Msx1 and Msx2 can function in concert with the T-box proteins to
suppress Cx43 and other working myocardial genes.

PMID: 18285513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;28(5):1553-64. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

An evolutionarily conserved nuclear export signal facilitates cytoplasmic
localization of the Tbx5 transcription factor.

Kulisz A(1), Simon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
CMRC, 2300 Children's Plaza, Box #204, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

During cardiac development, the T-box transcription factor Tbx5 displays dynamic 
changes in localization from strictly nuclear to both nuclear and cytoplasmic to 
exclusively cytoplasmic along the actin cytoskeleton in cells coexpressing its
binding protein LMP4. Although nuclear localization signals (NLSs) have been
described, the mechanism by which Tbx5 exits the nucleus remained elusive. Here, 
we describe for Tbx5 a nuclear export signal (NES) that is recognized by the CRM1
export protein. Site-directed mutagenesis of a critical amino acid(s) within this
sequence determined the functionality of this NES. Confocal localization studies 
and luciferase transcriptional reporter assays with NES mutant Tbx5 forms
demonstrated retention in the nucleus, regardless of the presence of LMP4.
Coimmunoprecipitation and pharmacological interference studies demonstrated a
direct interaction between Tbx5 and CRM1, revealing that Tbx5 is using the CRM1
pathway for nuclear export. In addition to Tbx5, we identified NESs in all T-box 
proteins and demonstrated interaction of the family members Tbx3 and Brachyury
with the CRM1 exporter, suggesting general significance. This first demonstration
of evolutionarily conserved NESs in all T-box proteins in conjunction with NLSs
indicates a primordial function of T-box proteins to dynamically shuttle between 
nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments of the cell.

PMCID: PMC2258776
PMID: 18160705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Transplant Proc. 2007 Sep;39(7):2434-7.

Umbilical cord blood-derived stem cells spontaneously express cardiomyogenic
traits.

Prat-Vidal C(1), Roura S, Farré J, Gálvez C, Llach A, Molina CE, Hove-Madsen L,
Garcia J, Cinca J, Bayes-Genis A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Physiology, Department of Cardiology-Institut Català de
Ciències Cardiovasculars (ICCC) Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Umbilical cord blood (UCB) has been widely used for hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation. The UCB-derived stem cells (UCBSCs) have been proposed
as an alternative to bone marrow (BM)-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) for
cardiac cell-based therapy. Herein we studied whether UCBSCs spontaneously
exhibit cardiac-specific markers in vitro.
METHODS: Human UCBSCs were isolated, expanded, and phenotyped by flow cytometry, 
quantitative RT-PCR, and immunofluorescence. Cell pluripotency and proliferation 
were also assessed by adipogenic and osteogenic media and in growth assays.
RESULTS: Among 25 analyzed UCB, 16% of cases afforded primary culture
satisfactory generation of UCBSCs. Duplication time (Td) of cultures was 2.16 +/-
0.06 days. The cells were strongly positive for CD105 (18.5 +/- 0.14), CD44 (27
+/- 2.8), CD166 (13 +/- 9), CD29 (59 +/- 9.4), CD90 (60 +/- 11) and consistently 
negative for CD117 (1.2 +/- 0.1), CD106 (1.1 +/- 0), CD34 (1.2 +/- 0.2), CD14 (1 
+/- 0), and CD45 (1 +/- 0), consistent with a mesenchymal lineage. Adipogenesis
and osteogenesis of cells resulted in low accumulation of intracellular lipid
droplets and high deposition of calcium. The UCBSCs showed gene transcripts for
alpha-actinin, connexin (Cx)-43, SERCA-2, and stromal cell-derived factor
(SDF)-1alpha. At the protein level, the cells abundantly expressed alpha-actinin,
Cx-43, SERCA-2 and SDF-1alpha. In contrast, these cells did not express the
cardiac transcription factors GATA-4, Tbx5, and Nkx2.5, nor the sarcomeric
proteins beta-myosin heavy chain (beta-MyHC) or cardiac troponin I (cTnI).
CONCLUSIONS: Human UCBSCs may represent an alternative source of stem cells for
myocardial-cell replacement. These cells can be highly expanded. They
spontaneously express proteins of paramount importance for cardiovascular
regeneration, such as Cx-43, SERCA-2, and SDF-1alpha.

PMID: 17889212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Circ Res. 2007 Oct 26;101(9):910-8. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

STAT3-dependent mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation into cardiomyocytes:
analysis of molecular signaling and therapeutic efficacy of cardiomyocyte
precommitted mES transplantation in a mouse model of myocardial infarction.

Rajasingh J(1), Bord E, Hamada H, Lambers E, Qin G, Losordo DW, Kishore R.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, 303 E Chicago Ave, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Pluripotent embryonic stem (ES) cell therapy may be an attractive source for
postinfarction myocardial repair and regeneration. However, the specific stimuli 
and signal pathways that may control ES cell-mediated cardiomyogenesis remains to
be completely defined. The aim of the present study was to investigate (1) the
effect and underlying signal transduction pathways of leukemia inhibitory factor 
(LIF) and bone-morphogenic protein-2 (BMP-2)-induced mouse ES cell (mES-D3 line) 
differentiation into cardiomyocytes (CMC) and (2) the efficacy of CMC
precommitted mES cells for functional and anatomical cardiac repair in
surgically-induced mouse acute myocardial infarction (AMI) model. Various doses
of LIF and BMP-2 and their inhibitors or blocking antibodies were tested for mES 
differentiation to CMC in vitro. CMC differentiation was assessed by mRNA and
protein expression of CMC-specific markers, Connexin-43, CTI, CTT, Mef2c, Tbx5,
Nkx2.5, GATA-4, and alphaMHC. LIF and BMP-2 synergistically induced the
expression of CMC markers as early as 2 to 4 days in culture. Signaling studies
identified STAT3 and MAP kinase (ERK1/2) as specific signaling components of
LIF+BMP-2-mediated CMC differentiation. Inhibition of either STAT3 or MAPK
activation by specific inhibitors drastically suppressed LIF+BMP-2-mediated CMC
differentiation. Moreover, in mouse AMI, transplantation of
lentivirus-GFP-transduced, LIF+BMP-2 precommitted mES cells, improved post-MI
left ventricular functions, and enhanced capillary density. Transplanted cells
engrafted in myocardium and differentiated into CMC and endothelial cells. Our
data suggest that LIF and BMP-2 may synergistically enhance CMC differentiation
of transplanted stem cells. Thus augmentation of LIF/BMP-2 downstream signaling
components or cell type specific precommitment may facilitate the effects of ES
cell-based therapies for post-MI myocardial repair and regeneration.

PMID: 17823373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2007 Sep;79(9):631-41.

Perturbation of retinoic acid (RA)-mediated limb development suggests a role for 
diminished RA signaling in the teratogenesis of ethanol.

Johnson CS(1), Zucker RM, Hunter ES 3rd, Sulik KK.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, and Bowles Center for
Alcohol Studies, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
USA.

BACKGROUND: A proposed mechanism for ethanol teratogenicity entails
ethanol-mediated reductions in retinoic acid (RA). This premise was investigated 
utilizing a mouse model, with limb reduction defects as the teratogenic end
point.
METHODS: Ethanol, Disulfiram, or BMS-189453 was administered to C57BL/6J mice on 
the 9(th) day of pregnancy. Forelimb morphology was assessed on gestation day 18 
using Alcian blue and Alizarin red staining. Nile blue sulfate or LysoTracker Red
(LTR) vital staining identified cell death in the limb bud. The ability of RA to 
prevent ethanol-induced cell death was assessed by coadministration followed by
laser scanning confocal microscopic examination of LTR-staining. In situ
hybridization and qPCR were used to examine gene expression in treated limb buds.
RESULTS: Ethanol, Disulfiram, and BMS-189453 resulted in postaxial ectrodactyly, 
intermediate ectrodactyly, and other digital defects. Excessive Nile blue sulfate
staining was evident in the presumptive AER following each of the three
exposures. Ethanol-induced LTR staining was prevented by RA supplementation. Both
in situ hybridization and qPCR illustrated decreases in Shh and Tbx5 in
ethanol-exposed embryos as compared to control.
CONCLUSIONS: Contrary to studies of prolonged RA deficiency, acute exposure to
functional antagonists of RA results in limb defects that are morphologically
similar to those caused by ethanol. The rescue of ethanol-induced cell death by
RA and similar changes in Shh transcription further suggest that RA contributes
to ethanol-induced limb dysmorphology. Moreover, the repression of key mediators 
of limb development soon after ethanol exposure adds to the existing knowledge of
the pathogenic effects of ethanol.

PMID: 17676605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Aug;81(2):280-91. Epub 2007 Jun 15.

Mutations in cardiac T-box factor gene TBX20 are associated with diverse cardiac 
pathologies, including defects of septation and valvulogenesis and
cardiomyopathy.

Kirk EP(1), Sunde M, Costa MW, Rankin SA, Wolstein O, Castro ML, Butler TL, Hyun 
C, Guo G, Otway R, Mackay JP, Waddell LB, Cole AD, Hayward C, Keogh A, Macdonald 
P, Griffiths L, Fatkin D, Sholler GF, Zorn AM, Feneley MP, Winlaw DS, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, 2010, 
Australia.

The T-box family transcription factor gene TBX20 acts in a conserved regulatory
network, guiding heart formation and patterning in diverse species. Mouse Tbx20
is expressed in cardiac progenitor cells, differentiating cardiomyocytes, and
developing valvular tissue, and its deletion or RNA interference-mediated
knockdown is catastrophic for heart development. TBX20 interacts physically,
functionally, and genetically with other cardiac transcription factors, including
NKX2-5, GATA4, and TBX5, mutations of which cause congenital heart disease (CHD).
Here, we report nonsense (Q195X) and missense (I152M) germline mutations within
the T-box DNA-binding domain of human TBX20 that were associated with a family
history of CHD and a complex spectrum of developmental anomalies, including
defects in septation, chamber growth, and valvulogenesis. Biophysical
characterization of wild-type and mutant proteins indicated how the missense
mutation disrupts the structure and function of the TBX20 T-box. Dilated
cardiomyopathy was a feature of the TBX20 mutant phenotype in humans and mice,
suggesting that mutations in developmental transcription factors can provide a
sensitized template for adult-onset heart disease. Our findings are the first to 
link TBX20 mutations to human pathology. They provide insights into how mutation 
of different genes in an interactive regulatory circuit lead to diverse clinical 
phenotypes, with implications for diagnosis, genetic screening, and patient
follow-up.

PMCID: PMC1950799
PMID: 17668378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Pigment Cell Res. 2007 Aug;20(4):279-87.

T-box factors: targeting to chromatin and interaction with the histone H3
N-terminal tail.

Demay F(1), Bilican B, Rodriguez M, Carreira S, Pontecorvi M, Ling Y, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Signalling and Development Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The
Chart, Oxted, Surrey, UK.

T-box transcription factors play a crucial role in development where they are
implicated in patterning and cell fate decisions. Tbx2 and Tbx3 have also been
implicated in several cancers including melanoma, and can act as antisenescence
factors through their ability to repress p19(ARF) and p21(CIP1) expression.
Although several target genes for T-box factors have been identified, it is
unknown whether this family of proteins can bind chromatin, a property that would
facilitate the epigenetic reprogramming that occurs in both development and
cancer progression. Here, we show that Tbx2 has the potential to recognize
mitotic chromatin in a DNA-dependent fashion, can interact specifically with the 
histone H3 N-terminal tail, a property shared with Tbx4, Tbx5 and Tbx6, and can
also recognize nucleosomal DNA, with binding to nucleosomes being antagonized by 
the presence of the histone tails. Strikingly, in vivo Tbx2 co-localization with 
pericentric heterochromatin appears to be regulated and ectopic expression of
Tbx2 leads to severe mitotic defects. Taken together our results suggest that
Tbx2, and most likely other members of the T-box family, are able to target
chromatin and may indicate a role for the T-box factors in epigenetic
reprogramming events.

PMID: 17630961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Cell. 2007 Jun 29;129(7):1365-76.

A molecular pathway including Id2, Tbx5, and Nkx2-5 required for cardiac
conduction system development.

Moskowitz IP(1), Kim JB, Moore ML, Wolf CM, Peterson MA, Shendure J, Nobrega MA, 
Yokota Y, Berul C, Izumo S, Seidman JG, Seidman CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The cardiac conduction system is an anatomically discrete segment of specialized 
myocardium that initiates and propagates electrical impulses to coordinate
myocardial contraction. To define the molecular composition of the mouse
ventricular conduction system we used microdissection and transcriptional
profiling by serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE).
Conduction-system-specific expression for Id2, a member of the Id gene family of 
transcriptional repressors, was identified. Analyses of Id2-deficient mice
demonstrated structural and functional conduction system abnormalities, including
left bundle branch block. A 1.2 kb fragment of the Id2 promoter proved sufficient
for cooperative regulation by Nkx2-5 and Tbx5 in vitro and for
conduction-system-specific gene expression in vivo. Furthermore, compound
haploinsufficiency of Tbx5 and Nkx2-5 or Tbx5 and Id2 prevented embryonic
specification of the ventricular conduction system. We conclude that a molecular 
pathway including Tbx5, Nkx2-5, and Id2 coordinates specification of ventricular 
myocytes into the ventricular conduction system lineage.

PMID: 17604724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 31;282(35):25748-59. Epub 2007 Jun 21.

Transcriptional repression by the T-box proteins Tbx18 and Tbx15 depends on
Groucho corepressors.

Farin HF(1), Bussen M, Schmidt MK, Singh MK, Schuster-Gossler K, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30625
Hannover, Germany.

Tbox18 (Tbx18) and Tbox15 (Tbx15) encode a closely related pair of
vertebrate-specific T-box (Tbx) transcription factors. Functional analyses in the
mouse have proven the requirement of Tbx15 in skin and skeletal development and
of Tbx18 in the formation of the vertebral column, the ureter, and the posterior 
pole of the heart. Despite the accumulation of genetic data concerning the
embryological roles of these genes, it is currently unclear how Tbx18 and Tbx15
exert their function on the molecular level. Here, we have initiated a molecular 
analysis of Tbx18 and Tbx15 proteins and have characterized functional domains
for nuclear localization, DNA binding, and transcriptional modulation. We show
that both proteins homo- and heterodimerize, bind to various combinations of T
half-sites, and repress transcription in a Groucho-dependent manner. Competition 
with activating T-box proteins may constitute one mode of action as we show that 
Tbx18 interacts with Gata4 and Nkx2-5 and competes Tbx5-mediated activation of
the cardiac Natriuretic peptide precursor type a-promoter and that ectopic
expression of Tbx18 down-regulates Tbx6-activated Delta-like 1 expression in the 
somitic mesoderm in vivo.

PMID: 17584735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2007 Sep;462:20-6.

Novel TBX5 mutations in patients with Holt-Oram syndrome.

Debeer P(1), Race V, Gewillig M, Devriendt K, Frijns JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, University Hospital Pellenberg, Pellenberg,
Belgium. philippe.debeer@uz.kuleuven.ac.be

Holt-Oram syndrome (MIM #142900) is an autosomal-dominant disorder characterized 
by radial ray deformities of the upper limb associated with cardiac septation
and/or conduction defects. The disorder is caused by mutations in the
transcription factor TBX5. Several studies report a rather low detection rate
(range, 22-35%) of TBX5 mutations in patients with a clinical suspicion of
Holt-Oram syndrome. The low detection rate is attributed to clinical misdiagnosis
and genetic heterogeneity. However, a detection rate up to 74% has been reported 
when strict inclusion criteria for Holt-Oram syndrome are applied before genetic 
testing. We performed mutational analysis in a cohort of 27 unrelated patients
referred with a clinical diagnosis of Holt-Oram syndrome. Seven TBX5 mutations
were detected by direct sequencing. The detection rate of TBX5 mutations in this 
co hort of patients was 25.9% but increased to 54% when the strict phenotypical
criteria were applied. No mutations were found in patients who did not meet these
strict phenotypical criteria. Interestingly, we were unable to identify a TBX5
mutation in six of 13 patients who did meet the strict criteria. This study
confirms TBX5 genetic testing should be reserved for patients who fulfill the
strict phenotypic criteria for Holt-Oram syndrome.

PMID: 17534187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2007;48(1):67-70.

Holt-Oram syndrome.

Lichiardopol C(1), Militaru C, Popescu B, Hila G, Mixich F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova,
Romania. corinalich@gmail.com

The Holt-Oram syndrome or atriodigital dysplasia is an autosomal dominant
disorder with near complete penetrance and variable expression, caused by
mutations of the TBX5 gene (12q24.1), affecting one in 100 000 live births. 60%
of cases are familial and 40% sporadic. We present the case of a 24 years old
male patient with a personal history of bilateral coxa vara surgically corrected 
on the right at the age of 8 years, complicated by osteochondritis, short stature
(160 cm), underweight (37 kg, BMI 14.45 kg/cm(2)), triangular face, micrognathia,
down slanting palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, low set ears, scoliosis, narrow 
shoulders, shortened left arm, left thumb agenesia, limited supination, abnormal 
toes, hypoplastic muscles, atrial septal defect ostium secundum type, incomplete 
right bundle branch block, hypoacusia and normal intelligence.

PMID: 17502954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Jul 15;16(14):1649-60. Epub 2007 Apr 27.

Identification of a novel role of ZIC3 in regulating cardiac development.

Zhu L(1), Harutyunyan KG, Peng JL, Wang J, Schwartz RJ, Belmont JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mutations in ZIC3 cause X-linked heterotaxy, a disorder characterized by abnormal
lateralization of normally asymmetric thoracic and abdominal organs. Animal
models demonstrate an early role for ZIC3 in embryonic left-right (LR)
patterning. ZIC3 mutations have also been described in patients with isolated
cardiovascular malformations. We wished to address the hypothesis that ZIC3 has
plieotropic effects in development and may regulate cardiac development
independent of its role in LR patterning. We observed significantly reduced
expression of several markers of cardiac lineage commitment in Zic3(null/y)
embryonic stem cells including atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), Nkx2.5 and Tbx5. 
Likewise, ANF expression-a molecular marker of trabecular myocardium and a direct
target of multiple cardiac-specific transcription factors-was severely reduced in
E9.5 Zic3 null hearts. Trabecular myocardium was reduced in these embryos. This
finding was similar to that observed in embryos with cardiac-specific ablation of
serum response factor (SRF), a direct transcriptional regulator of ANF
expression. While ZIC3 by itself had no effect on the ANF promoter, it could bind
to and inhibit a cardiac alpha-actin promoter through its zinc finger domains. We
observed that ZIC3 could function as a coactivator of SRF on both cardiac
alpha-actin and ANF promoters. The zinc fingers of ZIC3 and the mcm1, agamous
deficiens SRF (MADS) box motif of SRF were found to mediate their physical and
functional interactions. These findings reveal a novel role of ZIC3 in regulating
cardiac gene expression and may explain, in part, the association of ZIC3
mutation with cardiovascular malformations.

PMID: 17468179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Circ Res. 2007 May 11;100(9):1353-62. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Beta-catenin downregulation is required for adaptive cardiac remodeling.

Baurand A(1), Zelarayan L, Betney R, Gehrke C, Dunger S, Noack C, Busjahn A,
Huelsken J, Taketo MM, Birchmeier W, Dietz R, Bergmann MW.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

The armadillo-related protein beta-catenin has multiple functions in cardiac
tissue homeostasis: stabilization of beta-catenin has been implicated in adult
cardiac hypertrophy, and downregulation initiates heart formation in
embryogenesis. The protein is also part of the cadherin/catenin complex at the
cell membrane, where depletion might result in disturbed cell-cell interaction
similar to N-cadherin knockout models. Here, we analyzed the in vivo role of
beta-catenin in adult cardiac hypertrophy initiated by angiotensin II (Ang II).
The cardiac-specific mifepristone-inducible alphaMHC-CrePR1 transgene was used to
induce beta-catenin depletion (loxP-flanked exons 3 to 6, beta-cat(Deltaex3-6)
mice) or stabilization (loxP-flanked exon 3, beta-cat(Deltaex3) mice). Levels of 
beta-catenin were altered both in membrane and nuclear extracts. Analysis of the 
beta-catenin target genes Axin2 and Tcf-4 confirmed increased
beta-catenin-dependent transcription in beta-catenin stabilized mice. In both
models, transgenic mice were viable and healthy at age 6 months. beta-Catenin
appeared dispensable for cell membrane function. Ang II infusion induced cardiac 
hypertrophy both in wild-type mice and in mice with beta-catenin depletion. In
contrast, mice with stabilized beta-catenin had decreased cross-sectional area at
baseline and an abrogated hypertrophic response to Ang II infusion. Stabilizing
beta-catenin led to impaired fractional shortening compared with control
littermates after Ang II stimulation. This functional deterioration was
associated with altered expression of the T-box proteins Tbx5 and Tbx20 at
baseline and after Ang II stimulation. In addition, atrophy-related protein
IGFBP5 was upregulated in beta-catenin-stabilized mice. These data suggest that
beta-catenin downregulation is required for adaptive cardiac hypertrophy.

PMID: 17413044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 May 11;356(3):773-9. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

Synergistic cooperation of Sall4 and Cyclin D1 in transcriptional repression.

Böhm J(1), Kaiser FJ, Borozdin W, Depping R, Kohlhase J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Universität Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.

Loss of function mutations in SALL4 cause Okihiro syndrome, an autosomal dominant
disorder characterised by radial ray malformations associated with Duane anomaly.
In zebrafish and mouse Sall4 interacts with TBX5 during limb and heart
development and plays a crucial role for embryonic stem (ES) cell pluripotency.
Here we report the nuclear interaction of murine Sall4 with Cyclin D1, one of the
main regulators of G(1) to S phase transition in cell cycle, verified by yeast
two-hybrid assay, co-immunoprecipitation and intracellular co-localisation.
Furthermore, using luciferase reporter gene assays we demonstrate that Sall4
operates as a transcriptional repressor located to heterochromatin and that this 
activity is modulated by Cyclin D1.

PMID: 17383611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Differentiation. 2007 Oct;75(8):726-36. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Stage-dependent expression of Pax6 in optic vesicle/cup regulates patterning
genes through signaling molecules.

Reza HM(1), Takahashi Y, Yasuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma 630-0101, Japan.

Dorso-ventral and proximo-distal axis formation of the optic cup is apparent from
early stages of development. Pax6 is initially detectable in the optic vesicle
and later shows a distal-high and proximal-low gradient of expression in the
retina. To determine the early role of Pax6 in pattern formation of the optic
cup, we expressed Pax6 ectopically in the optic vesicle of stages 9-10 chick
embryos by in ovo electroporation, which resulted in a small eye-like phenotype. 
The signaling molecule fibroblast growth factor (FGF)8, which appears to be
restricted to the central retina, was increased, whereas bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP)4 and Tbx5, two dorsal markers, were down-regulated in
Pax6-electroporated eye. Pax6 overexpression also decreased the expression of the
ventral marker Vax. Electroporation with a dominant-negative form of Pax6
resulted in a decrease in FGF8 expression, but BMP4 expression was unaffected
initially while it was diminished later. Our data suggest a new role for Pax6 in 
regulating FGF8 and BMP4 expression during pattern formation of the optic cup,
and that a Pax6-regulated balance between FGF8 and BMP4 is critical for
retinogenesis.

PMID: 17381541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 May 1;143A(9):1012-4.

Holt-Oram syndrome with right lung agenesis caused by a de novo mutation in the
TBX5 gene.

Tseng YR(1), Su YN, Lu FL, Jeng SF, Hsieh WS, Chen CY, Chou HC, Peng SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital and National
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

PMID: 17366586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 6;104(10):3877-82. Epub 2007 Feb 26.

Mechanisms controlling the acquisition of a cardiac phenotype by liver stem
cells.

Muller-Borer BJ(1), Cascio WE, Esch GL, Kim HS, Coleman WB, Grisham JW, Anderson 
PA, Malouf NN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina
University, Greenville, NC 27834, USA.

The mechanisms underlying stem cell acquisition of a cardiac phenotype are
unresolved. We studied early events during the acquisition of a cardiac phenotype
by a cloned adult liver stem cell line (WB F344) in a cardiac microenvironment.
WB F344 cells express a priori the transcription factors GATA4 and SRF, connexin 
43 in the cell membrane, and myoinositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor in the
perinuclear region. Functional cell-cell communication developed between WB F344 
cells and adjacent cocultured cardiomyocytes in 24 h. De novo cytoplasmic
[Ca(2+)](c) and nuclear [Ca(2+)](nu) oscillations appeared in WB F344 cells,
synchronous with [Ca(2+)](i) transients in adjacent cardiomyocytes. The [Ca(2+)] 
oscillations in the WB F344 cells, but not those in the cardiomyocytes, were
eliminated by a gap junction uncoupler and reappeared with its removal. By 24 h, 
WB F344 cells began expressing the cardiac transcription factors Nkx2.5, Tbx5,
and cofactor myocardin; cardiac proteins 24 h later; and a sarcomeric pattern 4-6
days later. Myoinositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor inhibition suppressed WB F344
cell [Ca(2+)](nu) oscillations but not [Ca(2+)](c) oscillations, and L-type
calcium channel inhibition eliminated [Ca(2+)] oscillations in cardiomyocytes and
WB F344 cells. The use of these inhibitors was associated with a decrease in
Nkx2.5, Tbx5, and myocardin expression in the WB F344 cells. Our findings suggest
that signals from cardiomyocytes diffuse through shared channels, inducing
[Ca(2+)] oscillations in the WB F344 cells. We hypothesize that the WB F344 cell 
[Ca(2+)](nu) oscillations activate the expression of a cardiac specifying gene
program, ushering in a cardiac phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1805456
PMID: 17360446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Genesis. 2007 Mar;45(3):135-44.

Pan-myocardial expression of Cre recombinase throughout mouse development.

Breckenridge R(1), Kotecha S, Towers N, Bennett M, Mohun T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill,London, United Kingdom.

Mouse-lines expressing Cre recombinase in a tissue-specific manner are a powerful
tool in developmental biology. Here, we report that a 3 kb fragment of the
Xenopus laevis myosin light-chain 2 (XMLC2) promoter drives Cre recombinase
expression in a cardiac-restricted fashion in the mouse embryo. We have isolated 
two XMLC2-Cre lines that express recombinase exclusively within cardiomyocytes,
from the onset of their differentiation in the cardiac crescent of the early
embryo. Expression is maintained throughout the myocardium of the embryonic heart
tube and subsequently the mature myocardium of the chambered heart. Recombinase
activity is detected in all myocardial tissue, including the pulmonary veins. One
XMLC2-Cre line shows uniform expression while the other only expresses
recombinase in a mosaic fashion encompassing less than 50% of the myocardial
cells. Both lines cause severe cardiac malformations when crossed to a
conditional Tbx5 line, resulting in embryonic death at midgestation. Optical
projection tomography reveals that the spectrum of developmental abnormalities
includes a shortening of the outflow tract and its abnormal alignment, along with
a dramatic reduction in trabeculation of the ventricular segment of the looping
heart tube.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17334998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Circ Res. 2007 Mar 30;100(6):850-5. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

CHF1/Hey2 plays a pivotal role in left ventricular maturation through suppression
of ectopic atrial gene expression.

Koibuchi N(1), Chin MT.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Medicine Research, Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

We previously reported that mice lacking the hairy-related basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factor CHF1/Hey2 develop a thin-walled left ventricle. To
explore the basis for this phenotype, we examined regional gene expression
patterns in the developing myocardium. We found that atrial natriuretic factor
(ANF), which is normally expressed in the atria and trabeculae and is restricted 
from the developing compact myocardium beginning at embryonic day 13.5, is
persistently expressed in the left ventricular compact myocardium of the knockout
animals. We also examined the expression pattern of the T-box transcription
factor Tbx5, a known regulator of ANF, and an additional Tbx5-dependent gene,
connexin 40 (Cx40), both of which share a similar expression pattern to ANF
during development. Tbx5 and Cx40 were similarly expressed ectopically in the
compact myocardium of the CHF1/Hey2 knockout mouse. The atrial contractile genes 
mlc1a and mlc2a were also expressed ectopically in the left ventricular compact
myocardium, providing evidence for a general dysregulation of atrial gene
expression. Crossing of a myocardial-specific CHF1/Hey2 transgenic mouse with the
knockouts led to rescue of the thin-walled myocardial phenotype and restoration
of the normal patterns of gene expression. Myocardial cell proliferation, which
has been shown previously to be suppressed by Tbx5, was also decreased in the
knockout mice and rescued by the transgene. Our findings suggest that CHF1/Hey2
suppresses atrial identity in the left ventricular compact myocardium,
facilitates myocardial proliferation by suppressing Tbx5, and thereby promotes
proper ventricular myocardial maturation.

PMID: 17332425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Dev Biol. 2007 Mar 15;303(2):527-35. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

Fibin, a novel secreted lateral plate mesoderm signal, is essential for pectoral 
fin bud initiation in zebrafish.

Wakahara T(1), Kusu N, Yamauchi H, Kimura I, Konishi M, Miyake A, Itoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Biochemistry, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

We identified a novel secreted protein, fibin, in zebrafish, mice and humans. We 
inhibited its function in zebrafish embryos by injecting antisense fibin
morpholino oligonucleotides. A knockdown of fibin function in zebrafish resulted 
in no pectoral fin bud initiation and abolished the expression of tbx5, which is 
involved in the specification of pectoral fin identification. The lack of
pectoral fins in fibin-knockdown embryos was partially rescued by injection of
fibin RNA. fibin was expressed in the lateral plate mesoderm of the presumptive
pectoral fin bud regions. Its expression region was adjacent to that of tbx5.
fibin expression temporally preceded tbx5 expression in presumptive pectoral fin 
bud regions, and not abolished in tbx5-knockdown presumptive fin bud regions. In 
contrast, fibin expression was abolished in retinoic acid signaling-inhibited or 
wnt2b-knockdown presumptive fin bud regions. These results indicate that fibin is
a secreted signal essential for pectoral fin bud initiation in that it
potentially acts downstream of retinoic acid and wnt signaling and is essential
for tbx5 expression. The present findings have revealed a novel secreted lateral 
plate mesoderm signal essential for fin initiation in the lateral plate mesoderm.

PMID: 17196583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Dev Biol. 2007 Mar 1;303(1):362-75. Epub 2006 Nov 17.

Retinoids control anterior and dorsal properties in the developing forebrain.

Halilagic A(1), Ribes V, Ghyselinck NB, Zile MH, Dollé P, Studer M.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, Guy's
Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK.

We have previously shown that retinoic acid (RA) synthesized by the retinaldehyde
dehydrogenase 2 (RALDH2) is required in forebrain development. Deficiency in RA
due to inactivation of the mouse Raldh2 gene or to complete absence of retinoids 
in vitamin-A-deficient (VAD) quails, leads to abnormal morphogenesis of various
forebrain derivatives. In this study we show that double Raldh2/Raldh3 mouse
mutants have a more severe phenotype in the craniofacial region than single null 
mutants. In particular, the nasal processes are truncated and the eye
abnormalities are exacerbated. It has been previously shown that retinoids act
mainly on cell proliferation and survival in the ventral forebrain by regulating 
SHH and FGF8 signaling. Using the VAD quail model, which survives longer than the
Raldh-deficient mouse embryos, we found that retinoids act in maintaining the
correct position of anterior and dorsal boundaries in the forebrain by modulating
FGF8 anteriorly and WNT signaling dorsally. Furthermore, BMP4 and FGF8 signaling 
are affected in the nasal region and BMP4 is ventrally expanded in the optic
vesicle. At the optic cup stage, Pax6, Tbx5 and Bmp4 are ectopically expressed in
the presumptive retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE), while Otx2 and Mitf are not
induced, leading to a dorsal transdifferentiation of RPE to neural retina.
Therefore, besides being required for survival of ventral structures, retinoids
are involved in restricting anterior identity in the telencephalon and dorsal
identity in the diencephalon and the retina.

PMID: 17184764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. BMC Dev Biol. 2006 Dec 15;6:62.

The level of BMP4 signaling is critical for the regulation of distinct T-box gene
expression domains and growth along the dorso-ventral axis of the optic cup.

Behesti H(1), Holt JK, Sowden JC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College
London, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, UK. h.behesti@ich.ucl.ac.uk
<h.behesti@ich.ucl.ac.uk>

BACKGROUND: Polarised gene expression is thought to lead to the graded
distribution of signaling molecules providing a patterning mechanism across the
embryonic eye. Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (Bmp4) is expressed in the dorsal
optic vesicle as it transforms into the optic cup. Bmp4 deletions in human and
mouse result in failure of eye development, but little attempt has been made to
investigate mammalian targets of BMP4 signaling. In chick, retroviral gene
overexpression studies indicate that Bmp4 activates the dorsally expressed Tbx5
gene, which represses ventrally expressed cVax. It is not known whether the Tbx5 
related genes, Tbx2 and Tbx3, are BMP4 targets in the mammalian retina and
whether BMP4 acts at a distance from its site of expression. Although it is
established that Drosophila Dpp (homologue of vertebrate Bmp4) acts as a
morphogen, there is little evidence that BMP4 gradients are interpreted to create
domains of BMP4 target gene expression in the mouse.
RESULTS: Our data show that the level of BMP4 signaling is critical for the
regulation of distinct Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx5 and Vax2 gene expression domains along
the dorso-ventral axis of the mouse optic cup. BMP4 signaling gradients were
manipulated in whole mouse embryo cultures during optic cup development, by
implantation of beads soaked in BMP4, or the BMP antagonist Noggin, to provide a 
local signaling source. Tbx2, Tbx3 and Tbx5, showed a differential response to
alterations in the level of BMP4 along the entire dorso-ventral axis of the optic
cup, suggesting that BMP4 acts across a distance. Increased levels of BMP4 caused
expansion of Tbx2 and Tbx3, but not Tbx5, into the ventral retina and repression 
of the ventral marker Vax2. Conversely, Noggin abolished Tbx5 expression but only
shifted Tbx2 expression dorsally. Increased levels of BMP4 signaling caused
decreased proliferation, reduced retinal volume and altered the shape of the
optic cup.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest the existence of a dorsal-high, ventral-low BMP4
signaling gradient across which distinct domains of Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx5 and Vax2
transcription factor gene expression are set up. Furthermore we show that the
correct level of BMP4 signaling is critical for normal growth of the mammalian
embryonic eye.

PMCID: PMC1764729
PMID: 17173667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Development. 2007 Jan;134(1):85-92. Epub 2006 Nov 30.

Tbx5 is dispensable for forelimb outgrowth.

Hasson P(1), Del Buono J, Logan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC-National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Tbx5 is essential for initiation of the forelimb, and its deletion in mice
results in the failure of forelimb formation. Misexpression of dominant-negative 
forms of Tbx5 results in limb truncations, suggesting Tbx5 is also required for
forelimb outgrowth. Here we show that Tbx5 is expressed throughout the limb
mesenchyme in progenitors of cartilage, tendon and muscle. Using a
tamoxifeninducible Cre transgenic line, we map the time frame during which Tbx5
is required for limb development. We show that deletion of Tbx5 subsequent to
limb initiation does not impair limb outgrowth. Furthermore, we distinguish two
distinct phases of limb development: a Tbx5-dependent limb initiation phase,
followed by a Tbx5-independent limb outgrowth phase. In humans, mutations in the 
T-box transcription factor TBX5 are associated with the dominant disorder
Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), which is characterised by malformations in the forelimb
and heart. Our results demonstrate a short temporal requirement for Tbx5 during
early limb development, and suggest that the defects found in HOS arise as a
result of disrupted TBX5 function during this narrow time window.

PMID: 17138667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Dec 29;351(4):877-82. Epub 2006 Nov 2.

N-cadherin is a useful marker for the progenitor of cardiomyocytes differentiated
from mouse ES cells in serum-free condition.

Honda M(1), Kurisaki A, Ohnuma K, Okochi H, Hamazaki TS, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Sciences, The University
of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Cardiomyocytes are known to differentiate spontaneously from embryonic stem (ES) 
cells when they formed aggregates, so called "embryoid bodies", in the presence
of serum. In this study, we explored the induction of cardiomyocytes from mouse
ES cells in chemically defined serum-free medium by using a mesoderm-inducing
factor, BMP4. Comparing the different inductive methods, we found a candidate
cell surface marker, N-cadherin, for cardiomyocyte progenitors from ES cells.
N-cadherin-positive cells highly expressed cardiogenic markers, Nkx2.5, Tbx5, and
Isl1, and showed a high differentiation rate into cardiomyocyte lineage. These
results indicate that N-cadherin can be a useful cell surface marker for the
progenitors of cardiomyocyte differentiated from ES cells in the serum-free
culture.

PMID: 17097609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 1;302(1):230-42. Epub 2006 Sep 16.

Differential regulation of Tbx5 protein expression and sub-cellular localization 
during heart development.

Bimber B(1), Dettman RW, Simon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University, The Feinberg School of
Medicine, Children's Memorial Research Center, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

The T-box transcription factor Tbx5 can interact with Nkx2.5 and Gata4
transcription factors to synergistically regulate heart-specific genes in the
nucleus. While a nuclear role for Tbx5 is clearly defined, we have previously
shown that Tbx5 shuttles from nuclear to cytoplasmic sites, forming a complex
with the PDZ-LIM protein LMP4 on the actin cytoskeleton. In this study, using a
developmental series of chicken hearts, we provide the first evidence for
differential Tbx5 protein expression and sub-cellular localization during
cardiogenesis. At the tissue level, we show temporally and spatially restricted
Tbx5 co-expression with LMP4. In cells co-expressing LMP4 and Tbx5 we demonstrate
dynamic Tbx5 re-localization from exclusively nuclear to nuclear and cytoplasmic 
expression in the atrio-ventricular cushion. Furthermore, in coronary vessel
development we show exclusive cytoplasmic localization of Tbx5, indicating a
function for Tbx5 in the cytoplasm. In addition, we discover unknown regulation
of Tbx5 and LMP4 expression in epicardial tissue, suggesting a specific role for 
Tbx5 in epicardial formation. These studies provide in vivo significance of the
LMP4/Tbx5 protein interaction, suggesting both nuclear and cytoplasmic roles for 
Tbx5. The shuttling between nuclear and cytoplasmic sites reveals a novel
mechanism for Tbx transcription factor regulation in chicken heart development
allowing new insights for a better understanding of the molecular basis of
hand/heart birth defects associated with TBX5 mutations.

PMCID: PMC1876776
PMID: 17045582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Dev Biol. 2006 Nov 1;299(1):22-34. Epub 2006 Jul 14.

Pitx1 determines the morphology of muscle, tendon, and bones of the hindlimb.

DeLaurier A(1), Schweitzer R, Logan M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

The vertebrate forelimb and hindlimb are serially homologous structures; however,
their distinctive morphologies suggest that different mechanisms are associated
with each limb type to give rise to limb-type identity. Three genes have been
implicated in this process; T-box transcription factors Tbx5 and Tbx4, which are 
expressed in the forelimb and hindlimb, respectively, and a paired-type
homeodomain transcription factor Pitx1, expressed in the hindlimb. To explore the
roles of Pitx1 and Tbx4 in patterning the hindlimb, we have ectopically
misexpressed these genes in the mouse forelimb using transgenic methods. We have 
developed a novel technique for visualising the structure and organisation of
tissues in limbs in 3D using optical projection tomography (OPT). This approach
provides unparalleled access to understanding the relationships between
connective tissues during development of the limb. Misexpression of Pitx1 in the 
forelimb results in the transformation and translocation of specific muscles,
tendons, and bones of the forelimb so that they acquire a hindlimb-like
morphology. Pitx1 also upregulates hindlimb-specific factors in the forelimb,
including Hoxc10 and Tbx4. In contrast, misexpression of Tbx4 in the forelimb
does not result in a transformation of limb-type morphology. These results
demonstrate that Pitx1, but not Tbx4, determines the morphological identity of
hindlimb tissues.

PMID: 16989801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Dev Biol. 2006 Dec 15;300(2):623-34. Epub 2006 Aug 4.

Blimp-1 is an essential component of the genetic program controlling development 
of the pectoral limb bud.

Lee BC(1), Roy S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Proteos, 61 Biopolis Drive, 117688,
Singapore.

Formation of paired limbs in vertebrate embryos has long been a particularly
useful paradigm for the study of pattern formation. Here, we show that Blimp-1, a
SET domain and zinc finger-containing transcriptional factor, plays an important 
role in the development of the pectoral fins of the zebrafish structures that are
homologous to forelimbs of amniotes. The blimp-1 gene is expressed dynamically in
the mesenchyme as well as the ectodermal cells of the early fin bud, and later,
in the cells of the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) of the outgrowing fin.
Consistent with this expression profile, loss of Blimp-1 activity severely
impairs fin outgrowth and patterning. We present evidence that blimp-1 functions 
downstream of tbx5 and fgf24 and therefore is not required for the initial
specification of the fin bud primordia. Subsequently, however, its function is
necessary for the induction of fgf10 and sonic hedgehog in the mesenchyme. In
addition, Blimp-1 activity is absolutely critical for the proper induction of
gene expression in the ectoderm and establishment of the AER. Taken together,
these results identify an additional layer of control in the genetic pathway that
operates in the developing limb and provides novel insights into regulatory
mechanisms that organize its pattern.

PMID: 16949569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Hum Mutat. 2006 Sep;27(9):975-6.

Expanding the spectrum of TBX5 mutations in Holt-Oram syndrome: detection of two 
intragenic deletions by quantitative real time PCR, and report of eight novel
point mutations.

Borozdin W(1), Bravo Ferrer Acosta AM, Bamshad MJ, Botzenhart EM, Froster UG,
Lemke J, Schinzel A, Spranger S, McGaughran J, Wand D, Chrzanowska KH, Kohlhase
J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Universität Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.

Mutations in the gene TBX5 cause Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), an autosomal dominant 
disorder characterized by anterior (i.e., radial ray) upper limb malformations
and congenital heart defects and/or cardiac conduction anomalies. The detection
rate for TBX5 mutations in HOS patients has been given as 30-35% in most reports.
However, a detection rate of 74% was reported when strict clinical inclusion
criteria for HOS were applied prior to TBX5 analysis. Still, in a significant
proportion of typical HOS cases no mutation can be found within the TBX5 coding
region and flanking intronic sequences. One explanation could be that large but
submicroscopic deletions of TBX5 could cause HOS, yet only one such TBX5 deletion
has been reported to date. We developed a quantitative Real Time PCR strategy to 
detect large, submicroscopic deletions in TBX5. Using this assay, we screened a
total of 102 TBX5 mutation negative patients and discovered two novel intragenic 
deletions. One deletion of 7756 bp removes exon 6 and a considerable part of the 
neighboring intronic sequences, and the other of 3695 bp removes exon 9 with the 
stop codon and the 3'UTR completely as well as a part of the preceding intron 8. 
We conclude that quantitative Real Time PCR is a reliable method to detect
submicroscopic deletions within TBX5. However, such deletions explain only
approximately 2% of the TBX5 mutational spectrum in HOS cases. In addition, we
also present eight novel TBX5 mutations (three nonsense, one splice mutation,
four short deletions) as detected by direct sequencing in 21 families not
previously analyzed for mutations.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16917909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Sep 29;348(3):898-907. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

SALL4 is directly activated by TCF/LEF in the canonical Wnt signaling pathway.

Böhm J(1), Sustmann C, Wilhelm C, Kohlhase J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Universität Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.

The SALL4 promoter has not yet been characterized. Animal studies showed that
SALL4 is downstream of and interacts with TBX5 during limb and heart development,
but a direct regulation of SALL4 by TBX5 has not been demonstrated. For other SAL
genes, regulation within the Shh, Wnt, and Fgf pathways has been reported.
Chicken csal1 expression can be activated by a combination of Fgf4 and Wnt3a or
Wnt7a. Murine Sall1 enhances, but Xenopus Xsal2 represses, the canonical Wnt
signaling. Here we describe the cloning and functional analysis of the SALL4
promoter. Within a minimal promoter region of 31bp, we identified a consensus
TCF/LEF-binding site. The SALL4 promoter was strongly activated not only by LEF1 
but also by TCF4E. Mutation of the TCF/LEF-binding site resulted in decreased
promoter activation. Our results demonstrate for the first time the direct
regulation of a SALL gene by the canonical Wnt signaling pathway.

PMID: 16899215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Dev Dyn. 2006 Oct;235(10):2868-80.

Microarray analysis of Tbx5-induced genes expressed in the developing heart.

Plageman TF Jr(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, ML7020, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Tbx5 is a member of the T-box family of transcription factors and is associated
with Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), a congenital disorder characterized by heart and
limb defects. Although implicated in several processes during development, only a
few genes regulated by Tbx5 have been reported. To identify candidate genes
regulated by Tbx5 during heart development, a microarray approach was used. A
cardiac-derived mouse cell line (1H) was infected with adenoviruses expressing
Tbx5 or beta-galactosidase and RNA was isolated for analysis using an Affymetrix 
gene chip representing over 39,000 transcripts. Real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction confirmed Tbx5 induction of a subset of
the genes, including nppa, photoreceptor cadherin, brain creatine kinase,
hairy/enhancer-of-split related 2, and gelsolin. In situ hybridization analysis
indicated overlapping expression of these genes with tbx5 in the embryonic mouse 
heart. In addition, the effect of HOS-associated mutations on the ability of Tbx5
to induce target gene expression was evaluated. Together, these data identify
several genes induced by Tbx5 that are potentially important during cardiac
development. These genes represent new candidate gene targets of Tbx5 that may be
related to congenital heart malformations associated with HOS.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16894625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Sep 1;140A(17):1880-6.

Contiguous hemizygous deletion of TBX5, TBX3, and RBM19 resulting in a combined
phenotype of Holt-Oram and ulnar-mammary syndromes.

Borozdin W(1), Bravo-Ferrer Acosta AM, Seemanova E, Leipoldt M, Bamshad MJ, Unger
S, Kohlhase J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Universität Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.

PMID: 16892408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Cell Biol. 2006 Jul 31;174(3):339-48.

LMP4 regulates Tbx5 protein subcellular localization and activity.

Camarata T(1), Bimber B, Kulisz A, Chew TL, Yeung J, Simon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Memorial Research Center, Feinberg School
of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

The limb- and heart-specific Tbx5 transcription factor coexpresses with and
directly binds to the novel PDZ-LIM domain protein, LMP4. LMP4 is distributed in 
the cytoplasm associated with the actin cytoskeleton. In the presence of LMP4,
Tbx5 shuttles dynamically between the nucleus and cytoplasm and, in a complex
with LMP4, localizes to actin filaments. Nuclear and cytoplasmic Tbx5
distribution in developing chicken wings suggests the functional significance of 
the LMP4-Tbx5 interaction. In primary epicardial cells, we demonstrate that Tbx5 
protein subcellular relocalization can be stimulated by external signals that
induce cell differentiation. To test whether the relocalization from nuclear to
cytoplasmic sites interferes with downstream gene expression, we used
limb-specific Fgf10 and heart-specific Anf promoter-luciferase reporters and
demonstrate that LMP4 acts as a repressor of Tbx5 activity. These studies reveal 
a previously unknown mechanism for Tbx transcription factor regulation in
vertebrate limb and heart development and provide a better understanding of the
molecular basis of hand/heart birth defects associated with Tbx5 mutations.

PMCID: PMC2064230
PMID: 16880269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Dev Biol. 2006 Sep 15;297(2):566-86. Epub 2006 May 24.

Tbx5-dependent rheostatic control of cardiac gene expression and morphogenesis.

Mori AD(1), Zhu Y, Vahora I, Nieman B, Koshiba-Takeuchi K, Davidson L, Pizard A, 
Seidman JG, Seidman CE, Chen XJ, Henkelman RM, Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1X8.

Erratum in
    Dev Biol. 2007 Sep 15;309(2):386.

Dominant mutations in the T-box transcription factor gene TBX5 cause Holt-Oram
syndrome (HOS), an inherited human disease characterized by upper limb
malformations and congenital heart defects (CHDs) of variable severity. We
hypothesize that minor alterations in the dosage of Tbx5 directly influences
severity of CHDs. Using a mouse allelic series, we show a sensitive inverse
correlation between Tbx5 dosage and abnormal cardiac morphogenesis and gene
expression. The CHDs found in mice harbouring a hypomorphic allele of Tbx5
(Tbx5(lox/+) mice) are less pronounced than those found in Tbx5 haploinsufficient
mice (Tbx5(del/+)), and homozygous hypomorphic (Tbx5(lox/lox)) embryos have
noticeably more advanced cardiac development than Tbx5 null (Tbx5(del/del))
embryos. Examination of target gene expression across the allelic series uncovers
very fine sensitivity across the range of Tbx5 dosages, in which some genes
respond dramatically differently to only 15% differences in Tbx5 mRNA levels.
This analysis was expanded to a genome-wide level, which uncovered a Tbx5
dosage-sensitive genetic program involving a network of cardiac transcription
factors, developmentally important cell-cell signaling molecules, and ion channel
proteins. These results indicate an exquisite sensitivity of the developing heart
to Tbx5 dosage and provide significant insight into the transcriptional and
cellular mechanisms that are disrupted in CHDs.

PMID: 16870172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. An Pediatr (Barc). 2006 Jun;64(6):578-82.

[Holt-Oram syndrome: characterization of a novel mutation].

[Article in Spanish]

Fernández García-Moya L(1), Lapunzina Badía P, Delicado Navarro A, Sharif A,
Cross G, Mori Alvarez MA, de Torres Perezhidalgo ML, Palomares Bralo M, García
Sánchez P, García-Guereta Silva L, López Pajares I.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Genética Médica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Cardiomyelic syndromes encompass congenital heart disease and
skeletal malformations of the upper limbs and are related to mutations in
transcription factors with T-Box domains. Holt-Oram syndrome is caused by a
dominant mutation in the TBX5 gene that alters the three-dimensional structure of
the protein and its DNA binding function. Several point mutations and deletions
in TBX5 have been reported in patients with the Holt-Oram syndrome phenotype.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The proband was a boy with a large atrial septal defect
ostium secundum type and a ventricular septal defect, diagnosed by clinical
findings (heart murmur) and echocardiography. He also presented slightly
hypoplastic thumbs with distal bilateral placement and an implantation index of
0.19 (compared with an average of 0.50 for his gestational age at birth). The boy
was referred to the department of medical genetics to rule out 22q11.2
microdeletion syndrome.
RESULTS: Karyotype and fluorescence in situ hybridization at locus D22S75 were
both normal. Because of his clinical findings, molecular study for Holt-Oram
syndrome was indicated, leading to the finding of a mutation at intron 7 of TBX5,
probably producing a splicing alteration of the gene and resulting in a protein
truncated at its C-terminal end. The proband's parents presented the wild type
sequence of the gene, thus indicating that the mutation was produced de novo,
although a possible germinal mosaicism in the parents could not be ruled out.
CONCLUSIONS: Holt-Oram syndrome is the most frequent cause of cardiomyelic
syndrome. All children with heart malformations and abnormalities of the upper
limbs such as absent, hypoplastic, distally placed or triphalangic thumbs should 
undergo molecular studies for this syndrome.

PMID: 16792966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Development. 2006 Aug;133(15):2805-15. Epub 2006 Jun 21.

Prdm1 acts downstream of a sequential RA, Wnt and Fgf signaling cascade during
zebrafish forelimb induction.

Mercader N(1), Fischer S, Neumann CJ.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL Heidelberg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Development. 2006 Oct;133(19):3949.

Vertebrate limb induction is triggered in the lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) by a
cascade of signaling events originating in the axial mesoderm. While it is known 
that Fgf, Wnt and retinoic acid (RA) signals are involved in this cascade, their 
precise regulatory hierarchy has not been determined in any species. tbx5 is the 
earliest gene expressed in the limb bud mesenchyme. Recently, another
transcription factor, Prdm1, has been shown to be crucial for zebrafish forelimb 
development. Here, we show that Prdm1 is downstream of RA, Wnt2b and Tbx5
activity. We find that RA activity, but not Fgf signaling, is necessary for wnt2b
expression. Fgf signaling is required for prdm1 expression in the fin bud, but is
not necessary for the initiation of tbx5 expression. We propose a model in which 
RA signaling from the somitic mesoderm leads to activation of wnt2b expression in
the intermediate mesoderm, which then signals to the LPM to trigger tbx5
expression. tbx5 is required for Fgf signaling in the limb bud leading to
activation of prdm1 expression, which in turn is required for downstream
activation of fgf10 expression.

PMID: 16790478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Development. 2006 Jul;133(13):2575-84. Epub 2006 May 25.

TBX5 is required for embryonic cardiac cell cycle progression.

Goetz SC(1), Brown DD, Conlon FL.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center, 5109 Neuroscience Research Building,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7126, USA.

Despite the critical importance of TBX5 in normal development and disease,
relatively little is known about the mechanisms by which TBX5 functions in the
embryonic heart. Our present studies demonstrate that TBX5 is necessary to
control the length of the embryonic cardiac cell cycle, with depletion of TBX5
leading to cardiac cell cycle arrest in late G(1)- or early S-phase. Blocking
cell cycle progression by TBX5 depletion leads to a decrease in cardiac cell
number, an alteration in the timing of the cardiac differentiation program,
defects in cardiac sarcomere formation, and ultimately, to cardiac programmed
cell death. In these studies we have also established that terminally
differentiated cardiomyocytes retain the capacity to undergo cell division. We
further show that TBX5 is sufficient to determine the length of the embryonic
cardiac cell cycle and the timing of the cardiac differentiation program. Thus,
these studies establish a role for TBX5 in regulating the progression of the
cardiac cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC1635805
PMID: 16728474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Jul 1;140(13):1414-8.

Using the TBX5 transcription factor to grow and sculpt the heart.

Hatcher CJ(1), McDermott DA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, Greenberg Division of Cardiology, Department 
of Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 525 E. 68th Street, New
York, NY 10021, USA. cjhatche@med.cornell.edu

TBX5 mutations cause the cardiac and limb defects of the autosomal dominant
Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS). We have explored the role of the TBX5 transcription
factor during cardiogenesis and have elucidated some of its functions in
regulating myocardial cell proliferation and proepicardial cell migration. Our
identification of TBX5 mutations has enabled us to offer genetic testing for
diagnosis of HOS in patients and also to perform preimplantation genetic
diagnosis on blastocysts for couples desiring to have a child unaffected by HOS. 
We hope that our genetic testing approach will serve as a paradigm for mutation
screening in other inherited syndromes.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16691575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Jul 1;140(13):1407-13.

T-genes and limb bud development.

King M(1), Arnold JS, Shanske A, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Women's Health, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The T-box family of transcriptional factors is ancient and highly conserved among
most species of animals. Haploinsufficiency of multiple T-box proteins results in
severe human congenital malformation syndromes, involving craniofacial,
cardiovascular, and skeletal structures. These genes have major roles in
embryogenesis, including the development of the limbs. Formation of the limbs
begins with a limb bud and its morphogenesis requires complex
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. Recent studies have shown that T, Tbx2,
Tbx3, Tbx4, Tbx5, Tbx15, and Tbx18 are all expressed in the limb buds, and many
have developmental functions. The study of these genes is clinically relevant as 
mutations in several of them cause human congenital malformation syndromes.
Furthermore, understanding the function and biology of these genes is important
in understanding normal embryogenesis.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16688725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Dev Dyn. 2006 Jul;235(7):1809-21.

MEF2C is required for the normal allocation of cells between the ventricular and 
sinoatrial precursors of the primary heart field.

Vong L(1), Bi W, O'Connor-Halligan KE, Li C, Cserjesi P, Schwarz JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Sciences, Albany Medical Center, Albany, New York
12208, USA.

Targeted deletion of the mef2c gene results in a small left ventricle and
complete loss of the right ventricle (Lin et al. [1997] Science 276:1404-1407).
Absence of the right ventricle is from defective differentiation of cells from
the secondary heart field. Our studies of the dysmorphogenesis of the left
ventricle uncovered morphological and transcriptional abnormalities at the
transition from the cardiac crescent to the linear-tube stage heart. Use of the
cgata6LacZ transgene demonstrated that lacZ-positive cells, which normally mark
the precursors to the atrioventricular canal and adjacent regions of the left
ventricle and atria, remain in the sinoatrial region of the mutant. This, along
with the absence of a morphologically distinct atrioventricular canal, indicates 
a misapportioning of cells between the inflow and outflow segments. The
underlying genetic program was also affected with altered expression of mlc2a,
mlc2v, and irx4 in outflow segment precursors of the primary heart field. In
addition, the sinoatrial-enriched transcription factor, tbx5, was ectopically
expressed in the primitive ventricle and ventricle-specific splicing of mef2b was
lost, suggesting that the mutant ventricle had acquired atrial-specific
characteristics. Collectively, these results suggest a fundamental role of MEF2C 
in ventricular cardiomyocyte differentiation and apportioning of cells between
inflow and outflow precursors in the primary heart field.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16680724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Oct 1;99(2):478-84.

Regulation of dHAND protein expression by all-trans retinoic acid through
ET-1/ETAR signaling in H9c2 cells.

Li W(1), Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Development Molecular Biology, Department of Nutrition and Food 
Hygiene, School of Public Health, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing 100083, China.

dHAND is thought to be a cardiac-restricted transcription factor during embryonic
development. Vertebrate heart development involves many transcription factors
such as Nkx2.5, GATA, and tbx5. All-trans retinoic acid (AtRA), the oxidative
metabolite of vitamin A, can regulate the expression of these factors to affect
embryonic heart development. However, the action of atRA on the expression of
dHAND is rarely reported. To clarify whether atRA regulate the dHAND expression, 
we exposed cultured H9c2 cells (rat embryonic cardiomyocytes) to atRA and
detected the protein expression of dHAND by Western blot analysis. We observed
atRA can regulate the dHAND expression in a dose- and time-dependent manner. AtRA
also inhibited endothelin-1 (ET-1) expression in a time-dependent manner. Further
studies revealed that pretreatment with 10 microM BQ-123, a selective
endothelin-1 receptor (ETAR) antagonist, for 2 h can significantly counteract the
inhibition of 5 microM atRA treatment for 2 h of dHAND mRNA and protein
expression. Taken together, these results suggest that atRA regulates dHAND
expression by ET-1/ETAR signal transduction pathway in H9c2 cells. The mechanism 
of ET-1/ETAR signaling in controlling the level of dHAND protein is to reduce the
levels of dHAND mRNA. It is possible for atRA to exert its cardiac teratogenesis 
during vertebrate embryonic development in this way.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16619265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Development. 2006 May;133(10):1901-10. Epub 2006 Apr 12.

Retinoic acid guides eye morphogenetic movements via paracrine signaling but is
unnecessary for retinal dorsoventral patterning.

Molotkov A(1), Molotkova N, Duester G.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Retinoic acid (RA) is required for patterning of the posterior nervous system,
but its role in the retina remains unclear. RA is synthesized in discrete regions
of the embryonic eye by three retinaldehyde dehydrogenases (RALDHs) displaying
distinct expression patterns. Overlapping functions of these enzymes have
hampered genetic efforts to elucidate RA function in the eye. Here, we report
Raldh1, Raldh2 and Raldh3 single, double and triple null mice exhibiting
progressively less or no RA synthesis in the eye. Our genetic studies indicate
that RA signaling is not required for the establishment or maintenance of
dorsoventral patterning in the retina, as we observe normal expression of Tbx5
and ephrin B2 (Efnb2) dorsally, plus Vax2 and Ephb2 ventrally. Instead, RA is
required for the morphogenetic movements needed to shape the developing retina
and surrounding mesenchyme. At early stages, Raldh2 expressed in mesenchyme and
Raldh3 expressed in the retinal pigmented epithelium generate RA that delivers an
essential signal to the neural retina required for morphogenetic movements that
lead to ventral invagination of the optic cup. At later stages, Raldh1 expressed 
in dorsal neural retina and Raldh3 expressed in ventral neural retina (plus
weaker expression of each in lens/corneal ectoderm) generates RA that travels to 
surrounding mesenchyme, where it is needed to limit the anterior invasion of
perioptic mesenchyme during the formation of corneal mesenchyme and eyelids. At
all stages, RA target tissues are distinct from locations of RA synthesis,
indicating that RALDHs function cell-nonautonomously to generate paracrine RA
signals that guide morphogenetic movements in neighboring cells.

PMCID: PMC2833011
PMID: 16611695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 26;281(21):14893-906. Epub 2006 Mar 22.

p204 protein overcomes the inhibition of the differentiation of P19 murine
embryonal carcinoma cells to beating cardiac myocytes by Id proteins.

Ding B(1), Liu CJ, Huang Y, Yu J, Kong W, Lengyel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, 333
Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8024, USA.

We reported in the accompanying article (Ding, B., Liu, C., Huang, Y., Hickey, R.
P., Yu, J., Kong, W., and Lengyel, P. (2006) J. Biol. Chem. 281, 14882-14892)
that (i) the p204 protein is required for the differentiation of murine P19
embryonal carcinoma stem cells to beating cardiac myocytes, and (ii) the
expression of p204 in the differentiating P19 cells is synergistically
transactivated by the cardiac transcription factors Gata4, Nkx2.5, and Tbx5. Here
we report that endogenous or ectopic inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins
inhibited the differentiation of P19 cells to myocytes. This was in consequence
of the binding of Id1, Id2, or Id3 protein to the Gata4 and Nkx2.5 proteins and
the resulting inhibitions (i) of the binding of these transcription factors to
each other and to DNA and (ii) of their synergistic transactivation of the
expression of various genes, including atrial natriuretic factor and Ifi204
(encoding p204). p204 overcame this inhibition by Id proteins in consequence of
(i) binding and sequestering Id proteins, (ii) accelerating their ubiquitination 
and degradation by proteasomes, and (iii) decreasing the level of Id proteins in 
the nucleus by increasing their translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. 
Points (ii) and (iii) depended on the presence of the nuclear export signal in
p204. In the course of the differentiation, Gata4, Nkx2.5, and p204 were
components of a positive feedback loop. This loop arose in consequence of it that
p204 overcame the inhibition of the synergistic activity of Gata4 and Nkx2.5 by
the Id proteins.

PMID: 16556596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 26;281(21):14882-92. Epub 2006 Mar 22.

p204 is required for the differentiation of P19 murine embryonal carcinoma cells 
to beating cardiac myocytes: its expression is activated by the cardiac Gata4,
Nkx2.5, and Tbx5 proteins.

Ding B(1), Liu CJ, Huang Y, Hickey RP, Yu J, Kong W, Lengyel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, 333
Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8024, USA.

Among 10 adult mouse tissues tested, the p204 protein levels were highest in
heart and skeletal muscle. We described previously that the MyoD-inducible p204
protein is required for the differentiation of cultured murine C2C12 skeletal
muscle myoblasts to myotubes. Here we report that p204 was also required for the 
differentiation of cultured P19 murine embryonal carcinoma stem cells to beating 
cardiac myocytes. As shown by others, this process can be triggered by dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO). We established that DMSO induced the formation of 204RNA and
p204. Ectopic p204 could partially substitute for DMSO in inducing
differentiation, whereas ectopic 204 antisense RNA inhibited the differentiation.
Experiments with reporter constructs, including regulatory regions from the
Ifi204 gene (encoding p204) in P19 cells and in cultured newborn rat cardiac
myocytes, as well as chromatin coimmunoprecipitations with transcription factors,
revealed that p204 expression was synergistically transactivated by the cardiac
Gata4, Nkx2.5, and Tbx5 transcription factors. Furthermore, ectopic p204
triggered the expression of Gata4 and Nkx2.5 in P19 cells. p204 contains a
nuclear export signal and was partially translocated to the cytoplasm during the 
differentiation. p204 from which the nuclear export signal was deleted was not
translocated, and it did not induce differentiation. The various mechanisms by
which p204 promoted the differentiation are reported in the accompanying article 
(Ding, B., Liu, C., Huang, Y., Yu, J., Kong, W., and Lengyel, P. (2006) J. Biol. 
Chem. 281, 14893-14906).

PMID: 16556595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Yi Chuan Xue Bao. 2006 Mar;33(3):199-205.

Cloning of TBX5, a key gene during heart formation and its expression in rat
embryonic heart.

Gong LG(1), Qiu GR, Xin N, Xu XY, Sun KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001,
China. gonglig@sina.com

To study the expression of TBX5, a key gene during heart formation, full-length
TBX5 cDNA was cloned from Wistar rat embryonic heart (GenBank Accession No.
AY859491). The cDNA and predicted amino acid sequences were different from those 
previously reported in GenBank. The expression profile of TBX5 in rat tissues was
studied by RT-PCR and Northern blot. TBX5 was expressed in many rat tissues as a 
single transcript, and the highest level of expression was found in the heart.
For subcellular localization, TBX5 was expressed as an EGFP fusion protein in rat
hepatocarcinoma cells. Results showed that TBX5 was nuclear. In addition,
TBX5-GST fusion protein was obtained by prokaryotic expression. These findings
provide a good basis for further identification of TBX5-related transcription
factors and protein-protein interaction studies among each other.

PMID: 16553207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Development. 2006 Mar;133(6):1165-73.

sall4 acts downstream of tbx5 and is required for pectoral fin outgrowth.

Harvey SA(1), Logan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC-National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Okihiro syndrome (OS) is defined by forelimb defects associated with the eye
disorder Duane anomaly and results from mutations in the gene SALL4. Forelimb
defects in individuals with OS range from subtle thumb abnormalities to truncated
limbs. Mutations in the T-box transcription factor TBX5 cause Holt-Oram syndrome 
(HOS), which results in forelimb and heart defects. Although mutations in TBX5
result in HOS, it has been predicted that these mutations account for only
approximately 30% of all individuals with HOS. Individuals with OS and HOS limb
defects are very similar, in fact, individuals with mutations in SALL4 have in
some cases previously been diagnosed with HOS. Using zebrafish as a model, we
have investigated the function of sall4 and the relationship between sall4 and
tbx5, during forelimb development. We demonstrate that sall4 and a related gene
sall1 act downstream of tbx5 and are required for pectoral fin development. Our
studies of Sall gene family redundancy and tbx5 offer explanations for the
similarity of individuals with OS and HOS limb defects.

PMID: 16501170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Circ Res. 2006 Mar 17;98(5):651-8. Epub 2006 Feb 16.

Quantitative trait loci modifying cardiac atrial septal morphology and risk of
patent foramen ovale in the mouse.

Kirk EP(1), Hyun C, Thomson PC, Lai D, Castro ML, Biben C, Buckley MF, Martin IC,
Moran C, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, St. Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst,
Australia.

Atrial septal defect (ASD) is a common congenital heart disease (CHD) occurring
in 5 to 7 per 10,000 live births. Mutations in 5 human genes (NKX2.5, TBX5,
GATA4, MYHC, ACTC) are known to cause dominant ASD, but these account for a
minority of cases. Human and mouse data suggest that ASD exists in an anatomical 
continuum with milder septal variants patent foramen ovale (PFO) and atrial
septal aneurysm, strongly associated with ischemic stroke and migraine. We have
previously shown in inbred mice that the incidence of PFO strongly correlates
with length of the interatrial septum primum, defining a quantitative trait
underlying PFO risk. To better understand genetic causation of atrial septal
abnormalities, we mapped quantitative trait loci (QTL) influencing septal
morphology using mouse strains (QSi5 and 129T2/SvEms) maximally informative for
PFO incidence and 3 quantitative septal anatomical traits including septum primum
length. [QSi5x129T2/SvEms]F2 intercross animals (n=1437) were phenotyped and a
whole genome scan performed at an average 17-cM interval. Statistical methodology
scoring PFO as a binary phenotype was developed as a confirmatory mapping
technique. We mapped 7 significant and 6 suggestive QTL modifying quantitative
phenotypes, with 4 supported by binary analysis. Quantitative traits, although
strongly associated with PFO (P<0.001), correlated poorly with each other and in 
all but 1 case QTL for different traits were nonoverlapping. Thus, multiple
anatomical processes under separate genetic control contribute to risk of PFO.
Our findings demonstrate the feasibility of modeling the genetic basis of common 
CHD using animal genetic and genomic technologies.

PMID: 16484617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Dev Biol. 2006 Apr 1;292(1):79-89. Epub 2006 Feb 15.

Level-specific role of paraxial mesoderm in regulation of Tbx5/Tbx4 expression
and limb initiation.

Saito D(1), Yonei-Tamura S, Takahashi Y, Tamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School of Life
Sciences, Tohoku University, Aobayama Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

Tetrapod limbs, forelimbs and hindlimbs, emerge as limb buds during development
from appropriate positions along the rostro-caudal axis of the main body. In this
study, tissue interactions by which rostro-caudal level-specific limb initiation 
is established were analyzed. The limb bud originates from the lateral plate
located laterally to the paraxial mesoderm, and we obtained evidence that
level-specific tissue interactions between the paraxial mesoderm and the lateral 
plate mesoderm are important for the determination of the limb-type-specific gene
expression and limb outgrowth. When the wing-level paraxial mesoderm was
transplanted into the presumptive leg region, the wing-level paraxial mesoderm
upregulated the expression of Tbx5, a wing marker gene, and down regulated the
expression of Tbx4 and Pitx1, leg marker genes, in the leg-level lateral plate.
The wing-level paraxial mesoderm relocated into the leg level also inhibited
outgrowth of the hindlimb bud and down regulated Fgf10 and Fgf8 expression,
demonstrating that the wing-level paraxial mesoderm cannot substitute for the
function of the leg-level paraxial mesoderm in initiation and outgrowth of the
hindlimb. The paraxial mesoderm taken from the neck- and flank-level regions also
had effects on Tbx5/Tbx4 expression with different efficiencies. These findings
suggest that the paraxial mesoderm has level-specific abilities along the
rostro-caudal axis in the limb-type-specific mechanism for limb initiation.

PMID: 16480709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Dev Dyn. 2006 Jun;235(6):1623-30.

Developmental expression patterns of Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx5, and Tbx20 in Xenopus
tropicalis.

Showell C(1), Christine KS, Mandel EM, Conlon FL.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center and Department of Genetics, University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-3280, USA.

T-box genes have diverse functions during embryogenesis and are implicated in
several human congenital disorders. Here, we report the identification, sequence 
analysis, and developmental expression patterns of four members of the T-box gene
family in the diploid frog Xenopus tropicalis. These four genes-Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx5,
and Tbx20-have been shown to influence cardiac development in a variety of
organisms, in addition to their individual roles in regulating other aspects of
embryonic development. Our results highlight the high degree of evolutionary
conservation between orthologs of these genes in X. tropicalis and other
vertebrates, both at the molecular level and in their developmental expression
patterns, and also identify novel features of their expression. Thus, X.
tropicalis represents a potentially valuable vertebrate model in which to further
investigate the functions of these genes through genetic approaches.

Developmental Dynamics 235:1623-1630, 2006. (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC1635807
PMID: 16477648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Nat Genet. 2006 Feb;38(2):175-83. Epub 2005 Dec 25.

Cooperative and antagonistic interactions between Sall4 and Tbx5 pattern the
mouse limb and heart.

Koshiba-Takeuchi K(1), Takeuchi JK, Arruda EP, Kathiriya IS, Mo R, Hui CC,
Srivastava D, Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)Programs in Cardiovascular Research, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Human mutations in TBX5, a gene encoding a T-box transcription factor, and SALL4,
a gene encoding a zinc-finger transcription factor, cause similar upper limb and 
heart defects. Here we show that Tbx5 regulates Sall4 expression in the
developing mouse forelimb and heart; mice heterozygous for a gene trap allele of 
Sall4 show limb and heart defects that model human disease. Tbx5 and Sall4
interact both positively and negatively to finely regulate patterning and
morphogenesis of the anterior forelimb and heart. Thus, a positive and negative
feed-forward circuit between Tbx5 and Sall4 ensures precise patterning of
embryonic limb and heart and provides a unifying mechanism for heart/hand
syndromes.

PMID: 16380715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Int J Cardiol. 2007 Jan 2;114(1):98-100. Epub 2006 Jan 10.

Holt-Oram syndrome presenting as agenesis of the left pericardium.

Dias RR, Albuquerque JM, Pereira AC, Stolf NA, Krieger JE, Mady C, Oliveira SA.

We report on a case of a 60-year-old man with progressive heart failure, mitral
and aortic valve insufficiency and bilateral asymmetrical skeletal upper-limb
deformities. Central to the suspicion of Holt-Oram syndrome in this patient was
the surgical finding of agenesis of the left pericardium. A Holt-Oram syndrome
diagnostic was confirmed through molecular analysis of the TBX5 gene. A new amino
acid substitution at position 61 of the TBX5 gene was identified and confirmed
the clinical diagnosis of Holt-Oram syndrome. The clinical presentation of the
present case broadens the clinical spectrum of Holt-Oram syndrome and point out
the importance of Tbx 5 in pericardium development. It is still an unstudied
issue whether TBX5 mutations may also be present in other clinical presentations 
where absence of the pericardium is a feature.

PMID: 16376438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2005 Dec;45(4):107-18.

Understanding heart development and congenital heart defects through
developmental biology: a segmental approach.

Sakabe M(1), Matsui H, Sakata H, Ando K, Yamagishi T, Nakajima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University,
Abenoku, Osaka, Japan.

ABSTRACT The heart is the first organ to form and function during development. In
the pregastrula chick embryo, cells contributing to the heart are found in the
postero-lateral epiblast. During the pregastrula stages, interaction between the 
posterior epiblast and hypoblast is required for the anterior lateral plate
mesoderm (ALM) to form, from which the heart will later develop. This tissue
interaction is replaced by an Activin-like signal in culture. During
gastrulation, the ALM is committed to the heart lineage by endoderm-secreted BMP 
and subsequently differentiates into cardiomyocyte. The right and left precardiac
mesoderms migrate toward the ventral midline to form the beating primitive heart 
tube. Then, the heart tube generates a right-side bend, and the d-loop and
presumptive heart segments begin to appear segmentally: outflow tract (OT), right
ventricle, left ventricle, atrioventricular (AV) canal, atrium and sinus venosus.
T-box transcription factors are involved in the formation of the heart segments: 
Tbx5 identifies the left ventricle and Tbx20 the right ventricle. After the
formation of the heart segments, endothelial cells in the OT and AV regions
transform into mesenchyme and generate valvuloseptal endocardial cushion tissue. 
This phenomenon is called endocardial EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transformation)
and is regulated mainly by BMP and TGFbeta. Finally, heart septa that have
developed in the OT, ventricle, AV canal and atrium come into alignment and fuse,
resulting in the completion of the four-chambered heart. Altered development seen
in the cardiogenetic process is involved in the pathogenesis of congenital heart 
defects. Therefore, understanding the molecular nature regulating the 'nodal
point' during heart development is important in order to understand the etiology 
of congenital heart defects, as well as normal heart development.

PMID: 16359490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Dec 13;102(50):18034-9. Epub 2005 Dec 6.

A WW domain protein TAZ is a critical coactivator for TBX5, a transcription
factor implicated in Holt-Oram syndrome.

Murakami M(1), Nakagawa M, Olson EN, Nakagawa O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, 75390-9148, USA.

The T-box transcription factor TBX5 plays essential roles in cardiac and limb
development. Various mutations in the TBX5 gene have been identified in patients 
with Holt-Oram syndrome, which is characterized by congenital defects in the
heart and upper extremities. In this study, we identified a WW-domain-containing 
transcriptional regulator TAZ as a potent TBX5 coactivator. TAZ directly
associates with TBX5 and markedly stimulates TBX5-dependent promoters by
interacting with the histone acetyltransferases p300 and PCAF. YAP, a TAZ-related
protein with conserved functional domains, also stimulates TBX5-dependent
transcription, possibly by forming a heterodimer with TAZ. TBX5 lacks a PY motif,
which mediates the association of other proteins with TAZ, and interacts with TAZ
through multiple domains including its carboxyl-terminal structure. Truncation
mutants of TBX5 identified in patients with Holt-Oram syndrome were markedly
impaired in their ability to associate with and be stimulated by TAZ. These
findings reveal key roles for TAZ and YAP in the control of TBX5-dependent
transcription and suggest the involvement of these coactivators in cardiac and
limb development.

PMCID: PMC1312418
PMID: 16332960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Hum Mutat. 2006 Jan;27(1):118.

HEY2 mutations in malformed hearts.

Reamon-Buettner SM(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Research and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology
and Experimental Medicine, Nikolai Fuchs Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Hey2 (gridlock) is an
important determinant of mammalian heart development, but its role in human
ventricular septal defects is unknown. Hey2 functions as a repressor through the 
bHLH domain. By direct sequencing, we analyzed the sequences encoding the bHLH
domain of the human HEY2 in 52 explanted hearts of unrelated patients with
complex cardiac malformations, notably ventricular (VSD) and atrioventricular
septal defects (AVSD). We found three nonsynonymous mutations, namely, c.286A>G
(p.Thr96Ala), c.293A>C (p.Asp98Ala), and c.299T>C (p.Leu100Ser) affecting the
second helix of HEY2 in the diseased cardiac tissues of two patients with AVSD.
This result suggests a possible role of HEY2 in the regulation of ventricular
septation in humans. Since the two AVSD patients carried also binding domain
mutations in other cardiac-specific transcription factors, e.g. NKX2-5, TBX5, and
GATA4, breakdown of combinatorial interactions of transcription factors may have 
contributed to the complexity of their cardiac malformations.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16329098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Development. 2005 Nov;132(22):4897-910.

T-box transcription factors and their roles in regulatory hierarchies in the
developing heart.

Stennard FA(1), Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, St Vincent's Hospital, 384 Victoria
Street, Darlinghurst, New South Wales 2010, Australia.

T-box transcription factors are important players in the molecular circuitry that
generates lineage diversity and form in the developing embryo. At least seven
family members are expressed in the developing mammalian heart, and the human
T-box genes TBX1 and TBX5 are mutated in cardiac congenital anomaly syndromes.
Here, we review T-box gene function during mammalian heart development in the
light of new insights into heart morphogenesis. We see for the first time how
hierarchies of transcriptional activation and repression involving multiple T-box
factors play out in three-dimensional space to establish the cardiac progenitors 
fields, to define their subservient lineages, and to generate heart form and
function.

PMID: 16258075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Dev Biol. 2005 Dec 15;288(2):582-94. Epub 2005 Oct 11.

Odd-skipped related 1 (Odd 1) is an essential regulator of heart and urogenital
development.

Wang Q(1), Lan Y, Cho ES, Maltby KM, Jiang R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Oral Biology and Department of Biomedical Genetics, University of
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Box 611,
Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

The Odd-skipped related 1 (Odd 1) gene encodes a zinc finger protein homologous
to the Drosophila Odd-skipped class transcription factors that play critical
roles in embryonic patterning and tissue morphogenesis. We have generated mice
carrying a targeted null mutation in the Odd 1 gene and show that Odd 1 is
essential for heart and intermediate mesoderm development. Odd 1(-/-) mutant
mouse embryos fail to form atrial septum, display dilated atria with hypoplastic 
venous valves, and exhibit blood backflow from the heart into systemic veins. In 
contrast to other transcription factors implicated in atrial septum development, 
Odd 1 mRNA expression is restricted to the central dorsal domain of the atrial
myocardium during normal heart development. Moreover, expression patterns of
known key regulatory genes of atrial septum development, including Nkx2.5, Pitx2,
and Tbx5, are unaltered in the developing heart in Odd 1(-/-) mutants compared to
that of the wild-type littermates. Furthermore, homozygous Odd 1(-/-) mutant
embryos exhibit complete agenesis of adrenal glands, metanephric kidneys, gonads,
and defects in pericardium formation. Detailed molecular marker analyses show
that key regulators of early intermediate mesoderm development, including Lhx1,
Pax2, and Wt1, are all down-regulated and nephrogenic mesenchyme undergoes
massive apoptosis, resulting in disruption of nephric duct elongation and failure
of metanephric induction in the Odd 1(-/-) mutant embryos. These data provide new
insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying heart morphogenesis and
urogenital development.

PMCID: PMC3869089
PMID: 16223478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Pediatr Res. 2005 Nov;58(5):981-6. Epub 2005 Sep 23.

TBX5 genetic testing validates strict clinical criteria for Holt-Oram syndrome.

McDermott DA(1), Bressan MC, He J, Lee JS, Aftimos S, Brueckner M, Gilbert F,
Graham GE, Hannibal MC, Innis JW, Pierpont ME, Raas-Rothschild A, Shanske AL,
Smith WE, Spencer RH, St John-Sutton MG, van Maldergem L, Waggoner DJ, Weber M,
Basson CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York,
New York 10021, USA.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is an autosomal dominant heart-hand syndrome
characterized by congenital heart disease (CHD) and upper limb deformity, and
caused by mutations in the TBX5 gene. To date, the sensitivity of TBX5 genetic
testing for HOS has been unclear. We now report mutational analyses of a
nongenetically selected population of 54 unrelated individuals who were
consecutively referred to our center with a clinical diagnosis of HOS. TBX5
mutational analyses were performed in all individuals, and clinical histories and
findings were reviewed for each patient without reference to the genotypes.
Twenty-six percent of the complete cohort was shown to have mutations of the TBX5
gene. However, among those subjects for whom clinical review demonstrated that
their presentations met strict diagnostic criteria for HOS, TBX5 mutations were
identified in 74%. No mutations were identified in those subjects who did not
meet these criteria. Thus, these studies validate our clinical diagnostic
criteria for HOS including an absolute requirement for preaxial radial ray upper 
limb malformation. Accordingly, TBX5 genotyping has high sensitivity and
specificity for HOS if stringent diagnostic criteria are used in assigning the
clinical diagnosis.

PMID: 16183809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 25;280(47):39534-44. Epub 2005 Sep 11.

Focal adhesion kinase signaling regulates cardiogenesis of embryonic stem cells.

Hakuno D(1), Takahashi T, Lammerding J, Lee RT.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

The signaling steps that induce cardiac differentiation in embryonic stem (ES)
cells are incompletely understood. We examined the effect of adhesion signaling
including Src and focal adhesion kinase (FAK) on cardiogenesis in mouse ES cells 
using alpha-myosin heavy chain promoter-driven enhanced green fluorescent protein
or luciferase as reporters. Cardiac transcription factors including Nkx2.5 and
Tbx5 mRNA were first expressed at day 4 in hanging drop embryoid bodies, and
adhesion of embryoid bodies to surfaces at or before that day strongly inhibited 
differentiation of ES cells to cardiomyocytes. Since adhesion signaling could
suppress cardiogenesis through Src kinases, embryoid bodies were exposed to the
small molecule PP2, known as a Src family kinase inhibitor. PP2 during embryoid
body adhesion dramatically increased cardiomyocyte differentiation and decreased 
mRNA expression of neuronal cellular adhesion molecule and alpha-fetoprotein,
neuroectodermal, and endodermal markers, respectively. Surprisingly, although
there was an interaction between Src and FAK in cardiogenesis, the procardiogenic
effect of PP2 appeared incompletely explained by Src kinase inhibition, since
another Src family kinase inhibitor, SU6656, failed to induce cardiogenesis.
Instead, PP2 specifically inhibited adhesion-induced FAK phosphorylation. In ES
cells stably expressing FAK-related nonkinase, which functions as a dominant
negative FAK, cell migration from embryoid bodies was inhibited, whereas
alpha-myosin heavy chain expression and myosin-stained cardiomyocytes were
increased, suggesting that reducing cell motility may contribute to
cardiogenesis. These data indicate that FAK is a key regulator of cardiogenesis
in mouse ES cells and that FAK signaling within embryoid bodies can direct stem
cell lineage commitment.

PMID: 16157602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Dev Biol. 2005 Oct 1;286(1):361-75.

Nerve-dependent and -independent events in blastema formation during Xenopus
froglet limb regeneration.

Suzuki M(1), Satoh A, Ide H, Tamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School of Life
Sciences, Tohoku University, Aobayama, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

Blastema formation, the initial stage of epimorphic limb regeneration in
amphibians, is an essential process to produce regenerates. In our study on nerve
dependency of blastema formation, we used forelimb of Xenopus laevis froglets as 
a system and applied some histological and molecular approaches in order to
determine early events during blastema formation. We also investigated the
lateral wound healing in comparison to blastema formation in limb regeneration.
Our study confirmed at the molecular level that there are nerve-dependent and
-independent events during blastema formation after limb amputation, Tbx5 and
Prx1, reliable markers of initiation of limb regeneration, that start to be
expressed independently of nerve supply, although their expressions cannot be
maintained without nerve supply. We also found that cell proliferation activity, 
cell survival and expression of Fgf8, Fgf10 and Msx1 in the blastema were
affected by denervation, suggesting that these events specific for blastema
outgrowth are controlled by the nerve supply. Wound healing, which is thought to 
be categorized into tissue regeneration, shares some nerve-independent events
with epimorphic limb regeneration, although the healing process results in simple
restoration of wounded tissue. Overall, our results demonstrate that
dedifferentiated blastemal cells formed at the initial phase of limb regeneration
must enter the nerve-dependent epimorphic phase for further processes, including 
blastema outgrowth, and that failure of entry results in a simple
redifferentiation as tissue regeneration.

PMID: 16154125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Hum Mutat. 2005 Oct;26(4):397.

The human TBX5 gene mutation database.

Heinritz W(1), Shou L, Moschik A, Froster UG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig, Medical Faculty, Leipzig, 
Germany.

Germline mutations of the TBX5 gene were identified as the primary cause in up to
70% of patients with Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by malformations of the upper limbs and cardiac defects.
Furthermore, somatic mutations of the TBX5 gene have been described in diseased
heart tissues of patients with congenital heart defects of different cause. The
relationship between genotype and phenotype remains unclear and the underlying
mechanism of the pathogenic effect is not solved. In this report, we introduce
the 'TBX5 Gene Mutation Database,' an online locus specific database containing
germline and somatic mutations of the TBX5 gene. The permanently updated data
collection includes all reported mutations beginning with the first description
of the gene in 1997. With our database we complement the existing resources by:
1) giving a complete review of the so far reported mutation spectrum in TBX5
considering the clinical relevance; 2) linkage of the mutational data to the
corresponding gene location and PubMed-Abstracts; and 3) additional links to
other related resources like SNP database, sequences and literature references.
The usage of our database will help to quickly find informations about genetic
variations within the TBX5 gene. Here we describe the database structure,
content, and potential applications (http://www.uni-leipzig.de/~genetik/TBX5).

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16134140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2005 Sep;289(3):H975-6.

Developmental structure-function insights from Tbx5(del/+) mouse model of
Holt-Oram syndrome.

Keller BB.

Comment on
    Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2005 Sep;289(3):H992-H1001.

PMID: 16100253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Development. 2005 Jul;132(14):3305-16. Epub 2005 Jun 15.

Congenital heart disease reminiscent of partial trisomy 2p syndrome in mice
transgenic for the transcription factor Lbh.

Briegel KJ(1), Baldwin HS, Epstein JA, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10016, USA. kbriegel@med.miami.edu

Erratum in
    Development. 2005 Sep;132(17):4015.

Partial trisomy 2p syndrome includes a spectrum of congenital heart disease (CHD)
that is characterized by complex malformations of the outflow and inflow tracts, 
defects in cardiac septation, heart position, as well as abnormal ventricular
development. Lbh (limb-bud and heart) is a novel, highly conserved putative
transcriptional regulatory protein, which displays a unique spatiotemporal gene
expression pattern during early mouse heart development. Here we show that human 
LBH maps to chromosome 2p23, a genomic region related to CHD in partial trisomy
2p syndrome. Remarkably, transgenic overexpression of Lbh in mice throughout the 
embryonic myocardium from a cardiomyocyte-specific promoter of the cardiac
ankyrin repeat protein gene (Carp/Ankrd1) models CHD reported in humans with
partial trisomy 2p syndrome. The malformations in Carp-Lbh transgenic mice
reflect impaired pulmonary outflow tract valvulogenesis, cardiac septation,
inflow tract morphogenesis, as well as abnormalities in ventricular cardiomyocyte
growth. Furthermore, we demonstrate that overexpression of Lbh in cultured
mammalian cells represses the synergistic activity of key cardiac transcription
factors, Nkx2.5 and Tbx5, leading to reduced activation of the common target
gene, Anf (Nppa). Strikingly, reduced levels of Anf expression were also observed
in embryonic day 9.5 Carp-Lbh transgenic mice. Thus, repression of Nkx2.5 and
Tbx5-mediated gene expression by deregulated Lbh may account in part for the
cardiac anomalies observed in these mice. Our findings implicate LBH as a
candidate gene for CHD associated with partial trisomy 2p syndrome and suggest an
important role of Lbh in transcriptional control during normal cardiogenesis.

PMID: 15958514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;25(12):5073-83.

Connexin 40, a target of transcription factor Tbx5, patterns wrist, digits, and
sternum.

Pizard A(1), Burgon PG, Paul DL, Bruneau BG, Seidman CE, Seidman JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Haploinsufficiency of T-box transcription factor 5 (TBX5) causes human Holt-Oram 
syndrome (HOS), a developmental disorder characterized by skeletal and heart
malformations. Mice carrying a Tbx5 null allele (Tbx5(+/Delta)) have
malformations in digits, wrists, and sternum joints, regions where Tbx5 is
expressed. We demonstrate that mice deficient in connexin 40 (Cx40), a
Tbx5-regulated gap junction component, shared axial and appendicular skeletal
malformations with Tbx5(+/Delta) mice. Although no role in skeleton patterning
has been described for gap junctions, we demonstrate here that Cx40 is involved
in formation of specific joints, as well as bone shape. Even a 50% reduction in
either Tbx5 or Cx40 produces bone abnormalities, demonstrating their crucial
control over skeletal development. Further, we demonstrate that Tbx5 exerts in
part its key regulatory role in bone growth and maturation by controlling via
Cx40 the expression of Sox9 (a transcription factor essential for chondrogenesis 
and skeleton growth). Our study strongly suggests that Cx40 deficiency accounts
for many skeletal malformations in HOS and that Tbx5 regulation of Cx40 plays a
critical role in the exquisite developmental patterning of the forelimbs and
sternum.

PMCID: PMC1140596
PMID: 15923624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Dev Biol. 2005 May 15;281(2):227-39.

Developmental genetic basis for the evolution of pelvic fin loss in the
pufferfish Takifugu rubripes.

Tanaka M(1), Hale LA, Amores A, Yan YL, Cresko WA, Suzuki T, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.

Paired appendages were a key developmental innovation among vertebrates and they 
eventually evolved into limbs. Ancient developmental control systems for paired
fins and limbs are broadly conserved among gnathostome vertebrates. Some lineages
including whales, some salamanders, snakes, and many ray-fin fish, independently 
lost the pectoral, pelvic, or both appendages over evolutionary time. When
different taxa independently evolve similar developmental morphologies, do they
use the same molecular genetic mechanisms? To determine the developmental genetic
basis for the evolution of pelvis loss in the pufferfish Takifugu rubripes
(fugu), we isolated fugu orthologs of genes thought to be essential for limb
development in tetrapods, including limb positioning (Hoxc6, Hoxd9), limb bud
initiation (Pitx1, Tbx4, Tbx5), and limb bud outgrowth (Shh, Fgf10), and studied 
their expression patterns during fugu development. Results showed that bud
outgrowth and initiation fail to occur in fugu, and that pelvis loss is
associated with altered expression of Hoxd9a, which we show to be a marker for
pelvic fin position in three-spine stickleback Gasterosteus aculeatus. These
results rule out changes in appendage outgrowth and initiation genes as the
earliest developmental defect in pufferfish pelvic fin loss and suggest that
altered Hoxd9a expression in the lateral mesoderm may account for pelvis loss in 
fugu. This mechanism appears to be different from the mechanism for pelvic loss
in stickleback, showing that different taxa can evolve similar phenotypes by
different mechanisms.

PMID: 15893975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2005 Sep;289(3):H992-H1001. Epub 2005 Apr 22.

Abnormal cardiac inflow patterns during postnatal development in a mouse model of
Holt-Oram syndrome.

Zhou YQ(1), Zhu Y, Bishop J, Davidson L, Henkelman RM, Bruneau BG, Foster FS.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Imaging Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Ave.,
Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1X8. yqzhou@sickkids.ca

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2005 Sep;289(3):H975-6.

Tbx5(del/+) mice provide a model of human Holt-Oram syndrome. In this study, the 
cardiac functional phenotypes of this mouse model were investigated with 30-MHz
ultrasound by comparing 12 Tbx5(del/+) mice with 12 wild-type littermates at 1,
2, 4, and 8 wk of age. Cardiac dimensions were measured with two-dimensional and 
M-mode imaging. The flow patterns in the left and right ventricular inflow
channels were evaluated with Doppler flow sampling. Compared with wild-type
littermates, Tbx5(del/+) mice showed significant changes in the mitral flow
pattern, including decreased peak velocity of the left ventricular (LV) early
filling wave (E wave), increased peak velocity of the late filling wave (A wave),
and decreased or even reversed peak E-to-A ratio. The prolongation of LV
isovolumic relaxation time was detected in Tbx5(del/+) neonates as early as 1 wk 
of age. In Tbx5(del/+) mice, LV wall thickness appeared normal but LV chamber
dimension was significantly reduced. LV systolic function did not differ from
that in wild-type littermates. In contrast, the Doppler flow spectrum in the
enlarged tricuspid orifice of Tbx5(del/+) mice demonstrated increased peak
velocities of both E and A waves and increased total time-velocity integral but
unchanged peak E/A. In another 13 mice (7 Tbx5(del/+), 6 wild-type) at 2 wk of
age, significant correlation was found between Tbx5 gene expression level in
ventricular myocardium and LV filling parameters. In conclusion, the LV diastolic
function of Tbx5(del/+) mice is significantly deteriorated, whereas the systolic 
function remains normal.

PMID: 15849237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Development. 2005 May;132(10):2451-62. Epub 2005 Apr 20.

Murine T-box transcription factor Tbx20 acts as a repressor during heart
development, and is essential for adult heart integrity, function and adaptation.

Stennard FA(1), Costa MW, Lai D, Biben C, Furtado MB, Solloway MJ, McCulley DJ,
Leimena C, Preis JI, Dunwoodie SL, Elliott DE, Prall OW, Black BL, Fatkin D,
Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, St Vincent's Hospital, 384 Victoria
Street, Darlinghurst 2010, New South Wales, Australia.

The genetic hierarchies guiding lineage specification and morphogenesis of the
mammalian embryonic heart are poorly understood. We now show by gene targeting
that murine T-box transcription factor Tbx20 plays a central role in these
pathways, and has important activities in both cardiac development and adult
function. Loss of Tbx20 results in death of embryos at mid-gestation with grossly
abnormal heart morphogenesis. Underlying these disturbances was a severely
compromised cardiac transcriptional program, defects in the molecular
pre-pattern, reduced expansion of cardiac progenitors and a block to chamber
differentiation. Notably, Tbx20-null embryos showed ectopic activation of Tbx2
across the whole heart myogenic field. Tbx2 encodes a transcriptional repressor
normally expressed in non-chamber myocardium, and in the atrioventricular canal
it has been proposed to inhibit chamber-specific gene expression through
competition with positive factor Tbx5. Our data demonstrate a repressive activity
for Tbx20 and place it upstream of Tbx2 in the cardiac genetic program. Thus,
hierarchical, repressive interactions between Tbx20 and other T-box genes and
factors underlie the primary lineage split into chamber and non-chamber
myocardium in the forming heart, an early event upon which all subsequent
morphogenesis depends. Additional roles for Tbx20 in adult heart integrity and
contractile function were revealed by in-vivo cardiac functional analysis of
Tbx20 heterozygous mutant mice. These data suggest that mutations in human
cardiac transcription factor genes, possibly including TBX20, underlie both
congenital heart disease and adult cardiomyopathies.

PMID: 15843414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Ophthalmic Genet. 2005 Mar;26(1):1-8.

Molecular genetic and ocular findings in patients with holt-oram syndrome.

Gruenauer-Kloevekorn C(1), Reichel MB, Duncker GI, Froster UG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Opthalmology, Martin-Luther-University, Halle, Germany.
cup-gk@t-online.de

PURPOSE: The autosomal dominant Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is characterized by
upper limb and cardiac septal defects. Mutations of the TBX5 gene have been
identified as the underlying gene defect in HOS. Embryonic expression of TBX5 has
been found in the human retina. This is the first report of ocular findings in
two unrelated families with mutations in the TBX5 gene.
METHODS: Six living persons affected with HOS and 10 unaffected family members
were subjected to mutation analysis and complete ophthalmological examination,
including electrophysiological examinations (EOG and flash ERG).
RESULTS: A heterozygous single base-pain substitution in exon 5 (408C --> A) was 
detected in all affected patients. All examined affected patents were
ophthalmological asymptomatic with normal EOG. A scotopic elongated b-wave
latency was found in affected family members who were older than 35 years. The
ERG was normal in the young patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Haploinsufficiency of TBX5 alters the dorsal-ventral polarity in
developing eye vesicles without amy detected functional loss in human. Slight ERG
abnormalities later in life may be a result of changes induced by the inner
ganglion cell layer in the inner nuclear layer.

PMID: 15823919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 May 1;134(4):439-42.

Molecular characterization of a 14q deletion in a boy with features of Holt-Oram 
syndrome.

Le Meur N(1), Goldenberg A, Michel-Adde C, Drouin-Garraud V, Blaysat G, Marret S,
Amara SA, Moirot H, Joly-Hélas G, Mace B, Kleinfinger P, Saugier-Veber P,
Frébourg T, Rossi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rouen, France.

Holt-Oram syndrome, the major "heart-hand" syndrome is defined by the association
of radial defects or triphalangeal thumbs and septal heart defects. The
transmission is autosomal dominant and the causative gene has been shown to be
TBX5, located on 12q24.1, which encodes a transcription factor. Genetic
heterogeneity has been suggested by several reports. We identified a 14(q23.3
approximately 24.2q31.1) deletion in a boy presenting severe bilateral
asymmetrical radial aplasia, congenital heart defects, and developmental delay.
This deletion, whose size could be estimated to be 9.6-13.7 Mb, was shown to be
inherited via his mother's interchromosomal insertion. This is the second report 
of a chromosome 14 interstitial deletion associated with clinical features of
Holt-Oram syndrome. These observations suggest the existence of a new
"heart-hand" locus on chromosome 14q.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15810003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Nat Genet. 2005 Apr;37(4):423-8. Epub 2005 Feb 27.

Mutation in myosin heavy chain 6 causes atrial septal defect.

Ching YH(1), Ghosh TK, Cross SJ, Packham EA, Honeyman L, Loughna S, Robinson TE, 
Dearlove AM, Ribas G, Bonser AJ, Thomas NR, Scotter AJ, Caves LS, Tyrrell GP,
Newbury-Ecob RA, Munnich A, Bonnet D, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

Atrial septal defect is one of the most common forms of congenital heart
malformation. We identified a new locus linked with atrial septal defect on
chromosome 14q12 in a large family with dominantly inherited atrial septal
defect. The underlying mutation is a missense substitution, I820N, in
alpha-myosin heavy chain (MYH6), a structural protein expressed at high levels in
the developing atria, which affects the binding of the heavy chain to its
regulatory light chain. The cardiac transcription factor TBX5 strongly regulates 
expression of MYH6, but mutant forms of TBX5, which cause Holt-Oram syndrome, do 
not. Morpholino knock-down of expression of the chick MYH6 homolog eliminates the
formation of the atrial septum without overtly affecting atrial chamber
formation. These data provide evidence for a link between a transcription factor,
a structural protein and congenital heart disease.

PMID: 15735645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Heart. 2005 Mar;91(3):383-4.

Identification of new mutations in the TBX5 gene in patients with Holt-Oram
syndrome.

Heinritz W, Moschik A, Kujat A, Spranger S, Heilbronner H, Demuth S, Bier A,
Tihanyi M, Mundlos S, Gruenauer-Kloevekorn C, Froster UG.

PMCID: PMC1768780
PMID: 15710732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 18;280(11):10716-20. Epub 2005 Jan 13.

CSX/Nkx2.5 modulates differentiation of skeletal myoblasts and promotes
differentiation into neuronal cells in vitro.

Riazi AM(1), Lee H, Hsu C, Van Arsdell G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery Research Rm. 7017, McMaster Bldg., The
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Ave., Toronto, M5G 1X8 Ontario,
Canada. ali.riazi@sickkids.ca

CSX/Nkx2.5 transcription factor plays a pivotal role in cardiac development;
however, its role in development and differentiation of other organs has not been
investigated. In this study, we used C2C12 myoblasts and human fetal primary
myoblasts to investigate the function of Nkx2.5 in skeletal myogenesis. The
expression levels of Nkx2.5 decreased as C2C12 myoblasts elongated and fused to
form myotubes. The expression of human NKX2.5 in C2C12 myoblasts inhibited
myocyte differentiation and myotube formation, and up-regulated Gata4 and Tbx5
expression. The expression of NKX2.5 in terminally differentiated C2C12 myotubes 
resulted in a change in morphology and breakdown into smaller myotubes.
Furthermore, overexpression of NKX2.5 in C2C12 cells and primary cultures of
human fetal myoblasts led to differentiation of myoblasts into neuron-like cells 
and expression of neuronal markers. This study sheds light on the previously
unknown non-cardiac functions of Nkx2.5 transcription factor.

PMID: 15653675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Yi Chuan. 2003 Sep;25(5):533-7.

[Studies on the mutation and expression of TBX5 gene in human simple congenital
heart disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Gong LG(1), Qiu GR, Qiu GB, He G, Sun KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001,
China. gonglig@sina.com

This work is to investigate the mutation and expression of TBX5 gene in human
simple congenital heart disease. The mutations of eight exons of TBX5 gene in 61 
CHD family members (a total of 216 individuals including 65 patients and 151
normal relatives) were examined by PCR-DGGE. Using beta-actin as internal
control, the differential expression between 34 myocardium samples from simple
congenital heart disease patients and three normal controls was conducted by
RT-PCR. There is no mutation detected in all samples; The mRNA expression levels 
of TBX5 gene show descent tendency in samples of simple congenital heart disease 
compared with normal controls. The mutations in coding region of TBX5 gene do not
cause human simple congenital heart disease, but the abnormality in transcription
level of TBX5 gene maybe a kind of mechanism causing human simple congenital
heart disease.

PMID: 15639924  [PubMed]


434. Development. 2005 Feb;132(3):553-63. Epub 2005 Jan 5.

Tbx5 and Tbx20 act synergistically to control vertebrate heart morphogenesis.

Brown DD(1), Martz SN, Binder O, Goetz SC, Price BM, Smith JC, Conlon FL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Fordham Hall, UNC-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-3280, USA.

Members of the T-box family of proteins play a fundamental role in patterning the
developing vertebrate heart; however, the precise cellular requirements for any
one family member and the mechanism by which individual T-box genes function
remains largely unknown. In this study, we have investigated the cellular and
molecular relationship between two T-box genes, Tbx5 and Tbx20. We demonstrate
that blocking Tbx5 or Tbx20 produces phenotypes that display a high degree of
similarity, as judged by overall gross morphology, molecular marker analysis and 
cardiac physiology, implying that the two genes are required for and have
non-redundant functions in early heart development. In addition, we demonstrate
that although co-expressed, Tbx5 and Tbx20 are not dependent on the expression of
one another, but rather have a synergistic role during early heart development.
Consistent with this proposal, we show that TBX5 and TBX20 can physically
interact and map the interaction domains, and we show a cellular interaction for 
the two proteins in cardiac development, thus providing the first evidence for
direct interaction between members of the T-box gene family.

PMCID: PMC1635804
PMID: 15634698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Dev Cell. 2005 Jan;8(1):75-84.

Tbx5 and Tbx4 are not sufficient to determine limb-specific morphologies but have
common roles in initiating limb outgrowth.

Minguillon C(1), Del Buono J, Logan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

Morphological differences between forelimbs and hindlimbs are thought to be
regulated by Tbx5 expressed in the forelimb and Tbx4 and Pitx1 expressed in the
hindlimb. Gene deletion and misexpression experiments have suggested that these
factors have two distinct functions during limb development: the initiation
and/or maintenance of limb outgrowth and the specification of limb-specific
morphologies. Using genetic methods in the mouse, we have investigated the roles 
of Tbx5, Tbx4, and Pitx1 in both processes. Our results support a role for Tbx5
and Tbx4, but not for Pitx1, in initiation of limb outgrowth. In contrast to
conclusions from gene misexpression experiments in the chick, our results
demonstrate that Tbx5 and Tbx4 do not determine limb-specific morphologies.
However, our results support a role for Pitx1 in the specification of
hindlimb-specific morphology. We propose a model in which positional codes, such 
as Pitx1 and Hox genes in the lateral plate mesoderm, dictate limb-specific
morphologies.

PMID: 15621531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Neuroreport. 2004 Dec 22;15(18):2751-5.

Retinoic acid-dependent regulation of BMP4 and Tbx5 in the embryonic chick
retina.

Golz S(1), Lantin C, Mey J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie II, RWTH Aachen, Kopernikusstr. 16, 52074 Aachen,
Germany.

The transcriptional activator retinoic acid (RA) has been proposed to determine
the dorsoventral polarity of the eye axis in vertebrates, thereby organizing the 
later developing retinotopic visual projection. We manipulated the RA
distribution in the early chick eye anlage and subsequently measured gene
expression with quantitative RT-PCR. Injections of all-trans RA suppressed the
expression of dorsal signals Tbx5, BMP4 and to a lesser extent of ephrinB1,
whereas the injection of citral, an inhibitor of RA synthesis, enhanced the
expression of BMP4 and Tbx5. In contrast, the distribution of the transcription
factor Pax2 in the ventral eye cup was not affected by changes in RA signaling.

PMID: 15597047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 25;280(12):11816-28. Epub 2004 Dec 9.

Serum response factor, an enriched cardiac mesoderm obligatory factor, is a
downstream gene target for Tbx genes.

Barron MR(1), Belaguli NS, Zhang SX, Trinh M, Iyer D, Merlo X, Lough JW, Parmacek
MS, Bruneau BG, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

We tested the idea that T-box factors direct serum response factor (SRF) gene
activity early in development. Analysis of SRF-LacZ "knock-in" mice showed highly
restricted expression in early embryonic cardiac and skeletal muscle mesoderm and
neuroectoderm. Examination of the SRF gene for regulatory regions by linking the 
promoter and 5'-flanking sequences, up to 5.5 kb, failed to target LacZ transgene
activity to the heart and the tail pre-somitic mesenchyme. However, linkage of a 
minimal SRF promoter with the SRF 3'-untranslated region (UTR), inundated with
multimeric T-box binding sites (TBEs), restored robust reporter gene activity to 
embryonic heart and tail. Finer dissection of the 3'-UTR to a small cluster of
TBEs also stimulated transgene activity in the cardiac forming region and the
tail, however, when the TBEs contained within these DNA sequences were mutated,
preventing Tbx binding, transgene activity was lost. Tbx2, Tbx5, and the
cardiac-enriched MYST family histone acetyltransferase TIP60, were observed to be
mutual interactive cofactors through the TIP60 zinc finger and the T-box of the
Tbx factors. In SRF-null ES cells, TIP60, Tbx2, and Tbx5 were sufficient to
stimulate co-transfected SRF reporter activity, however this activity required
the presence of the SRF 3'-UTR. SRF gene transactivation was blocked by two
distinct TIP60 mutants, in which either the histone acetyltransferase domain was 
inactivated or the Zn finger-protein binding domain was excised. Our study
supports the idea that SRF embryonic cardiac gene expression is dependent upon
the SRF 3'-UTR enhancer, Tbx2, Tbx5, and TIP60 histone acetyltransferase
activity.

PMID: 15591049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jan;232(1):11-20.

T-box genes and heart development: putting the "T" in heart.

Plageman TF Jr(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, ML7020, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Members of the T-box gene family (Tbx) are essential for normal heart
development, and mutations in human TBX genes cause congenital cardiovascular
malformations. T-box genes have been implicated in early cardiac lineage
determination, chamber specification, valvuloseptal development, and
diversification of the specialized conduction system in vertebrate embryos. These
genes include Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx3, Tbx5, Tbx18, and Tbx20, all of which exhibit
complex temporal spatial regulation in developing cardiac structures. Less is
known about T-box genes in invertebrate heart development, but multiple T-box
genes are expressed in Drosophila cardiac lineages. The molecular hierarchies and
developmental processes controlled by T-box genes in the heart are the focus of
this review.

PMID: 15580613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Development. 2004 Dec;131(24):6211-23. Epub 2004 Nov 17.

ENU induced mutations causing congenital cardiovascular anomalies.

Yu Q(1), Shen Y, Chatterjee B, Siegfried BH, Leatherbury L, Rosenthal J, Lucas
JF, Wessels A, Spurney CF, Wu YJ, Kirby ML, Svenson K, Lo CW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, National Heart Lung and Blood Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-8019, USA.

We used non-invasive high frequency ultrasound to screen N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea
mutagenized mouse fetuses for congenital cardiovascular anomalies. We ultrasound 
scanned 7546 mouse fetuses from 262 mutagenized families, and identified 124
families with cardiovascular defects. Represented were most of the major
congenital cardiovascular anomalies seen clinically. The ENU-induced mutations in
several families were mapped using polymorphic microsatellite DNA markers. One
family with forelimb anomalies and ventricular septal defects, phenotypes similar
to Holt-Oram syndrome, and one family with transposition of the great arteries
and heart situs anomalies were mapped to different regions of mouse chromosome 4.
A third mutation causing persistent truncus arteriosus and craniofacial defects, 
phenotypes reminiscent of DiGeorge syndrome, was mapped to mouse chromosome 2. We
note that mouse chromosomes 4 and 2 do not contain Tbx5 or Tbx1, genes previously
linked to Holt-Oram and DiGeorge syndromes, respectively. In two other families, 
the ENU-induced mutation was identified--Sema3CL605P was associated with
persistent truncus arteriosus with interrupted aortic arch, and the Gja1W45X
connexin43 mutation caused conotruncal malformation and coronary aneurysms.
Although our screen was designed as a recessive screen, a number of the mutations
showed cardiovascular phenotypes in both heterozygote and homozygote animals.
These studies show the efficacy of ENU mutagenesis and high-throughput ultrasound
phenotyping in recovering mutations causing a wide spectrum of congenital heart
defects. These ENU-induced mutations hold promise in yielding new insights into
the genetic basis for human congenital heart disease.

PMID: 15548583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cardiovasc Res. 2004 Dec 1;64(3):402-11.

Transcriptional regulation of the murine Connexin40 promoter by cardiac factors
Nkx2-5, GATA4 and Tbx5.

Linhares VL(1), Almeida NA, Menezes DC, Elliott DA, Lai D, Beyer EC, Campos de
Carvalho AC, Costa MW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Cardiologia Celular e Molecular-Instituto de Biofísica Carlos
Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro 20941-900,
Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: Connexin40 (Cx40) is a gap junction protein expressed specifically in 
developing and mature atrial myocytes and cells of the conduction system. In this
report, we identify cis-acting elements within the mouse Cx40 promoter and
unravel part of the complex pathways involved in the cardiac expression of this
gene.
METHODS: To identify the factors involved in the cardiac expression of Cx40, we
used transient transfections in mammalian cells coupled with electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSA) and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Within the promoter region, we identified the minimal elements required 
for transcriptional activity within 150 base pairs (bp) upstream of the
transcriptional start site. Several putative regulatory sites for transcription
factors were predicted within this region by computer analysis, and we
demonstrated that the nuclear factors Sp1, Nkx2-5, GATA4 and Tbx5 could interact 
specifically with elements present in the minimal promoter region of the Cx40.
Furthermore, co-transfection experiments showed the ability of Nkx2-5 and GATA4
to transactivate the minimal Cx40 promoter while Tbx5 repressed
Nkx2-5/GATA4-mediated activation. Mutagenesis of the Nkx2-5 core site in the Cx40
promoter led to significantly decreased activity in rat smooth muscle cell line
A7r5. Consistent with this, mouse embryos lacking Nkx2-5 showed a marked decrease
in Cx40 expression.
CONCLUSION: In this work, we cloned the promoter region of the Cx40 and
demonstrated that the core promoter was modulated by cardiac transcriptional
factors Nkx2-5, Tbx5 and GATA4 acting together with ubiquitous Sp1.

PMCID: PMC3252638
PMID: 15537493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Dev Biol. 2004 Nov 1;275(1):235-44.

GATA4 is a dosage-sensitive regulator of cardiac morphogenesis.

Pu WT(1), Ishiwata T, Juraszek AL, Ma Q, Izumo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
wpu@enders.tch.harvard.edu

Normal heart development is orchestrated by a set of highly conserved
transcription factors that includes GATA4, Nkx2-5, and Tbx5. Heterozygous
mutation of each of these genes causes congenital heart disease in humans. In
mouse models, haploinsufficiency for Nkx2-5 or Tbx5 resulted in an increased
incidence of structural heart disease, confirming that normal heart development
is sensitive to small changes in expression levels of Nkx2-5 and Tbx5. However,
mice haploinsufficient for GATA4 have not been reported to have cardiac
abnormalities. We generated two new GATA4 alleles, GATA4(H) and GATA4(flox).
GATA4(flox/flox) embryos expressed 50% less GATA4 protein in the heart and
survived normally. In contrast, GATA4(H/H) embryos expressed 70% less GATA4
protein in the heart and died between days 13.5 and 16.5 of gestation. These
embryos had common atrioventricular canal (CAVC), double outlet right ventricle
(DORV), hypoplastic ventricular myocardium, and normal coronary vasculature.
Myocardial hypoplasia was associated with diminished cardiomyocyte proliferation.
Hemodynamic measurements demonstrated that these embryos had normal systolic
function, severe diastolic dysfunction, and atrioventricular regurgitation.
Surprisingly, expression levels of the putative GATA4 target genes ANF, BNP,
MEF2C, Nkx2-5, cyclin D2, and BMP4 were unchanged in mutant hearts, suggesting
that GATA4 is not a dose-limiting regulator of the expression of these genes
during later stages of embryonic cardiac development. These data demonstrate that
multiple aspects of embryonic cardiac morphogenesis and function are exquisitely 
sensitive to small changes in GATA4 expression levels.

PMID: 15464586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol. 2004 Oct;280(2):1022-6.

Offbeat mice.

Gaussin V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Cardiovascular Research
Institute, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New Jersey Medical
School, 185 South Orange Avenue, MSB Room G-609, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.
gaussivi@umdnj.edu

This review summarizes the recent advances in understanding the development and
function of the cardiac conduction system using genetically modified mice. Null
mice for different cardiac connexins confirmed their suspected roles in cardiac
conduction and, in addition, unraveled unexpected roles in cardiac morphogenesis.
Genetically modified mice with LacZ-labeled conduction system cells are
indispensable tools to the further understanding of the mechanisms governing the 
development of this system in the mammalian heart. Mouse models also addressed
the role and contribution of specific signaling molecules, such as PRKAG2,
Nkx2.5, ALK3, and Tbx5, in the development of the cardiac conduction system and
the pathogenesis of cardiac dysfunction in humans.

copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15368346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol. 2004 Oct;280(2):1036-45.

Transcriptional regulation of cardiac conduction system development: 2004 FASEB
cardiac conduction system minimeeting, Washington, DC.

Harris BS(1), Jay PY, Rackley MS, Izumo S, O'brien TX, Gourdie RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC 29425, USA. harrisbs@musc.edu

The development of the complex network of specialized cells that form the
atrioventricular conduction system (AVCS) during cardiac morphogenesis occurs by 
progressive recruitment within a multipotent cardiomyogenic lineage.
Understanding the molecular control of this developmental process has been the
focus of recent research. Transcription factors representative of multiple
subfamilies have been identified and include members of zinc-finger subfamilies
(GATA4, GATA6 HF-1b), skeletal muscle transcription factors (MyoD), T-box genes
(Tbx5), and also homeodomain transcription factors (Msx2 and Nkx2.5). Mutations
in some of these transcription factors cause congenital heart disease and are
associated with cardiac abnormalities, including deficits within the AVCS. Mouse 
models that closely phenocopy known human heart disease provide powerful tools
for the study of molecular effectors of AVCS development. Indeed, investigations 
of the Nkx2.5 haploinsufficient mouse have shown that peripheral Purkinje fibers 
are significantly underrepresented. This piece of data corroborates our previous 
work showing in chick, mouse, and humans that Nkx2.5 is elevated in the
differentiating AVCS relative to adjacent working ventricular myocardial tissues.
Using the chick embryo as a model, we show that this elevation of Nkx2.5 is
transient in the network of conduction cells comprising the peripheral Purkinje
fiber system. Functional studies using defective adenoviral constructs, which
disrupt the normal variation in level of this gene, result in perturbations of
Purkinje fiber phenotype. Thus, the precise spatiotemporal regulation of Nkx2.5
levels during development may be required for the progressive emergence of gene
expression patterns specific to differentiated Purkinje fiber cells.

copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15368344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Cardiovasc Res. 2004 Oct 1;64(1):40-51.

Biochemical analyses of eight NKX2.5 homeodomain missense mutations causing
atrioventricular block and cardiac anomalies.

Kasahara H(1), Benson DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Functional Genomics, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. hkasahar@phys.med.ufl.edu

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2004 Oct 1;64(1):1-2.

OBJECTIVE: There has been considerable interest in understanding determinants of 
the diverse cardiac phenotypes associated with heterozygous NKX2.5 mutations. We 
hypothesized that analysis of functional properties of NKX2.5 mutant proteins
would result in the ability to classify mutations according to function in a
scheme that would help to clarify genotype-phenotype correlations. We analyzed
missense mutations in the conserved homeodomain.
METHODS: We studied in vitro biochemical characteristics, including nuclear
localization, DNA binding, transcriptional activation and protein-protein
interaction with transcriptional partners (GATA4, TBX5 and NKX2.5 itself), of
eight homeodomain missense mutations. Associated phenotypes include
atrioventricular (AV) block (98% penetrance), atrial septal defect (83%
penetrance), and additional varied heart malformations.
RESULTS: Mutations were present at varied homeodomain locations in the putative
nuclear localizing signal (1), helix 2 (1), a turn between helix 2 and 3 (1) and 
helix 3 (5); a spectrum of biochemical phenotypes was observed. All mutants
localized to the nuclei but some exhibited anomalous nuclear distribution. While 
all mutants exhibited markedly decreased DNA binding and reduced transcriptional 
activation, interaction with transcriptional partners was varied.
CONCLUSION: Each mutant protein had a unique spectrum of observed properties, but
our data show that while dominant negative properties could be demonstrated in
vitro, the best correlation with clinical phenotypes resulted from the markedly
reduced DNA binding shared by all eight homeodomain mutations. This suggests that
the principle determinant of the two most common phenotypes associated with
homeodomain missense mutations is the total dose of NKX2.5 capable of binding to 
DNA.

PMID: 15364612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 5;279(45):47272-7. Epub 2004 Aug 18.

Pax6 interacts with cVax and Tbx5 to establish the dorsoventral boundary of the
developing eye.

Leconte L(1), Lecoin L, Martin P, Saule S.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 146, Institut Curie Section de Recherche, Batiment 110, Centre
Universitaire, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France.

Dorsoventral pattern formation of the optic cup is essential for vertebrate eye
morphogenesis and retinotectal topographic mapping. Dorsal and ventral aspects of
the eye are distinct at early stages of development; cVax homeodomain protein
expression is confined to the ventral optic cup, whereas Tbx5 (T-box
transcription factor) expression domain becomes restricted to the dorsal region. 
Misexpression of cVax or Tbx5 induces profound defects in eye morphology and
abnormal visual projections. In the Pax6-/- mutant Tbx5 fails to be expressed,
and Vax1 and -2 are abnormally present in the entire optic vesicle. During eye
development Pax6 becomes expressed in a gradient at the optic cup stage due to
the specific activation of a highly conserved intronic alpha enhancer in the Pax6
locus. We observed that the highest level of Pax6 in the optic cup corresponds to
the boundary between non-overlapping cVax and Tbx5 territories. To further
investigate how these transcription factors control the patterning of the eye, we
overexpressed Pax6 in the chick optic cup (E2) using in ovo electroporation. We
observed that overexpression of Pax6 extends the Tbx5 and Bmp4 domains but
reduces the cVax expression domains in the E3 chick eye. This results in an
abnormal eye phenotype at E4. In addition, we showed that cVax and Tbx5 interact 
with Pax6 and modulate in an opposite manner the activity of the Pax6 alpha
enhancer. Moreover, the Pax6/cVax interaction inhibits the transactivation
properties of Pax6. These results demonstrate that Pax6 together with cVax and
Tbx5 mediate dorsoventral patterning of the eye.

PMID: 15322073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Dev Biol. 2004 Sep 1;273(1):106-20.

Tbx5 and Tbx4 transcription factors interact with a new chicken PDZ-LIM protein
in limb and heart development.

Krause A(1), Zacharias W, Camarata T, Linkhart B, Law E, Lischke A, Miljan E,
Simon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Feinberg School of Medicine, Children's Memorial
Institute for Education and Research, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60614,
USA.

The T-domain transcription factors, Tbx5 and Tbx4, play important roles in
vertebrate limb and heart development. To identify interacting and potential
Tbx-regulating proteins, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen with the
C-terminal domain of Tbx5 as bait. We identified a new PDZ-LIM protein composed
of one N-terminal PDZ and three C-terminal LIM domains, which we named chicken
LMP-4. Among the Tbx2, 3, 4, 5 subfamily, we observed exclusive interaction with 
Tbx5 and Tbx4 proteins. Tbx3 nor Tbx2 can substitute for LMP-4 binding. While
chicken LMP-4 associates with Tbx5 or Tbx4, it uses distinct LIM domains to bind 
to the individual proteins. Subcellular co-localization of LMP-4 and Tbx proteins
supports the protein interaction and reveals interference of LMP-4 with Tbx
protein distribution, tethering the transcription factors to the cytoskeleton.
The protein-protein interaction indicates regulation of Tbx function at the level
of transcription factor nuclear localization. During chicken limb and heart
development, Tbx5/LMP-4 and Tbx4/LMP-4 are tightly co-expressed in a temporal and
spatial manner, suggesting that they operate in the same pathway. Surprisingly,
chicken LMP-4 expression domains outside those of Tbx5 in the heart led to the
discovery of Tbx4 expression in the outflow tract and the right ventricle of this
organ. The Tbx4-expressing cells coincide with those of the recently discovered
secondary anterior heart-forming field. The discrete posterior or anterior
expression domains in the heart and the exclusive fore- or hindlimb expression of
Tbx5 and Tbx4, respectively, suggest common pathways in the heart and limbs. The 
identification of a new Tbx5/4-specific binding factor further suggests a novel
mechanism for Tbx transcription factor regulation in development and disease.

PMID: 15302601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Development. 2004 Aug;131(16):4107-16.

The T-Box transcription factor Tbx5 is required for the patterning and maturation
of the murine cardiac conduction system.

Moskowitz IP(1), Pizard A, Patel VV, Bruneau BG, Kim JB, Kupershmidt S, Roden D, 
Berul CI, Seidman CE, Seidman JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We report a critical role for the T-box transcription factor Tbx5 in development 
and maturation of the cardiac conduction system. We find that Tbx5 is expressed
throughout the central conduction system, including the atrioventricular bundle
and bundle branch conduction system. Tbx5 haploinsufficiency in mice
(Tbx5(del/+)), a model of human Holt-Oram syndrome, caused distinct morphological
and functional defects in the atrioventricular and bundle branch conduction
systems. In the atrioventricular canal, Tbx5 haploinsufficiency caused a
maturation failure of conduction system morphology and function.
Electrophysiologic testing of Tbx5(del/+) mice suggested a specific
atrioventricular node maturation failure. In the ventricular conduction system,
Tbx5 haploinsufficiency caused patterning defects of both the left and right
ventricular bundle branches, including absence or severe abnormalities of the
right bundle branch. Absence of the right bundle branch correlated with
right-bundle-branch block by ECG. Deficiencies in the gap junction protein gene
connexin 40 (Cx40), a downstream target of Tbx5, did not account for morphologic 
conduction system defects in Tbx5(del/+) mice. We conclude that Tbx5 is required 
for Cx40-independent patterning of the cardiac conduction system, and suggest
that the electrophysiologic defects in Holt-Oram syndrome reflect a developmental
abnormality of the conduction system.

PMID: 15289437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Hum Mutat. 2004 Jul;24(1):104.

TBX5 mutations in non-Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) malformed hearts.

Reamon-Buettner SM(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Research and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology
and Experimental Medicine, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

The T-box transcription factor Tbx5 is important in mammalian cardiac
development. Mutations in the human TBX5 gene cause Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), a
disorder characterized by heart and upper limb deformities. To determine the role
of TBX5 in non-HOS patients with complex cardiac malformations, we analyzed 68
explanted hearts from unrelated patients with various cardiac abnormalities
including atrial (ASD), ventricular (VSD) and atrioventricular septal defects
(AVSD). Direct sequencing detected nine mutations in diseased cardiac tissues of 
patients, eight of which are novel. Six mutations would affect amino acids in the
T-domain, and one (c.236C>T, p.Ala79Val) is within the recently identified
nuclear localization signal (NLS1) region. Further, mutations were found in
patients with ASD and AVSD, but not with VSD; and mutations were absent in normal
heart tissue of same patients, thus indicating somatic origin. Our results
suggest a possible role of somatically occurring TBX5 mutations in congenital
heart disease. We show for the first time TBX5 mutations in non-HOS associated
cardiac malformations and we identified a novel missense mutation that would
impact nuclear localization of TBX5.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15221798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 May;1015:171-81.

Development of the building plan of the heart.

Moorman AF(1), Soufan AT, Hagoort J, de Boer PA, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Molecular Cardiology Group, Department of Anatomy and
Embryology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
a.f.moorman@amc.uva.nl

In this communication we discuss the formation of the synchronously contracting
chambered heart from a peristaltically contracting linear heart tube. It is
proposed that members of the T-box family of transcription factors play a crucial
role in the formation of the building plan of the formed heart. Tbx5 may confer
venoarterial polarity to the heart tube, whereas Tbx2 initially and Tbx3 in later
developmental stages prevent the cardiac inflow tract, atrioventricular region,
outflow tract, as well as the cardiac inner curvatures from chamber
differentiation. With the exception of the outflow tract that becomes
incorporated into the ventricles, these regions contribute to the cardiac
conduction system.

PMID: 15201158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Cardiovasc Res. 2004 Jun 1;62(3):489-99.

The transcriptional repressor Tbx3 delineates the developing central conduction
system of the heart.

Hoogaars WM(1), Tessari A, Moorman AF, de Boer PA, Hagoort J, Soufan AT, Campione
M, Christoffels VM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Molecular Cardiology Group, AMC, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2004 Jun 1;62(3):444-6.

OBJECTIVE: The molecular mechanisms that regulate the formation of the conduction
system are poorly understood. We studied the developmental expression pattern and
functional aspects of the T-box transcription factor Tbx3, a novel marker for the
murine central conduction system (CCS).
METHODS: The patterns of expression of Tbx3, and of Cx40, Cx43, and Nppa, which
are markers for atrial and ventricular chamber-type myocardium in the developing 
heart, were analyzed in mice by in situ hybridization and three-dimensional
reconstruction analysis. The function of Tbx3 in regulating Nppa and Cx40
promoter activity was studied in vitro.
RESULTS: In the formed heart, Tbx3 is expressed in the sinoatrial node (SAN),
atrioventricular node (AVN), bundle and proximal bundle branches (BBs), as well
as the internodal regions and the atrioventricular region. Throughout cardiac
development, Tbx3 is expressed in an uninterrupted myocardial domain that extends
from the sinoatrial node to the atrioventricular region. This expression domain
is present in the looping heart tube from E8.5 onwards. Expression of the
chamber-type myocardial markers is specifically absent from the Tbx3 expression
domain. Tbx3 is able to repress Nppa and Cx40 promoter activity and abolish the
synergistic activation of the Nppa promoter by Tbx5 and Nkx2.5.
CONCLUSION: We identified the T-box transcription factor Tbx3 as a novel and
accurate marker for the central conduction system. Our analysis implicates a role
for Tbx3 in repressing a chamber-specific program of gene expression in regions
from which the components of the central conduction system are subsequently
formed.

PMID: 15158141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(11):4627-35.

Role of Hand1/eHAND in the dorso-ventral patterning and interventricular septum
formation in the embryonic heart.

Togi K(1), Kawamoto T, Yamauchi R, Yoshida Y, Kita T, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social Service, Kyoto University Hospital, 54
Shogoin-Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. makoto@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Molecular mechanisms for the dorso-ventral patterning and interventricular septum
formation in the embryonic heart are unknown. To investigate a role of
Hand1/eHAND in cardiac chamber formation, we generated Hand1/eHAND knock-in mice 
where Hand1/eHAND cDNA was placed under the control of the MLC2V promoter. In
Hand1/eHAND knock-in mice, the outer curvature of the right and left ventricles
expanded more markedly. Moreover, there was no interventricular groove or septum 
formation, although molecularly, Hand1/eHAND knock-in hearts had two ventricles. 
However, the morphology of the inner curvature of the ventricles, the
atrioventricular canal, and the outflow tract was not affected by Hand1/eHAND
expression. Furthermore, expression of Hand1/eHAND in the whole ventricles
altered the expression patterns of Chisel, ANF, and Hand2/dHAND but did not
affect Tbx5 expression. In contrast, the interventricular septum formed normally 
in transgenic embryos overexpressing Hand1/eHAND in the right ventricle but not
in the boundary region. These results suggested that Hand1/eHAND is involved in
expansion of the ventricular walls and that absence of Hand1/eHAND expression in 
the boundary region between the right and left ventricles may be critical in the 
proper formation of the interventricular groove and septum. Furthermore,
Hand1/eHAND is not a master regulatory gene that specifies the left ventricle
myocyte lineage but may control the dorso-ventral patterning in concert with
additional genes.

PMCID: PMC416422
PMID: 15143159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Physiol Genomics. 2004 Jul 8;18(2):129-40.

A role for Tbx5 in proepicardial cell migration during cardiogenesis.

Hatcher CJ(1), Diman NY, Kim MS, Pennisi D, Song Y, Goldstein MM, Mikawa T,
Basson CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, Greenberg Cardiology Division, Department of 
Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10021, 
USA.

Transcriptional regulatory cascades during epicardial and coronary vascular
development from proepicardial progenitor cells remain to be defined. We have
used immunohistochemistry of human embryonic tissues to demonstrate that the TBX5
transcription factor is expressed not only in the myocardium, but also throughout
the embryonic epicardium and coronary vasculature. TBX5 is not expressed in other
human fetal vascular beds. Furthermore, immunohistochemical analyses of human
embryonic tissues reveals that unlike their epicardial counterparts, delaminating
epicardial-derived cells do not express TBX5 as they migrate through the
subepicardium before undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transformation required
for coronary vasculogenesis. In the chick, Tbx5 is expressed in the embryonic
proepicardial organ (PEO), which is composed of the epicardial and coronary
vascular progenitor cells. Retrovirus-mediated overexpression of human TBX5
inhibits cell incorporation of infected proepicardial cells into the nascent
chick epicardium and coronary vasculature. TBX5 overexpression as well as
antisense-mediated knockdown of chick Tbx5 produce a cell-autonomous defect in
the PEO that prevents proepicardial cell migration. Thus, both increasing and
decreasing Tbx5 dosage impairs development of the proepicardium. Culture of
explanted PEOs demonstrates that untreated chick proepicardial cells downregulate
Tbx5 expression during cell migration. Therefore, we propose that Tbx5
participates in regulation of proepicardial cell migration, a critical event in
the establishment of the epicardium and coronary vasculature.

PMID: 15138308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Dev Biol. 2004 Jun 1;270(1):214-31.

Sonic hedgehog signaling regulates Gli3 processing, mesenchymal proliferation,
and differentiation during mouse lung organogenesis.

Li Y(1), Zhang H, Choi SC, Litingtung Y, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN 37232-8240, USA.

Lack of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling, mediated by the Gli proteins, leads to
severe pulmonary hypoplasia. However, the precise role of Gli genes in lung
development is not well established. We show Shh signaling prevents Gli3
proteolysis to generate its repressor forms (Gli3R) in the developing murine
lung. In Shh(-/-) or cyclopamine-treated wild-type (WT) lung, we found that Gli3R
level is elevated, and this upregulation appears to contribute to defects in
proliferation and differentiation observed in the Shh(-/-) mesenchyme, where Gli3
is normally expressed. In agreement, we found Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) lungs exhibit
enhanced growth potential. Vasculogenesis is also enhanced; in contrast,
bronchial myogenesis remains absent in Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) compared with Shh(-/-) 
lungs. Genes upregulated in Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) relative to Shh(-/-) lung include 
Wnt2 and, surprisingly, Foxf1 whose expression has been reported to be
Shh-dependent. Cyclins D1, D2, and D3 antibody labelings also reveal distinct
expression patterns in the normal and mutant lungs. We found significant
repression of Tbx2 and Tbx3, both linked to inhibition of cellular senescence, in
Shh(-/-) and partial derepression in Shh(-/-); Gli3(-/-) lungs, while Tbx4 and
Tbx5 expressions are less affected in the mutants. Our findings shed light on the
role of Shh signaling on Gli3 processing in lung growth and differentiation by
regulating several critical genes.

PMID: 15136151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2004 May;19(3):211-5.

TBX5 mutations and congenital heart disease: Holt-Oram syndrome revealed.

Mori AD(1), Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cardiovascular Research, Hospital for Sick Children, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Mutations in the T-box transcription factor TBX5 cause
Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), an autosomal-dominant condition characterized by a
familial history of congenital heart defects and preaxial radial ray upper limb
defects. This review summarizes recent developments in the study of TBX5 as it
relates to congenital heart disease and the pathology of HOS.
RECENT FINDINGS: Currently, 37 mutations in TBX5 have been found in patients with
HOS. Most of these mutations cause premature truncation of the primary TBX5
transcript, thereby presumably causing haploinsufficiency. Conversely, missense
mutations diminish the interaction of TBX5 with other transcription factors and
reduce nuclear localization of mutant protein. Although mutations are found
throughout the TBX5 gene, no evidence exists to suggest that genotype affects the
location of heart and limb defects or the severity of HOS manifestation. However,
genetic background, and to a lesser extent, environmental and stochastic
modifiers are believed to influence greatly the severity of HOS manifestation and
may account for the large variation seen in the severity of defects, even among
members of the same kindred. Careful clinical examination of patients who seek
treatment with heart and limb malformations is necessary to avoid misdiagnosis of
similar congenital conditions. With the proper examination, TBX5 mutations can be
identified in more than 70% of patients with a clinical diagnosis of HOS.
SUMMARY: Genetic analysis of patient populations and the biochemical
characterization of the mutated proteins have provided considerable insight into 
the function of TBX5 in cardiac development and disease pathology. Novel
discoveries await as these two paradigms merge.

PMID: 15096952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Cell Biochem. 2004 May 1;92(1):189-99.

TBX5, a gene mutated in Holt-Oram syndrome, is regulated through a GC box and
T-box binding elements (TBEs).

Sun G(1), Lewis LE, Huang X, Nguyen Q, Price C, Huang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics and Metabolism,
University of California, Irvine, California 92697, USA.

Erratum in
    J Cell Biochem. 2004 Jul 1;92(4):864.

TBX5 is a member of the T-box gene family and encodes a transcription factor that
regulates the expression of other gene(s) in the developing heart and limbs.
Mutations of TBX5 cause Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), an autosomal dominant condition
characterized by congenital heart defects and limb anomalies. How TBX5 gene
expression is regulated is still largely unknown. In order to identify
transcription factors regulating TBX5 expression, we examined the 5'-flanking
region of the human TBX5 gene. We determined that up to 300 bp of the 5'-flanking
region of the TBX5 gene was necessary for promoter activity in mouse
cardiomyocyte ECL2 cells. One GC box, three potential T-box-like binding elements
(TBE-A, -B, and -C), and one NKX2.5 binding site were identified. Site-directed
mutagenesis of the potential binding sites revealed that the GC box, TBE-B,
TBE-C, and NKX2.5 are functionally positive for the expression of TBX5. DNA
footprint analysis showed that these binding regions are resistant to DNaseI
digestion. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) further demonstrated the
protein-DNA interactions at the GC box and the potential TBE-B, TBE-C, and NKX2.5
sites in a sequence-specific manner. The ability of TBX5 to regulate its own
promoter was demonstrated by the ability of ectopically expressed human TBX5 to
increase reporter expression. We conclude that the GC box, T-box-like binding
elements, and NKX2.5 binding site play important roles in the regulation of TBX5 
expression, and that TBX5 is likely to be autoregulated as part of the mechanism 
of its transcription.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15095414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Gene. 2004 Apr 14;330:9-18.

Identification of the TBX5 transactivating domain and the nuclear localization
signal.

Zaragoza MV(1), Lewis LE, Sun G, Wang E, Li L, Said-Salman I, Feucht L, Huang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, University of
California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

TBX5 is a member of the T-box gene family and encodes a transcription factor
involved in cardiac and limb development. Mutations of TBX5 cause Holt-Oram
syndrome (HOS), an autosomal-dominant condition with congenital cardiac defects
and forelimb anomalies. Here, we used a GAL4-TBX5 fusion protein in a modified
yeast-one hybrid system to elucidate the TBX5 transactivating domain. Using a
series of deletion mutations of TBX5, we narrowed down its functional domain to
amino acids 339-379 of its C-terminal half; point mutagenesis analysis then
showed that the loss of amino acids 349-351 abolished transactivation. This
result was confirmed in mammalian cells. Furthermore, wild-type TBX5, but not
TBX5 with mutations at the amino acids 349-351, has ability to inhibit NCI-H1299 
cell growth also suggesting that these amino acids are crucial for the TBX5
function in mammalian cells. In addition, to identify the nuclear localization
signal of TBX5, we searched for cluster of basic amino acids. We found that the
deletion of the KRK sequence at amino acids 325-327 mislocalizes TBX5 to
cytoplasm, suggesting that these amino acids serve as a nuclear localization
signal. These studies enhance our understanding of the structure-function
relationship of TBX5 and suggest that truncation mutations of TBX5 could cause
HOS through the loss of its transactivating domain and/or the nuclear
localization signal.

PMID: 15087119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 18;279(25):26698-706. Epub 2004 Apr 6.

Retinoic acid synthesis controlled by Raldh2 is required early for limb bud
initiation and then later as a proximodistal signal during apical ectodermal
ridge formation.

Mic FA(1), Sirbu IO, Duester G.

Author information: 
(1)Oncodevelopmental Biology Program, Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

We present evidence for the existence of two phases of retinoic acid (RA)
signaling required for vertebrate limb development. Limb RA synthesis is under
the control of retinaldehyde dehydrogenase-2 (Raldh2) expressed in the lateral
plate mesoderm, which generates a proximodistal RA signal during limb outgrowth. 
We report that Raldh2(-/-) embryos lack trunk mesodermal RA activity and fail to 
initiate forelimb development. This is associated with deficient expression of
important limb determinants Tbx5, Meis2, and dHand needed to establish forelimb
bud initiation, proximal identity, and the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA),
respectively. Limb expression of these genes can be rescued by maternal RA
treatment limited to embryonic day 8 (E8) during limb field establishment, but
the mutant forelimbs obtained at E10 display a significant growth defect
associated with a smaller apical ectodermal ridge (AER), referred to here as an
apical ectodermal mound (AEM). In these RA-deficient forelimbs, a ZPA expressing 
Shh forms, but it is located distally adjacent to the Fgf8 expression domain in
the AEM rather than posteriorly as is normal. AER formation in Raldh2(-/-)
forelimbs is rescued by continuous RA treatment through E10, which restores RA to
distal ectoderm fated to become the AER. Our findings indicate the existence of
an early phase of RA signaling acting upstream of Tbx5, Meis2, and dHand,
followed by a late phase of RA signaling needed to expand AER structure fully
along the distal ectoderm. During ZPA formation, RA acts early to activate
expression of dHand, but it is not required later for Shh activation.

PMID: 15069081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Apr 1;126A(1):93-8.

Preimplantation genetic diagnosis of human congenital heart malformation and
Holt-Oram syndrome.

He J(1), McDermott DA, Song Y, Gilbert F, Kligman I, Basson CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, The New
York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a multiple malformation syndrome associated with
congenital heart malformation (CHM) and caused by mutations in the TBX5
transcription factor. Effective prenatal genetic diagnosis of HOS is limited by
factors that modify clinical manifestations and confound prediction of an
individual's phenotype. Although preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) has been
applied to complex disorders with some cardiovascular manifestations, its utility
in Mendelian CHM has not been previously demonstrated. We tested whether PGD and 
in vitro fertilization (IVF) technology, including oocyte donation, can identify 
fertilized eggs affected by HOS for potential embryo selection. Five donor
oocytes were fertilized in vitro with sperm from a HOS patient heterozygous for a
Glu69ter-TBX5 mutation and then underwent embryo biopsy and genotyping. One
carried the Glu69ter-TBX5 mutation; all others had wildtype genotypes. Two
wildtype blastocysts were transferred to the mother, and the resulting singleton 
pregnancy was successfully delivered. Mutational analysis of fetal amniocytes and
postpartum umbilical cord blood confirmed PGD. Fetal ultrasonography as well as
postpartum electrocardiography and echocardiography also validated accurate
prediction of normal skeletal and cardiac phenotypes. We conclude that PGD is an 
effective reproductive strategy for HOS patients. As more genetic etiologies for 
CHM are identified, application of PGD as adjunctive therapy to IVF will be
increasingly available to prevent transmission of such diseases from affected
parents to their children. Clinical application of PGD must balance the benefits 
of avoiding disease transmission with the medical risks and financial burdens of 
IVF.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15039979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 30;279(18):19026-34. Epub 2004 Feb 20.

Differential expression and function of Tbx5 and Tbx20 in cardiac development.

Plageman TF Jr(1), Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

The T-box transcription factors play critical roles in embryonic development
including cell type specification, tissue patterning, and morphogenesis. Several 
T-box genes are expressed in the heart and are regulators of cardiac development.
At the earliest stages of heart development, two of these genes, Tbx5 and Tbx20, 
are co-expressed in the heart-forming region but then become differentially
expressed as heart morphogenesis progresses. Although Tbx5 and Tbx20 belong to
the same gene family and share a highly conserved DNA-binding domain, their
transcriptional activities are distinct. The C-terminal region of the Tbx5
protein is a transcriptional activator, while the C terminus of Tbx20 can repress
transcription. Tbx5, but not Tbx20, activates a cardiac-specific promoter (atrial
natriuretic factor (ANF)) alone and synergistically with other transcription
factors. In contrast, Tbx20 represses ANF promoter activity and also inhibits the
activation mediated by Tbx5. Of the two T-box binding consensus sequences in the 
promoter of ANF, only T-box binding element 1 (TBE1) is required for the
synergistic activation of ANF by Tbx5 and GATA4, but TBE2 is required for
repression by Tbx20. To elucidate upstream signaling pathways that regulate Tbx5 
and Tbx20 expression, recombinant bone morphogenetic protein-2 was added to
cardiogenic explants from chick embryos. Using real time reverse
transcription-PCR, it was demonstrated that Tbx20, but not Tbx5, is induced by
bone morphogenetic protein-2. Collectively these data demonstrate clear
differences in both the expression and function of two related transcription
factors and suggest that the modulation of cardiac gene expression can occur as a
result of combinatorial regulatory interactions of T-box proteins.

PMID: 14978031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Cell Biol. 2004 Jan 5;164(1):97-109.

Oriented clonal cell growth in the developing mouse myocardium underlies cardiac 
morphogenesis.

Meilhac SM(1), Esner M, Kerszberg M, Moss JE, Buckingham ME.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie du Développement, Institut Pasteur, 28 Rue de Dr.
Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

During heart morphogenesis, cardiac chambers arise by differential expansion of
regions of the primitive cardiac tube. This process is under the control of
specific transcription factors such as Tbx5 and dHAND. To gain insight into the
cellular mechanisms that underlie cardiogenesis, we have used a retrospective
clonal approach based on the spontaneous recombination of an nlaacZ reporter gene
targeted to the murine alpha-cardiac actin locus. We show that clonal growth of
myocardial cells is oriented. At embryonic day (E) 10.5, the shape of clones is
characteristic of a given cardiac region and reflects its morphology. This is
already detectable in the primitive cardiac tube at E8.5, and is maintained after
septation at E14.5 with additional modulations. The clonal analysis reveals new
subdivisions of the myocardium, including an interventricular boundary region.
Our results show that the myocardium, from the time of its formation, is a
polarized and regionalized tissue and point to the role of oriented clonal cell
growth in cardiac chamber morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2171975
PMID: 14709543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 Jan;45(1):23-9.

Catalase and peroxiredoxin 5 protect Xenopus embryos against alcohol-induced
ocular anomalies.

Peng Y(1), Yang PH, Guo Y, Ng SS, Liu J, Fung PC, Tay D, Ge J, He ML, Kung HF,
Lin MC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Open Laboratory of Chemical Biology, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

PURPOSE: To study the molecular mechanisms underlying alcohol-induced ocular
anomalies in Xenopus embryos.
METHODS: Xenopus embryos were exposed to various concentrations (0.1%-0.5%) of
alcohol, and the subsequent effects in eye development and in eye marker gene
expression were determined. To investigate the role of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) in fetal alcohol syndrome
(FAS)-associated ocular injury, two antioxidant enzymes, catalase and
peroxiredoxin 5, were overexpressed in the two blastomeres of the two-cell stage 
Xenopus embryos.
RESULTS: Exposure of Xenopus embryos to alcohol during eye development produced
marked gross ocular anomalies, including microphthalmia, incomplete closure of
the choroid fissure, and malformation of the retina in 40% of the eyes examined. 
In parallel, alcohol (0.1%-0.5%) dose dependently and significantly reduced the
expression of several eye marker genes, of which TBX5, VAX2, and Pax6 were the
most vulnerable. Overexpression of catalase and of cytosolic and mitochondrial
peroxiredoxin 5 restored the expression of these alcohol-sensitive eye markers
and significantly decreased the frequency of ocular malformation from 39% to 21%,
19%, and 13% respectively. All these enzymes reduced alcohol-induced ROS
production, but only peroxiredoxin 5 inhibited RNS formation in the
alcohol-treated embryos.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that oxidative and nitrosative stresses both
contribute to alcohol-induced fetal ocular injury.

PMID: 14691149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Muscle Res Cell Motil. 2003;24(2-3):211-8.

TBX5 overexpression stimulates differentiation of chamber myocardium in P19C16
embryonic carcinoma cells.

Fijnvandraat AC(1), Lekanne Deprez RH, Christoffels VM, Ruijter JM, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Molecular Cardiology Group, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

In vitro differentiation of pluripotent embryonic cells is becoming a model
system to study factors and genes involved in early developmental processes
including cardiogenesis. An additional application involves the development of
donor cells for treatment of diseases among which cardiac infarction. For this
purpose differentiated cells should meet the functional characteristics of
chamber myocardium, a requirement not convincingly reached as yet. The T-box
transcription factor Tbx5 has been demonstrated to be crucial for heart
formation. Using stably transfected clones of the P19C16 embryonic carcinoma cell
line, reported to differentiate efficiently into the cardiac lineage, we
investigated whether Tbx5 is sufficient to enhance cardiogenesis and
differentiation of chamber myocardium. TBX5-transfected clones started to beat
earlier, however, a relation between transgenic TBX5 mRNA levels and the number
of beating foci or levels of Serca2a mRNA, a myocardial marker, could not be
observed. However, TBX5-transfected clones displayed significantly higher levels 
of atrial natriuretic factor (Anf) and Connexin (Cx)40 mRNAs, which are
associated with the formation of chamber myocardium. This indicates that Tbx5
enhances cardiac maturation within this system rather than cardiogenesis.

PMID: 14609032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Development. 2003 Dec;130(24):5953-64. Epub 2003 Oct 22.

Tbx5 specifies the left/right ventricles and ventricular septum position during
cardiogenesis.

Takeuchi JK(1), Ohgi M, Koshiba-Takeuchi K, Shiratori H, Sakaki I, Ogura K,
Saijoh Y, Ogura T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5, Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0101, Japan.

Extensive misexpression studies were carried out to explore the roles played by
Tbx5, the expression of which is excluded from the right ventricle (RV) during
cardiogenesis. When Tbx5 was misexpressed ubiquitously, ventricular septum was
not formed, resulting in a single ventricle. In such heart, left ventricle
(LV)-specific ANF gene was induced. In search of the putative RV factor(s), we
have found that chick Tbx20 is expressed in the RV, showing a complementary
fashion to Tbx5. In the Tbx5-misexpressed heart, this gene was repressed. When
misexpression was spatially partial, leaving small Tbx5-negative area in the
right ventricle, ventricular septum was shifted rightwards, resulting in a small 
RV with an enlarged LV. Focal expression induced an ectopic boundary of
Tbx5-positive and -negative regions in the right ventricle, at which an
additional septum was formed. Similar results were obtained from the transient
transgenic mice. In such hearts, expression patterns of dHAND and eHAND were
changed with definitive cardiac abnormalities. Furthermore, we report that human 
ANF promoter is synergistically activated by Tbx5, Nkx2.5 and GATA4. This
activation was abrogated by Tbx20, implicating the pivotal roles of interactions 
among these heart-specific factors. Taken together, our data indicate that Tbx5
specifies the identity of LV through tight interactions among several
heart-specific factors, and highlight the essential roles of Tbx5 in cardiac
development.

PMID: 14573514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Trends Mol Med. 2003 Oct;9(10):407-9.

Interaction makes the heart grow stronger.

Packham EA(1), David Brook J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre, NG7
2UH, Nottingham, UK. elizabeth.packham@nottingham.ac.uk

A novel interaction between GATA4 and TBX5 could explain phenotypic similarities 
(atrial septal defects) between patients with mutations in GATA4 or TBX5. The
cardiac transcription factor GATA4 has not previously been implicated in a human 
disorder but a recent paper by Garg et al. provides evidence of mutations in
GATA4 that cause atrial septal defects. Mutations in TBX5 have already been shown
to cause similar atrial septal defects in Holt-Oram syndrome.

PMID: 14557051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Dev Biol. 2003 Oct 15;262(2):206-24.

Cardiac T-box factor Tbx20 directly interacts with Nkx2-5, GATA4, and GATA5 in
regulation of gene expression in the developing heart.

Stennard FA(1), Costa MW, Elliott DA, Rankin S, Haast SJ, Lai D, McDonald LP,
Niederreither K, Dolle P, Bruneau BG, Zorn AM, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, 384 Victoria Street, Darlinghurst,
2010, Sydney, Australia.

Tbx20 is a member of the T-box transcription factor family expressed in the
forming hearts of vertebrate and invertebrate embryos. We report here analysis of
Tbx20 expression during murine cardiac development and assessment of DNA-binding 
and transcriptional properties of Tbx20 isoforms. Tbx20 was expressed in
myocardium and endocardium, including high levels in endocardial cushions. cDNAs 
generated by alternative splicing encode at least four Tbx20 isoforms, and Tbx20a
uniquely carried strong transactivation and transrepression domains in its C
terminus. Isoforms with an intact T-box bound specifically to DNA sites
resembling the consensus brachyury half site, although with less avidity compared
with the related factor, Tbx5. Tbx20 physically interacted with cardiac
transcription factors Nkx2-5, GATA4, and GATA5, collaborating to synergistically 
activate cardiac gene expression. Among cardiac GATA factors, there was
preferential synergy with GATA5, implicated in endocardial differentiation. In
Xenopus embryos, enforced expression of Tbx20a, but not Tbx20b, led to induction 
of mesodermal and endodermal lineage markers as well as cell migration,
indicating that the long Tbx20a isoform uniquely bears functional domains that
can alter gene expression and developmental behaviour in an in vivo context. We
propose that Tbx20 plays an integrated role in the ancient myogenic program of
the heart, and has been additionally coopted during evolution of vertebrates for 
endocardial cushion development.

PMID: 14550786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2003 Oct;35(10):1191-5.

TBX5 nuclear localization is mediated by dual cooperative intramolecular signals.

Collavoli A(1), Hatcher CJ, He J, Okin D, Deo R, Basson CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 525 E
68th Street, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2003 Oct;35(10):1175-7.

The TBX5 transcription factor is required for normal cardiogenesis, and human
TBX5 mutations cause congenital heart defects. Previous studies have shown that
TBX5 can localize to cellular nuclei during embryogenesis and have suggested that
altered nuclear localization may contribute to disease pathogenesis. Current
analyses suggest that TBX5 nuclear localization is not uniform during
organogenesis. To determine the biochemical mechanisms underlying TBX5 nuclear
import, we performed site-directed mutagenesis of human TBX5. We identified two
distinct nuclear localization signals in TBX5, one monopartite and one bipartite.
While each is insufficient to promote complete TBX5 nuclear localization, they
act cooperatively to do so. These sequences are evolutionarily conserved and have
cognates in other T-box gene family members.

PMID: 14519429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2003 Oct;35(10):1175-7.

TBX5: a developmental key that fits many locks.

Yutzey KE, Benson DW.

Comment on
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2003 Oct;35(10):1191-5.

PMID: 14519425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Dev Biol. 2003 Sep 1;261(1):116-31.

Transgenic analysis of the atrialnatriuretic factor (ANF) promoter: Nkx2-5 and
GATA-4 binding sites are required for atrial specific expression of ANF.

Small EM(1), Krieg PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Arizona Health Sciences 
Center, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

The atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) gene is initially expressed throughout the
myocardial layer of the heart, but during subsequent development, expression
becomes limited to the atrial chambers. Mouse knockout and mammalian cell culture
studies have shown that the ANF gene is regulated by combinatorial interactions
between Nkx2-5, GATA-4, Tbx5, and SRF; however, the molecular mechanisms leading 
to chamber-specific expression are currently unknown. We have isolated the
Xenopus ANF promoter in order to examine the temporal and spatial regulation of
the ANF gene in vivo using transgenic embryos. The mammalian and Xenopus ANF
promoters show remarkable sequence similarity, including an Nkx2-5 binding site
(NKE), two GATA sites, a T-box binding site (TBE), and two SRF binding sites
(SREs). Our transgenic studies show that mutation of either SRE, the TBE or the
distal GATA element, strongly reduces expression from the ANF promoter. However, 
mutations of the NKE, the proximal GATA, or both elements together, result in
relatively minor reductions in transgene expression within the myocardium.
Surprisingly, mutation of these elements results in ectopic ANF promoter activity
in the kidneys, facial muscles, and aortic arch artery-associated muscles, and
causes persistent expression in the ventricle and outflow tract of the heart. We 
propose that the NKE and proximal GATA elements serve as crucial binding sites
for assembly of a repressor complex that is required for atrial-specific
expression of the ANF gene.

PMID: 12941624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2002;67:115-20.

Causes of clinical diversity in human TBX5 mutations.

Huang T(1), Lock JE, Marshall AC, Basson C, Seidman JG, Seidman CE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Children's Hospital, Department of Genetics, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

PMID: 12858531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Nature. 2003 Jul 24;424(6947):443-7. Epub 2003 Jul 6.

GATA4 mutations cause human congenital heart defects and reveal an interaction
with TBX5.

Garg V(1), Kathiriya IS, Barnes R, Schluterman MK, King IN, Butler CA, Rothrock
CR, Eapen RS, Hirayama-Yamada K, Joo K, Matsuoka R, Cohen JC, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Rm. NA8.124, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.
Vidu.Garg@UTSouthwestern.edu

Congenital heart defects (CHDs) are the most common developmental anomaly and are
the leading non-infectious cause of mortality in newborns. Only one causative
gene, NKX2-5, has been identified through genetic linkage analysis of pedigrees
with non-syndromic CHDs. Here, we show that isolated cardiac septal defects in a 
large pedigree were linked to chromosome 8p22-23. A heterozygous G296S missense
mutation of GATA4, a transcription factor essential for heart formation, was
found in all available affected family members but not in any control
individuals. This mutation resulted in diminished DNA-binding affinity and
transcriptional activity of Gata4. Furthermore, the Gata4 mutation abrogated a
physical interaction between Gata4 and TBX5, a T-box protein responsible for a
subset of syndromic cardiac septal defects. Conversely, interaction of Gata4 and 
TBX5 was disrupted by specific human TBX5 missense mutations that cause similar
cardiac septal defects. In a second family, we identified a frame-shift mutation 
of GATA4 (E359del) that was transcriptionally inactive and segregated with
cardiac septal defects. These results implicate GATA4 as a genetic cause of human
cardiac septal defects, perhaps through its interaction with TBX5.

PMID: 12845333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Med Genet. 2003 Jul;40(7):473-8.

Mutations at the SALL4 locus on chromosome 20 result in a range of clinically
overlapping phenotypes, including Okihiro syndrome, Holt-Oram syndrome,
acro-renal-ocular syndrome, and patients previously reported to represent
thalidomide embryopathy.

Kohlhase J(1), Schubert L, Liebers M, Rauch A, Becker K, Mohammed SN,
Newbury-Ecob R, Reardon W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Genetics, University of Göttingen, Heinrich-Düker-Weg 12, 
37073 Göttingen, Germany. jkohlha@gwdg.de

We have recently shown that Okihiro syndrome results from mutation in the
putative zinc finger transcription factor gene SALL4 on chromosome 20q13.13-13.2.
There is considerable overlap of clinical features of Okihiro syndrome with other
conditions, most notably Holt-Oram syndrome, a condition in part resulting from
mutation of the TBX5 locus, as well as acro-renal-ocular syndrome. We analysed
further families/patients with the clinical diagnosis of Holt-Oram syndrome and
acro-renal-ocular syndrome for SALL4 mutations. We identified a novel SALL4
mutation in one family where the father was originally thought to have
thalidomide embryopathy and had a daughter with a similar phenotype. We also
found two novel mutations in two German families originally diagnosed as
Holt-Oram syndrome and a further mutation in one out of two families carrying the
diagnosis acro-renal-ocular syndrome. Our results show that some cases of
"thalidomide embryopathy" might be the result of SALL4 mutations, resulting in an
increased risk for similarly affected offspring. Furthermore we confirm the
overlap of acro-renal-ocular syndrome with Okihiro syndrome at the molecular
level and expand the phenotype of SALL4 mutations.

PMCID: PMC1735528
PMID: 12843316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Ann Genet. 2003 Jan-Mar;46(1):19-23.

Holt-Oram syndrome: a new mutation in the TBX5 gene in two unrelated families.

Gruenauer-Kloevekorn C(1), Froster UG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig, Philipp-Rosenthal-Str. 55,
04103, Leipzig, Germany.

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a specific developmental defect involving upper limb 
malformations and cardiac defects. Mutations in the TBX5 gene, located on
chromosome 12q24.1, were demonstrated as the underlying molecular defect in
several families with this disorder. We report on two unrelated families with
HOS. Affected members of both families have the same truncation mutation in exon 
5 of the TBX5 gene (Y136X). This mutation has not been reported before in HOS.
The spectrum of defects is similar in both families, displaying an ASD,
hypoplastic deltoid muscles and hypoplastic or absent thumbs extending to radial 
defects in one case. So far, only a single genotype-phenotype analysis in HOS has
been done which is not sufficient to explain the high inter- and intrafamilial
variability of expression. Our observation further supports that the position of 
the mutation in the TBX5 gene is related to the phenotype expression of HOS.

PMID: 12818525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Development. 2003 Aug;130(15):3515-24.

The zebrafish fgf24 mutant identifies an additional level of Fgf signaling
involved in vertebrate forelimb initiation.

Fischer S(1), Draper BW, Neumann CJ.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1, D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

The development of vertebrate limb buds is triggered in the lateral plate
mesoderm by a cascade of genes, including members of the Fgf and Wnt families, as
well as the transcription factor tbx5. Fgf8, which is expressed in the
intermediate mesoderm, is thought to initiate forelimb formation by activating
wnt2b, which then induces the expression of tbx5 in the adjacent lateral plate
mesoderm. Tbx5, in turn, is required for the activation of fgf10, which relays
the limb inducing signal to the overlying ectoderm. We show that the zebrafish
fgf24 gene, which belongs to the Fgf8/17/18 subfamily of Fgf ligands, acts
downstream of tbx5 to activate fgf10 expression in the lateral plate mesoderm. We
also show that fgf24 activity is necessary for the migration of tbx5-expressing
cells to the fin bud, and for the activation of shh, but not hand2, expression in
the posterior fin bud.

PMID: 12810598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 Jul;73(1):74-85. Epub 2003 Jun 3.

Expressivity of Holt-Oram syndrome is not predicted by TBX5 genotype.

Brassington AM(1), Sung SS, Toydemir RM, Le T, Roeder AD, Rutherford AE, Whitby
FG, Jorde LB, Bamshad MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, 15
North 2030 East, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Mutations in TBX5, a T-box-containing transcription factor, cause cardiac and
limb malformations in individuals with Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS). Mutations that
result in haploinsufficiency of TBX5 are purported to cause cardiac and limb
defects of similar severity, whereas missense mutations, depending on their
location in the T box, are thought to cause either more severe heart or more
severe limb abnormalities. These inferences are, however, based on the analysis
of a relatively small number of independent cases of HOS. To better understand
the relationship between mutations in TBX5 and the variable expressivity of HOS, 
we screened the coding and noncoding regions of TBX5 and SALL4 for mutations in
55 probands with HOS. Seventeen mutations, including six missense mutations in
TBX5 and two mutations in SALL4, were found in 19 kindreds with HOS. Fewer than
50% of individuals with nonsense or frameshift mutations in TBX5 had heart and
limb defects of similar severity, and only 2 of 20 individuals had heart or limb 
malformations of the severity predicted by the location of their mutations in the
T box. These results suggest that neither the type of mutation in TBX5 nor the
location of a mutation in the T box is predictive of the expressivity of
malformations in individuals with HOS.

PMCID: PMC1180592
PMID: 12789647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2003 Feb;69(1):25-37.

T-box genes and cardiac development.

Ryan K(1), Chin AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Joseph Stokes Jr. Research Institute, Division of Cardiology, Abramson 
Research Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND: T-box genes play roles in vertebrate gastrulation and in later
organogenesis. Their existence in all metazoans examined so far indicates that
this is an evolutionarily ancient gene family. Drosophila melanogaster has eight 
T-box genes, whereas Caenorhabditis elegans has 22. Mammals appear to have at
least 18 T-box genes, comprising five subfamilies.
METHODS: A full range of cytological, developmental, molecular and genetic
methodologies have recently been applied to the study of T-box genes.
RESULTS: Over the last 5 years, mutations in TBX1 and TBX5 have been implicated
in two human disorders with haplo-insufficient cardiovascular phenotypes,
DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome and Holt-Oram ("heart-hand") syndrome.
Interestingly, the number of T-box gene family members discovered to have cardiac
or pharyngeal arch expression domains during vertebrate embryonic development has
steadily grown. In addition, various Tbx5 loss-of-function models in organisms as
distant as the mouse and zebrafish do indeed phenocopy Holt-Oram syndrome.
Finally, the intriguing discovery earlier this year that a T-box gene is
expressed in a subset of cardioblasts in D. melanogaster suggests that members of
this gene family may have fundamental, conserved roles in cardiovascular pattern 
formation.
CONCLUSIONS: These developments prompted us to review the current understanding
of the contribution of T-box genes to cardiovascular morphogenesis.

PMID: 12768655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Development. 2003 Jun;130(12):2741-51.

Tbx5 is required for forelimb bud formation and continued outgrowth.

Rallis C(1), Bruneau BG, Del Buono J, Seidman CE, Seidman JG, Nissim S, Tabin CJ,
Logan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Tbx5 is a T-box transcription factor expressed exclusively in the developing
forelimb but not in the developing hindlimb of vertebrates. Tbx5 is first
detected in the prospective forelimb mesenchyme prior to overt limb bud outgrowth
and its expression is maintained throughout later limb development stages. Direct
evidence for a role of Tbx5 in forelimb development was provided by the discovery
that mutations in human TBX5 cause Holt-Oram Syndrome (HOS), a dominant disorder 
characterised predominantly by upper(fore) limb defects and heart abnormalities. 
Misexpression studies in the chick have demonstrated a role for this gene in
limb-type specification. Using a conditional knockout strategy in the mouse to
delete Tbx5 gene function in the developing forelimb, we demonstrate that this
gene is also required at early limb bud stages for forelimb bud development. In
addition, by misexpressing dominant-negative and dominant-activated forms of Tbx5
in the chick wing we provide evidence that this gene is also required at later
stages of limb bud development for continued limb outgrowth. Our results provide 
a context to understand the defects observed in HOS caused by haploinsufficiency 
of TBX5 in human. Moreover, our results also demonstrate that limb bud outgrowth 
and specification of limb identity are linked by a requirement for Tbx5.

PMID: 12736217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Development. 2003 Jun;130(12):2729-39.

Tbx5 and Tbx4 trigger limb initiation through activation of the Wnt/Fgf signaling
cascade.

Takeuchi JK(1), Koshiba-Takeuchi K, Suzuki T, Kamimura M, Ogura K, Ogura T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5, Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0101, Japan.

A tight loop between members of the fibroblast growth factor and the Wnt families
plays a key role in the initiation of vertebrate limb development. We show for
the first time that Tbx5 and Tbx4 are directly involved in this process. When
dominant-negative forms of these Tbx genes were misexpressed in the chick
prospective limb fields, a limbless phenotype arose with repression of both Wnt
and Fgf genes By contrast, when Tbx5 and Tbx4 were misexpressed in the flank, an 
additional wing-like and an additional leg-like limbs were induced, respectively.
This additional limb formation was accompanied by the induction of both Wnt and
Fgf genes These results highlight the pivotal roles of Tbx5 and Tbx4 during limb 
initiation, specification of forelimb/hindlimb and evolution of tetrapod limbs,
placing Tbx genes at the center of a highly conserved genetic program.

PMID: 12736216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 May 1;118A(4):314-8.

Holt-Oram syndrome: is there a "face"?

Allanson JE(1), Newbury-Ecob RA.

Author information: 
(1)Eastern Ontario Regional Genetics Program, Children's Hospital of Eastern
Ontario, Ottawa, Canada. allanson@cheo.on.ca

Holt-Oram syndrome, first described in 1960, is one of many heart-hand syndromes.
Upper limb involvement, predominantly radial, is universal, bilateral and
asymmetrical, with variable severity. Cardiac defects occur in 95% of familial
cases. Inheritance is autosomal dominant with 100% penetrance and no evidence of 
reduced fitness. Mutations in TBX5 have been reported in Holt-Oram syndrome. This
study was conducted to establish whether a particular facial appearance is
associated with Holt-Oram syndrome, one which might facilitate early diagnosis
and aid differentiation from other heart-hand syndromes. Twenty-five individuals 
were evaluated, age 11 months to 70 years. A complete dysmorphological
examination was carried out, serial photographs were reviewed, and a series of
anthropometric craniofacial measurements was obtained. Subjectively, the face is 
square with a broad lower jaw and parietal bossing. The forehead is prominent and
tall. There is narrowing at the temples. Eyes seem close-set. The nose appears
relatively long, with a wide base, and short columella. With age the face becomes
longer and more oval. Our anthropometric approach confirms certain clinical
impressions. However, there is no objective evidence for increased face or nose
height, two of the most striking features of the "gestalt." Nasal height is, in
fact, reduced at all ages. There does not appear to be a syndrome-specific
pattern profile to facilitate the discrimination of this condition from other
heart-hand syndromes.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12687661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Apr 1;12 Spec No 1:R37-44.

T-box genes in human disorders.

Packham EA(1), Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham, NG7 2UH, UK.

The T-box gene family encodes a large family of transcription factors with more
than 20 members identified in humans so far, and homologues in many other
organisms. A number of human disorders have been linked to mutations in T-box
genes, confirming their medical importance. They include Holt- Oram
syndrome/TBX5, Ulnar-Mammary syndrome/TBX3, and more recently DiGeorge
syndrome/TBX1, ACTH deficiency/TBX19 and cleft palate with ankyloglossia/TBX22.
This review describes the key features of these disorders and the involvement of 
T-box genes in their phenotype.

PMID: 12668595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Med Genet. 2003 Mar;40(3):e29.

Novel TBX5 mutations and molecular mechanism for Holt-Oram syndrome.

Fan C(1), Duhagon MA, Oberti C, Chen S, Hiroi Y, Komuro I, Duhagon PI, Canessa R,
Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Genetics, Department of Molecular Cardiology, Lerner
Research Institute, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

PMCID: PMC1618877
PMID: 12624158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2001 Jun 28;26(3):244-6.

[Statistical analysis of 47 cases with Holt-Qram syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang JF(1), Hu DX, Zhou XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha 410011, China.

By statistical analysis of 47 cases with Holt-Qram syndrome(HOS), we found that
the severity of the upper limb abnormalities and cardiac defects in HOS varied
significantly with different individuals. The variations of appearance were
related with the types and positions of mutatons of TBX5 gene which could damage 
the gene function and cause HOS. It is suggested that the genetic heterogeneity
in HOS may be caused by the mutations of different genes.

PMID: 12536695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jan;226(1):82-90.

T-box gene products are required for mesenchymal induction of epithelial
branching in the embryonic mouse lung.

Cebra-Thomas JA(1), Bromer J, Gardner R, Lam GK, Sheipe H, Gilbert SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania,
USA. jacebra@hotmail.com

The regulation of signaling pathways is a prerequisite for coordinating the
induction between mesenchymal and epithelial tissues during morphogenesis.
Mesenchymal FGF10 is known to be an important paracrine factor regulating the
branching morphogenesis of the bronchial epithelium. By using antisense
oligonucleotides (AS ODNs) and in vitro culture of embryonic lungs, we
demonstrate that the transcription factors Tbx4 and Tbx5 are critical for the
expression of mesenchymal FGF10. Treatment of embryonic lung cultures with AS
ODNs to Tbx4 and Tbx5 reduces the level of these transcripts, suppresses Fgf10
expression in the mesenchyme, and completely eliminates the formation of new lung
branches. If FGF10 is locally replaced in these AS ODN-treated lungs, epithelial 
branching is restored. These studies provide evidence that the production of
branching signals by the lung mesenchyme is mediated by T-box genes.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12508227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 7;278(10):8780-5. Epub 2002 Dec 23.

Functional analysis of TBX5 missense mutations associated with Holt-Oram
syndrome.

Fan C(1), Liu M, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Genetics, Department of Molecular Cardiology, Lerner
Research Institute, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

TBX5 is a T-box transcription factor that plays a critical role in organogenesis.
Seven missense mutations in TBX5 have been identified in patients with Holt-Oram 
syndrome characterized by congenital heart defects and upper limb abnormalities. 
However, the functional significance and molecular pathogenic mechanisms of these
mutations are not clear. In this study we describe functional defects in DNA
binding, transcriptional activity, protein-protein interaction, and cellular
localization of mutant TBX5 with these missense mutations (Q49K, I54T, G80R,
G169R, R237Q, R237W, and S252I). Mutations G80R, R237Q, and R237W represent a
group of mutations that dramatically reduce DNA-binding activity of TBX5, leading
to reduced transcription activation by TBX5 and the loss of synergy in
transcriptional activation between TBX5 and NKX2.5. The second group of mutations
includes Q49K, I54T, G169R, and S252I, which have no or moderate effect on
DNA-binding activity and the function of transcription activation of TBX5 but
cause the complete loss of synergistic transcription activity between TBX5 and
NKX2.5. All seven missense mutations greatly reduced the interaction of TBX5 with
NKX2.5 in vivo and in vitro. Immunofluorescent staining showed that wild type
TBX5 was localized completely into the nucleus, but mutants were localized in
both nucleus and cytoplasm. These results demonstrate that all seven missense
mutations studied here are functional mutations with a spectrum of defects
ranging from decreases in DNA-binding activity and transcriptional activation to 
the dramatic reduction of interaction between TBX5 and NKX2.5, and loss of
synergy in transcriptional activation between these two proteins, as well as
impairment in the nuclear localization of TBX5. These defects are likely central 
to the pathogenesis of Holt-Oram syndrome.

PMCID: PMC1579789
PMID: 12499378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Development. 2003 Feb;130(3):623-33.

Tbx5 is essential for forelimb bud initiation following patterning of the limb
field in the mouse embryo.

Agarwal P(1), Wylie JN, Galceran J, Arkhitko O, Li C, Deng C, Grosschedl R,
Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)Programmes in Cardiovascular Research and Developmental Biology, The Hospital 
for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.

Transcriptional cascades responsible for initiating the formation of vertebrate
embryonic structures such as limbs are not well established. Limb formation
occurs as a result of interplay between fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and Wnt
signaling. What initiates these signaling cascades and thus limb bud outgrowth at
defined locations along the anteroposterior axis of the embryo is not known. The 
T-box transcription factor TBX5 is important for normal heart and limb formation,
but its role in early limb development is not well defined. We report that mouse 
embryos lacking Tbx5 do not form forelimb buds, although the patterning of the
lateral plate mesoderm into the limb field is intact. Tbx5 is not essential for
an early establishment of forelimb versus hindlimb identity. In the absence of
Tbx5, the FGF and Wnt regulatory loops required for limb bud outgrowth are not
established, including initiation of Fgf10 expression. Tbx5 directly activates
the Fgf10 gene via a conserved binding site, providing a simple and direct
mechanism for limb bud initiation. Lef1/Tcf1-dependent Wnt signaling is not
essential for initiation of Tbx5 or Fgf10 transcription, but is required in
concert with Tbx5 for maintenance of normal levels of Fgf10 expression. We
conclude that Tbx5 is not essential for the early establishment of the limb field
in the lateral plate mesoderm but is a primary and direct initiator of forelimb
bud formation. These data suggest common pathways for the differentiation and
growth of embryonic structures downstream of T-box genes.

PMID: 12490567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2002 Dec;14(6):691-5.

Current advances in Holt-Oram syndrome.

Huang T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Unversity of California,
Irvine, California 92697, USA. huangts@uci.edu

Holt-Oram syndrome is an autosomal-dominant condition characterized by congenital
cardiac and forelimb anomalies. It is caused by mutations of the TBX5 gene, a
member of the T-box family that encodes a transcription factor. Molecular studies
have demonstrated that mutations predicted to create null alleles cause
substantial abnormalities in both the limbs and heart, and that missense
mutations of TBX5 can produce distinct phenotypes. One class of missense
mutations causes significant cardiac malformations but only minor skeletal
abnormalities; others might cause extensive upper limb malformations but less
significant cardiac abnormalities. Intrafamilial variations of the malformations 
strongly suggest that genetic background or modifier genes play an important role
in the phenotypic expression of HOS. Efforts to understand the intracellular
pathway of TBX5 would provide a unique window onto the molecular basis of common 
congenital heart diseases and limb malformations.

PMID: 12436037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Development. 2002 Nov;129(22):5161-70.

The limb identity gene Tbx5 promotes limb initiation by interacting with Wnt2b
and Fgf10.

Ng JK(1), Kawakami Y, Büscher D, Raya A, Itoh T, Koth CM, Rodríguez Esteban C,
Rodríguez-León J, Garrity DM, Fishman MC, Izpisúa Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Gene Expression Laboratory, 10010
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037-1099. USA.

A major gap in our knowledge of development is how the growth and identity of
tissues and organs are linked during embryogenesis. The vertebrate limb is one of
the best models to study these processes. Combining mutant analyses with gain-
and loss-of-function approaches in zebrafish and chick embryos, we show that
Tbx5, in addition to its role governing forelimb identity, is both necessary and 
sufficient for limb outgrowth. We find that Tbx5 functions downstream of WNT
signaling to regulate Fgf10, which, in turn, maintains Tbx5 expression during
limb outgrowth. Furthermore, our results indicate that Tbx5 and Wnt2b function
together to initiate and specify forelimb outgrowth and identity. The molecular
interactions governed by members of the T-box, Wnt and Fgf gene families
uncovered in this study provide a framework for understanding not only limb
development, but how outgrowth and identity of other tissues and organs of the
embryo may be regulated.

PMID: 12399308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):5093-101.

HrT is required for cardiovascular development in zebrafish.

Szeto DP(1), Griffin KJ, Kimelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Box 357350, University of Washington, Seattle
98195-7530, USA.

The recently identified zebrafish T-box gene hrT is expressed in the developing
heart and in the endothelial cells forming the dorsal aorta. Orthologs of hrT are
expressed in cardiovascular cells from Drosophila to mouse, suggesting that the
function of hrT is evolutionarily conserved. The role of hrT in cardiovascular
development, however, has not thus far been determined in any animal model. Using
morpholino antisense oligonucleotides, we show that zebrafish embryos lacking hrT
function have dysmorphic hearts and an absence of blood circulation. Although the
early events in heart formation were normal in hrT morphant embryos, subsequently
the hearts failed to undergo looping, and late onset defects in chamber
morphology and gene expression were observed. In particular, we found that the
loss of hrT function led to a dramatic upregulation of tbx5, a gene required for 
normal heart morphogenesis. Conversely, we show that overexpression of hrT causes
a significant downregulation of tbx5, indicating that one key role of hrT is to
regulate the levels of tbx5. Secondly, we found that HrT is required to inhibit
the expression of the blood lineage markers gata1 and gata2 in the most posterior
lateral plate mesoderm. Finally, we show that HrT is required for vasculogenesis 
in the trunk, leading to similar vascular defects to those observed in midline
mutants such as floating head. hrT expression in the vascular progenitors depends
upon midline mesoderm, indicating that this expression is one important component
of the response to a midline-derived signal during vascular morphogenesis.

PMID: 12397116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Nov 1;11(23):2979-87.

Okihiro syndrome is caused by SALL4 mutations.

Kohlhase J(1), Heinrich M, Schubert L, Liebers M, Kispert A, Laccone F, Turnpenny
P, Winter RM, Reardon W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universität Göttingen, Heinrich-Düker-Weg 12, 37073
Göttingen, Germany. jkohlha@gwdg.de

Okihiro syndrome refers to the association of forearm malformations with Duane
syndrome of eye retraction. Based on the reported literature experience, clinical
diagnosis of the syndrome can be elusive, owing to the variable presentation in
families reported. Specifically, there is overlap of clinical features with other
conditions, most notably Holt-Oram syndrome, a condition resulting from mutation 
of the TBX5 locus and Townes-Brocks syndrome, known to be caused by mutations in 
the SALL1 gene. Arising from our observation of several malformations in Okihiro 
syndrome patients which are also described in Townes-Brocks syndrome, we
postulated that Okihiro syndrome might result from mutation of another member of 
the human SALL gene family. We have characterized the human SALL4 gene on
chromosome 20q13.13-q13.2. Moreover, we have identified literature reports of
forelimb malformations in patients with cytogenetically identifiable
abnormalities of this region. We here present evidence in 5 of 8 affected
families that mutation at this locus results in the Okihiro syndrome phenotype.

PMID: 12393809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Dev Biol. 2002 Oct 15;250(2):383-92.

Different regulation of T-box genes Tbx4 and Tbx5 during limb development and
limb regeneration.

Khan P(1), Linkhart B, Simon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University, The Feinberg School of
Medicine, Children's Memorial Institute for Education and Research, Chicago,
Illinois 60614, USA.

The T-domain transcription factors Tbx4 and Tbx5 have been implicated, by virtue 
of their limb-type specific expression, in controlling the identity of vertebrate
legs and arms, respectively. To study the roles of these genes in developing and 
regenerating limbs, we cloned Tbx4 and Tbx5 cDNAs from the newt, and generated
antisera that recognize Tbx4 or Tbx5 proteins. We show here that, in two urodele 
amphibians, newts and axolotls, the regulation of Tbx4 and Tbx5 differs from
higher vertebrates. At the mRNA and protein level, both Tbx4 and Tbx5 are
expressed in developing hindlimbs as well as in developing forelimbs. The
coexpression of these genes argues that additional factors are involved in the
control of limb type-specific patterns. In addition, newt and axolotl Tbx4 and
Tbx5 expression is regulated differently during embryogenesis and regenerative
morphogenesis. During regeneration, Tbx5 is exclusively upregulated in the
forelimbs, whereas Tbx4 is exclusively upregulated in the hindlimbs. This
indicates that, on a molecular level, different regulatory mechanisms control the
shaping of identical limb structures and that regeneration is not simply a
reiteration of developmental gene programs.

PMID: 12376111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Sep 20;297(2):185-92.

Induction of apoptosis and inhibition of cell growth by developmental regulator
hTBX5.

He ML(1), Chen Y, Peng Y, Jin D, Du D, Wu J, Lu P, Lin MC, Kung HF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Open Laboratory of the Institute of Molecular 
Technology for Drug Discovery and Synthesis, The University of Hong Kong, SAR,
China. mlhe@hkucc.hku.hk

T box (Tbx) genes are a large family of transcription regulators that play
critical roles in invertebrate and vertebrate development. Mutations in Tbx5 gene
have been found to cause Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) in humans. Partial dysfunction 
of TBX5 in mouse also causes HOS phenotype. Little is known about its molecular
and cellular mechanism. Here, we report that ectopic expression of TBX5 inhibited
colony formation, induced apoptosis, and decreased the growth rate of cells. The 
two point mutations in T domain and a truncated mutation in C-terminal found in
human HOS patients produced TBX5 mutant proteins with a significantly reduction
of colony suppression activity. Deletion of the DNA-binding domain, however,
nearly completely abrogated its ability to suppress colony formation. These
results reveal TBX5 as a new regulator of apoptosis and cell growth, suggesting a
possible mechanism for Holt-Oram syndrome, and a potential reagent for
controlling tumor growth.

PMID: 12237100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Development. 2002 Oct;129(19):4635-45.

The heartstrings mutation in zebrafish causes heart/fin Tbx5 deficiency syndrome.

Garrity DM(1), Childs S, Fishman MC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, 149 13th
Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Holt-Oram syndrome is one of the autosomal dominant human "heart-hand" disorders,
with a combination of upper limb malformations and cardiac defects. Holt-Oram
syndrome is caused by mutations in the TBX5 gene, a member of a large family of
T-box transcription factors that play important roles in cell-type specification 
and morphogenesis. In a screen for mutations affecting zebrafish cardiac
function, we isolated the recessive lethal mutant heartstrings, which lacks
pectoral fins and exhibits severe cardiac dysfunction, beginning with a slow
heart rate and progressing to a stretched, non-functional heart. We mapped and
cloned the heartstrings mutation and find it to encode the zebrafish ortholog of 
the TBX5 gene. The heartstrings mutation causes premature termination at amino
acid 316. Homozygous mutant embryos never develop pectoral fin buds and do not
express several markers of early fin differentiation. The total absence of any
fin bud differentiation distinguishes heartstrings from most other mutations that
affect zebrafish fin development, suggesting that Tbx5 functions very early in
the pectoral fin induction pathway. Moderate reduction of Tbx5 by morpholino
causes fin malformations, revealing an additional early requirement for Tbx5 in
coordinating the axes of fin outgrowth. The heart of heartstrings mutant embryos 
appears to form and function normally through the early heart tube stage,
manifesting only a slight bradycardia compared with wild-type siblings. However, 
the heart fails to loop and then progressively deteriorates, a process affecting 
the ventricle as well as the atrium. Relative to mammals, fish require lower
levels of Tbx5 to produce malformed appendages and display whole-heart rather
than atrial-predominant cardiac defects. However, the syndromic deficiencies of
tbx5 mutation are remarkably well retained between fish and mammals.

PMID: 12223419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Aug 15;111(3):301-6.

A dominantly inherited malformation syndrome with short stature, upper limb
anomaly, minor craniofacial anomalies, and absence of TBX5 mutations: report of a
Thai family.

Kantaputra PN(1), Yamasaki K, Ishida T, Kishino T, Niikawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand. dnpdi001@chiangmai.ac.th

We report on a Thai family with dominantly inherited malformation syndrome with
upper limb anomalies, short stature, quadricuspid aortic valve, and minor
craniofacial anomalies. The affected individuals comprised a mildly affected
mother, a moderately affected daughter, and a most severely affected son. The
daughter and son had short stature. The craniofacial abnormalities comprised
frontal bossing, hypoplastic nasal bones, depressed nasal bridge, and broad nasal
alae. The upper limb defects varies among the patients, ranging from radial ray
defects in the mother through radial and ulnar ray defects with unilateral
humeral hypoplasia in the daughter to radial ray defects with severe oligodactyly
and bilateral humeral hypoplasia in the son. All patients in this family had
hypoplasia of the shoulder girdle and resembled what is observed in many families
with Holt-Oram syndrome. Moreover, the son showed quadricuspid aortic valve with 
mild aortic regurgitation. However, the present family did not show any mutation 
of the TBX5 gene, a disease-causing gene of Holt-Oram syndrome. The present
family deserves further investigation on other genes that play a role in the
development of the upper limbs, particularly of radial rays.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12210327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Ann Med. 2002;34(3):148-56.

Developmental paradigms in heart disease: insights from tinman.

Prall OW(1), Elliott DA, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, St. Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst,
NSW, Australia.

Congenital heart disease is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in
humans, and gene mutations that underlie some of these anomalies are now being
described. The NKX2.5 gene, which encodes a homeobox transcription factor, was
initially discovered in mice through its similarity to the tinman gene of the
fruitfly Drosophila. Tinman is required for formation of the dorsal pulsatile
vessel or 'heart' of the fly. Tinman and NKX2.5 share structural and functional
features, and in mice the gene is required for normal cardiac looping and
differentiation of chamber myocardium. Humans with heterozygous mutations in the 
NKX2.5 gene generally have a disorder involving progressive atrio-ventricular
conduction block and atrial septal defect, although sometimes other abnormalities
including tetralogy of Fallot. The TBX5 gene, which encodes another cardiac
transcription factor that collaborates with NKX2.5, is also an important cardiac 
disease gene, with heterozygous mutations responsible for Holt-Oram (hand/heart) 
syndrome. These contributions to human pathology underscore the relevance of
studying biological phenomena in lower organisms, and examination of other genes 
acting in this and associated pathways will expand our knowledge of congenital
abnormalities and disease predisposition, and improve genetic counseling.

PMID: 12173684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Dev Biol. 2002 Aug 15;248(2):319-30.

Development of dorsal-ventral polarity in the optic vesicle and its presumptive
role in eye morphogenesis as shown by embryonic transplantation and in ovo
explant culturing.

Uemonsa T(1), Sakagami K, Yasuda K, Araki M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Laboratory, Faculty of Science, Nara Women's
University, Nara 630-8506, Japan .

Dorsal and ventral specification in the early optic vesicle appears to play a
crucial role in the proper development of the eye. In the present study, we
performed embryonic transplantation and organ culturing of the chick optic
vesicle in order to investigate how the dorsal-ventral (D-V) polarity is
established in the optic vesicle and what role this polarity plays in proper eye 
development. The left optic vesicle was cut and transplanted inversely in the
right eye cavity of host chick embryos. This method ensured that the D-V polarity
was reversed while the anteroposterior axis remained normal. The results showed
that the location of the choroid fissure was altered from the normal (ventral) to
ectopic positions as the embryonic stage of transplantation progressed from 6 to 
18 somites. At the same time, the shape of the optic vesicle and the expression
patterns of Pax2 and Tbx5, marker genes for ventral and dorsal regions of the
optic vesicle, respectively, changed concomitantly in a similar way. The crucial 
period was between the 8- and 14-somite stages, and during this period the
polarity seemed to be gradually determined. In ovo explant culturing of the optic
vesicle showed that the D-V polarity and choroid fissure formation were already
specified by the 10-somite stage. These results indicate that the D-V polarity of
the optic vesicle is established gradually between 8- and 14-somite stages under 
the influence of signals derived from the midline portion of the forebrain. The
presumptive signal(s) appeared to be transmitted from proximal to distal regions 
within the optic vesicle. A severe anomaly was observed in the development of
optic vesicles reversely transplanted around the 10-somite stage: the optic cup
formation was disturbed and subsequently the neural retina and pigment epithelium
did not develop normally. We concluded that establishment of the D-V polarity in 
the optic vesicle plays an essential role in the patterning and differentiation
of the neural retina and pigment epithelium.

PMID: 12167407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 11;277(41):38390-8. Epub 2002 Aug 1.

Genomic structures of the human and murine corin genes and functional GATA
elements in their promoters.

Pan J(1), Hinzmann B, Yan W, Wu F, Morser J, Wu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Research, Berlex Biosciences, Richmond,
California 94806, USA. junliang_pan@berlex.com

Corin is a multiple-domain type II transmembrane serine protease highly expressed
in the heart. It converts pro-atrial natriuretic peptide to atrial natriuretic
peptide, a cardiac hormone that regulates blood volume and pressure. Here we
describe the genomic structures of the human and murine corin genes and
functional analysis of their promoters. Both corin genes contain 22 exons and
span >200 kb. Their intron/exon boundaries are well conserved, with most exons
encoding distinct structural domains, supporting the idea that corin evolved as a
result of exon duplication and rearrangement. Comparison of the 5'-flanking
regions of the human and murine corin genes revealed several conserved sequences,
including binding sites for TBX5, GATA, NKX2.5, and Krüppel-like transcription
factors. Transfection experiments with reporter gene constructs driven by the
human or murine corin 5'-flanking region indicated that the sequences from -405
to -15 in human and from -646 to -77 in mouse are sufficient to promote high
levels of gene expression in murine cardiomyocytes. In contrast, these sequences 
produced only minimal levels of expression in HeLa cells. Within these sequences,
we identified a conserved GATA element that bound to GATA-4. Mutation of the core
sequence impaired both GATA-4 binding and gene expression. These data indicate
that the GATA element and its binding to GATA-4 are essential for cardiac
expression of the human and murine corin genes.

PMID: 12154094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Nature. 2002 Jun 13;417(6890):754-8.

T-box gene tbx5 is essential for formation of the pectoral limb bud.

Ahn DG(1), Kourakis MJ, Rohde LA, Silver LM, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois 60637, USA. dahn@midway.uchicago.edu

The T-box genes Tbx4 and Tbx5 have been shown to have key functions in the
specification of the identity of the vertebrate forelimb (Tbx5) and hindlimb
(Tbx4). Here we show that in zebrafish, Tbx5 has an additional early function
that precedes the formation of the limb bud itself. Functional knockdown of
zebrafish tbx5 through the use of an antisense oligonucleotide resulted in a
failure to initiate fin bud formation, leading to the complete loss of pectoral
fins. The function of the tbx5 gene in the development of zebrafish forelimbs
seems to involve the directed migration of individual lateral-plate mesodermal
cells into the future limb-bud-producing region. The primary defect seen in the
tbx5-knockdown phenotype is similar to the primary defects described in known
T-box-gene mutants such as the spadetail mutant of zebrafish and the Brachyury
mutant of the mouse, which both similarly exhibit an altered migration of
mesodermal cells. A common function for many of the T-box genes might therefore
be in mediating the proper migration and/or changes in adhesive properties of
early embryonic cells.

PMID: 12066188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Structure. 2002 Mar;10(3):343-56.

Structure of the DNA-bound T-box domain of human TBX3, a transcription factor
responsible for ulnar-mammary syndrome.

Coll M(1), Seidman JG, Müller CW.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Grenoble Outstation, France.

T-box genes encode transcription factors involved in morphogenesis and
organogenesis of vertebrates and invertebrates. Mutations in human T-box genes
TBX3, TBX5, and TBX1 cause severe genetic disorders known as Ulnar-Mammary
syndrome (UMS), Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), and DiGeorge syndrome, respectively.
The crystal structure of the T-box domain of the first human T-box transcription 
factor, TBX3, in complex with DNA at 1.7 A resolution explains structural
consequences of T-box domain point mutations observed in UMS and HOS patients.
Comparison with the structure of the T-box domain from Xenopus laevis (Xbra)
bound to DNA shows differences in several secondary structure elements and in the
quaternary structure of the two complexes. TBX3 independently recognizes the two 
binding sites present in the palindromic DNA duplex, whereas in Xbra, binding to 
the palindrome is stabilized through interactions between the two monomers. The
different quaternary structures suggest different DNA binding modes for T-box
transcription factors.

PMID: 12005433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Nature. 2002 Apr 4;416(6880):527-31.

Fin development in a cartilaginous fish and the origin of vertebrate limbs.

Tanaka M(1), Münsterberg A, Anderson WG, Prescott AR, Hazon N, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, Wellcome Trust Biocentre,
University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK. mtanaka@dundee.ac.uk

Recent fossil finds and experimental analysis of chick and mouse embryos
highlighted the lateral fin fold theory, which suggests that two pairs of limbs
in tetrapods evolved by subdivision of an elongated single fin. Here we examine
fin development in embryos of the primitive cartilaginous fish, Scyliorhinus
canicula (dogfish) using scanning electron microscopy and investigate expression 
of genes known to be involved in limb positioning, identity and patterning in
higher vertebrates. Although we did not detect lateral fin folds in dogfish
embryos, Engrailed-1 expression suggests that the body is compartmentalized
dorso-ventrally. Furthermore, specification of limb identity occurs through the
Tbx4 and Tbx5 genes, as in higher vertebrates. In contrast, unlike higher
vertebrates, we did not detect Shh transcripts in dogfish fin-buds, although
dHand (a gene involved in establishing Shh) is expressed. In S. canicula, the
main fin axis seems to lie parallel to the body axis. 'Freeing' fins from the
body axis and establishing a separate 'limb' axis has been proposed to be a
crucial step in evolution of tetrapod limbs. We suggest that Shh plays a critical
role in this process.

PMID: 11932743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Development. 2002 Feb;129(3):805-13.

Vax2 inactivation in mouse determines alteration of the eye dorsal-ventral axis, 
misrouting of the optic fibres and eye coloboma.

Barbieri AM(1), Broccoli V, Bovolenta P, Alfano G, Marchitiello A, Mocchetti C,
Crippa L, Bulfone A, Marigo V, Ballabio A, Banfi S.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Via Pietro Castellino
111, Naples, Italy.

Vax2 is a homeobox gene whose expression is confined to the ventral region of the
prospective neural retina. Overexpression of this gene at early stages of
development in Xenopus and in chicken embryos determines a ventralisation of the 
retina, thus suggesting its role in the molecular pathway that underlies eye
development. We describe the generation and characterisation of a mouse with a
targeted null mutation of the Vax2 gene. Vax2 homozygous mutant mice display
incomplete closure of the optic fissure that leads to eye coloboma. This
phenotype is not fully penetrant, suggesting that additional factors contribute
to its generation. Vax2 inactivation determines dorsalisation of the expression
of mid-late (Ephb2 and Efnb2) but not early (Pax2 and Tbx5) markers of
dorsal-ventral polarity in the developing retina. Finally, Vax2 mutant mice
exhibit abnormal projections of ventral retinal ganglion cells. In particular, we
observed the almost complete absence of ipsilaterally projecting retinal ganglion
cells axons in the optic chiasm and alteration of the retinocollicular
projections. All these findings indicate that Vax2 is required for the proper
closure of the optic fissure, for the establishment of a physiological asymmetry 
on the dorsal-ventral axis of the eye and for the formation of appropriate
retinocollicular connections.

PMID: 11830579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Development. 2002 Jan;129(1):211-20.

Specification and determination of limb identity: evidence for inhibitory
regulation of Tbx gene expression.

Saito D(1), Yonei-Tamura S, Kano K, Ide H, Tamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Institute, Graduate School of Life Science, Tohoku University,
Aobayama Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

Limb-type-specific expression of Tbx5/Tbx4 plays a key role in drawing
distinction between a forelimb and a hindlimb. Here, we show insights into
specification and determination during commitment of limb-type identity, in
particular that median tissues regulate Tbx expressions. By using the RT-PCR
technique on chick embryos, the onset of specific Tbx5/Tbx4 expression in the
wing/leg region was estimated to be stage 13. Specification of the limb-type
identity is thought to occur before stage 9, since all explants from stage 9
through 14 expressed the intrinsic Tbx gene autonomously in a simple culture
medium. The results of transplantation experiments revealed that axial structures
medial to the lateral plate mesoderm at the level of the wing region are capable 
of transforming leg identity to wing identity, suggesting that a factor(s) from
the median tissues is involved in the limb-type determination. Nevertheless, the 
transplanted wing region was not converted to leg identity. The results of the
transplantation experiments also suggested that wing-type identity is determined 
much earlier than is leg-type identity. Finally, we also found that inhibitory
effects of median tissues mediate the specific expression of Tbx5/Tbx4 in the
presumptive wing/leg region. We propose a model for limb-type identification in
which inhibitory regulation is involved in restricting one Tbx gene expression by
masking the other Tbx expression there.

PMID: 11782414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Med Genet. 2001 Dec;38(12):E44.

Detection of a large TBX5 deletion in a family with Holt-Oram syndrome.

Akrami SM, Winter RM, Brook JD, Armour JA.

PMCID: PMC1734777
PMID: 11748310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2001 Dec;42(13):3095-102.

Expression of Drosophila omb-related T-box genes in the developing human and
mouse neural retina.

Sowden JC(1), Holt JK, Meins M, Smith HK, Bhattacharya SS.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College
London, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.
j.sowden@ich.ucl.ac.uk

PURPOSE: To examine the role of Drosophila optomotor blind (omb)-related T-box
genes in development of human and mouse retina.
METHODS: Mouse Tbx2, Tbx3, and Tbx5 and human TBX2 cDNAs were isolated from
retinal cDNA libraries by hybridization to the Drosophila omb gene. Gene
expression patterns in developing retina were analyzed by in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: TBX2/Tbx2, TBX3/Tbx3, and TBX5/Tbx5 were expressed asymmetrically across
the embryonic neural retina with highest levels of mRNA within dorsal and
peripheral retina. The dorsoventral gradient of TBX2 expression disappeared
before the ganglion cell layer (GCL) formed. Its expression then became
restricted to the inner neuroblastic retina and later to the GCL and inner
nuclear layer (INL). The dorsal expression domains of TBX5/Tbx5 and TBX3/Tbx3
were maintained during formation of the GCL. As the retina matured, TBX3/Tbx3
expression was restricted to the INL, and TBX5/Tbx5 was expressed within the GCL.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression pattern of TBX2, TBX3, and TBX5 within the developing
retina supports the idea that the encoded transcription factors play a role in
providing positional information important for topographic mapping and in
differentiation of distinct cell types across the laminar axis of the retina.

PMID: 11726608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Genome Res. 2001 Oct;11(10):1686-98.

A comparative molecular analysis of developing mouse forelimbs and hindlimbs
using serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE).

Margulies EH(1), Kardia SL, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

The analysis of differentially expressed genes is a powerful approach to
elucidate the genetic mechanisms underlying the morphological and evolutionary
diversity among serially homologous structures, both within the same organism
(e.g., hand vs. foot) and between different species (e.g., hand vs. wing). In the
developing embryo, limb-specific expression of Pitx1, Tbx4, and Tbx5 regulates
the determination of limb identity. However, numerous lines of evidence,
including the fact that these three genes encode transcription factors, indicate 
that additional genes are involved in the Pitx1-Tbx hierarchy. To examine the
molecular distinctions coded for by these factors, and to identify novel genes
involved in the determination of limb identity, we have used Serial Analysis of
Gene Expression (SAGE) to generate comprehensive gene expression profiles from
intact, developing mouse forelimbs and hindlimbs. To minimize the extraction of
erroneous SAGE tags from low-quality sequence data, we used a new algorithm to
extract tags from -analyzed sequence data and obtained 68,406 and 68,450 SAGE
tags from forelimb and hindlimb SAGE libraries, respectively. We also developed
an improved method for determining the identity of SAGE tags that increases the
specificity of and provides additional information about the confidence of the
tag-UniGene cluster match. The most differentially expressed gene between our
SAGE libraries was Pitx1. The differential expression of Tbx4, Tbx5, and several 
limb-specific Hox genes was also detected; however, their abundances in the SAGE 
libraries were low. Because numerous other tags were differentially expressed at 
this low level, we performed a 'virtual' subtraction with 362,344 tags from six
additional nonlimb SAGE libraries to further refine this set of candidate genes. 
This subtraction reduced the number of candidate genes by 74%, yet preserved the 
previously identified regulators of limb identity. This study presents the gene
expression complexity of the developing limb and identifies candidate genes
involved in the regulation of limb identity. We propose that our computational
tools and the overall strategy used here are broadly applicable to other
SAGE-based studies in a variety of organisms. [SAGE data are all available at GEO
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under accession nos. GSM55 and GSM56, which
correspond to the forelimb and hindlimb raw SAGE data.]

PMCID: PMC311149
PMID: 11591645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell. 2001 Sep 21;106(6):709-21.

A murine model of Holt-Oram syndrome defines roles of the T-box transcription
factor Tbx5 in cardiogenesis and disease.

Bruneau BG(1), Nemer G, Schmitt JP, Charron F, Robitaille L, Caron S, Conner DA, 
Gessler M, Nemer M, Seidman CE, Seidman JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Heterozygous Tbx5(del/+) mice were generated to study the mechanisms by which
TBX5 haploinsufficiency causes cardiac and forelimb abnormalities seen in
Holt-Oram syndrome. Tbx5 deficiency in homozygous mice (Tbx5(del/del)) decreased 
expression of multiple genes and caused severe hypoplasia of posterior domains in
the developing heart. Surprisingly, Tbx5 haploinsufficiency also markedly
decreased atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) and connexin 40 (cx40) transcription,
implicating these as Tbx5 target genes and providing a mechanism by which 50%
reduction of T-box transcription factors cause disease. Direct and cooperative
transactivation of the ANF and cx40 promoters by Tbx5 and the homeodomain
transcription factor Nkx2-5 was also demonstrated. These studies provide one
potential explanation for Holt-Oram syndrome conduction system defects, suggest
mechanisms for intrafamilial phenotypic variability, and account for related
cardiac malformations caused by other transcription factor mutations.

PMID: 11572777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Sep 1;10(18):1983-94.

Characterization of the TBX5 binding site and analysis of mutations that cause
Holt-Oram syndrome.

Ghosh TK(1), Packham EA, Bonser AJ, Robinson TE, Cross SJ, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

Holt-Oram syndrome is caused by mutations in TBX5, a member of the T-box gene
family. In order to identify DNA sequences to which the TBX5 protein binds, we
have performed an in vitro binding site selection assay. We have identified an 8 
bp core sequence that is part of the Brachyury consensus-binding site. We show
that TBX5 binds to the full palindromic Brachyury binding site and to the
half-palindrome, whereas Brachyury does not bind to the TBX5 site. Amino acids
1-237 of TBX5 are required for DNA binding. Analysis of the effects of specific
substitution mutations that arise in Holt-Oram patients indicates that G80R and
R237Q eliminate binding to the target site. DNA database analysis reveals that
target sites are present in the upstream regions of several cardiac-expressed
genes including cardiac alpha actin, atrial natriuretic factor, cardiac myosin
heavy chain alpha, cardiac myosin heavy chain beta, myosin light chain 1A, myosin
light chain 1V and Nkx2.5. Cell transfection studies demonstrate that TBX5
activates the transcription of an atrial natriuretic factor reporter construct
and this effect is significantly reduced by deletion of the TBX5 binding site.

PMID: 11555635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Dev Biol. 2001 Jul 15;235(2):507-20.

Novel cell lines promote the discovery of genes involved in early heart
development.

Brunskill EW(1), Witte DP, Yutzey KE, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3300, USA.

Clonal cell lines representing early cardiomyocytes would provide valuable
reagents for the dissection of the genetic program of early cardiogenesis. Here
we describe the establishment and characterization of cell lines from the hearts 
of transgenic mice and embryos with SV40 large T antigen expressed in the
heart-forming region. Ultrastructure analysis by transmission electron microscopy
showed the primitive, precontractile nature of the resulting cells, with the
absence of myofilaments, Z lines, and intercalated disks. Immunohistochemistry,
RT-PCR, Northern blots, and oligonucleotide microarrays were used to determine
the expression levels of thousands of genes in the 1H and ECL-2 cell lines. The
resulting gene-expression profiles showed the transcription of early
cardiomyocyte genes such as Nkx2.5, GATA4, Tbx5, dHAND, cardiac troponin C, and
SM22-alpha. Furthermore, many genes not previously implicated in early cardiac
development were expressed. Two of these genes, Hic-5, a possible negative
regulator of muscle differentiation, and the transcription enhancing factor TEF-5
were selected and shown by in situ hybridizations to be expressed in the early
developing heart. The results show that the 1H and ECL-2 cell lines can be used
to discover novel genes expressed in the early cardiomyocyte.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11437454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Dev Biol. 2001 Jul 15;235(2):489-506.

Defects in pulmonary vasculature and perinatal lung hemorrhage in mice
heterozygous null for the Forkhead Box f1 transcription factor.

Kalinichenko VV(1), Lim L, Stolz DB, Shin B, Rausa FM, Clark J, Whitsett JA,
Watkins SC, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine, Department of
Molecular Genetics, 900 S. Ashland Ave., Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

Decreased pulmonary expression of Forkhead Box f1 (Foxf1) transcription factor
was associated with lethal alveolar hemorrhage in 55% of the Foxf1 +/- newborn
mice. The severity of the pulmonary abnormalities correlates with the levels of
Foxf1 mRNA. Defects in alveolarization and vasculogenesis were observed in
subsets of the Foxf1 +/- mice with relatively low levels of expression from the
normal Foxf1 allele. Lung hemorrhage was coincident with disruption of the
mesenchymal-epithelial cell interfaces in the alveolar and bronchiolar regions of
the lung parenchyma and was associated with increased apoptosis and reduced
surfactant protein B (SP-B) expression. Finally, the lung defect associated with 
the Foxf1 +/- mutation was accompanied by reduced expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), the VEGF receptor 2 (Flk-1), bone morphogenetic
protein 4 (Bmp-4), and the transcription factors of the Brachyury T-Box family
(Tbx2-Tbx5) and Lung Kruppel-like Factor. Reduction in the level of Foxf1 caused 
neonatal pulmonary hemorrhage and abnormalities in alveologenesis, implicating
this transcription factor in the regulation of mesenchyme-epithelial interaction 
critical for lung morphogenesis.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11437453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nat Genet. 2001 Jul;28(3):276-80.

Tbx5 associates with Nkx2-5 and synergistically promotes cardiomyocyte
differentiation.

Hiroi Y(1), Kudoh S, Monzen K, Ikeda Y, Yazaki Y, Nagai R, Komuro I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Tokyo Graduate School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

The cardiac homeobox protein Nkx2-5 is essential in cardiac development, and
mutations in Csx (which encodes Nkx2-5) cause various congenital heart diseases. 
Using the yeast two-hybrid system with Nkx2-5 as the 'bait', we isolated the
T-box-containing transcription factor Tbx5; mutations in TBX5 cause heart and
limb malformations in Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS). Co-transfection of Nkx2-5 and
Tbx5 into COS-7 cells showed that they also associate with each other in
mammalian cells. Glutathione S-transferase (GST) 'pull-down' assays indicated
that the N-terminal domain and N-terminal part of the T-box of Tbx5 and the
homeodomain of Nkx2-5 were necessary for their interaction. Tbx5 and Nkx2-5
directly bound to the promoter of the gene for cardiac-specific natriuretic
peptide precursor type A (Nppa) in tandem, and both transcription factors showed 
synergistic activation. Deletion analysis showed that both the N-terminal domain 
and T-box of Tbx5 were important for this transactivation. A G80R mutation of
Tbx5, which causes substantial cardiac defects with minor skeletal abnormalities 
in HOS, did not activate Nppa or show synergistic activation, whereas R237Q,
which causes upper-limb malformations without cardiac abnormalities, activated
the Nppa promoter to a similar extent to that of wildtype Tbx5. P19CL6 cell lines
overexpressing wildtype Tbx5 started to beat earlier and expressed
cardiac-specific genes more abundantly than did parental P19CL6 cells, whereas
cell lines expressing the G80R mutant did not differentiate into beating
cardiomyocytes. These results indicate that two different types of cardiac
transcription factors synergistically induce cardiac development.

PMID: 11431700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2000 Apr;10(3):93-101.

Atrial form and function: lessons from human molecular genetics.

Hatcher CJ(1), Kim MS, Basson CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine
and Department of Cell Biology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 525 
E. 68th St., New York, NY 10021, USA.

Molecular genetic analyses of human hereditary disorders that affect cardiac
atrial structure and function have recently identified several genes that
regulate atrial morphogenesis. Mutations of the TBX5, NKX2.5, EVC, and PRKAR1
alpha genes all result in abnormalities of human atrial growth and development,
and mutations in at least one gene results in familial atrial fibrillation and is
as yet unidentified. Ongoing studies to find interactions between these
transcription factors and intracellular signaling molecules and other as yet
unknown genes are establishing critical pathways in human cardiogenesis. Human
investigation and experimental animal models of heart development synergize to
elucidate etiologies of common congenital heart disease.

PMID: 11428001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Winter;97(4):304-9.

Molecular determinants of atrial and ventricular septal defects and patent ductus
arteriosus.

Vaughan CJ(1), Basson CT.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Septation defects and patent ductus arteriosus are the most common human
cardiovascular malformations (CVMs). Genetic factors play a major part in the
origin of these malformations. Recent molecular analyses have shed light on
several mendelian forms. In the autosomal dominant Holt-Oram syndrome, both
atrial and ventricular septal defects are inherited in association with limb
deformity as a result of mutations in the gene encoding the TBX5 transcription
factor. Mutations in the NKX2.5 transcription factor gene cause autosomal
dominant familial atrial septal defects in association with progressive
atrioventricular block as well as complex congenital heart disease. Common atrial
syndromes in autosomal dominant Ellis-van Creveld syndrome arise in the context
of axial skeletal and limb malformation as a result of mutations in the EVC gene,
whose function is unknown. Patent ductus arteriosus occurs in several syndromic
forms of congenital heart disease, including Holt-Oram syndrome. Recent analyses 
of autosomal dominant Char syndrome, which includes, with variable penetrance,
patent ductus arteriosus as well as craniofacial and hand malformations, have
shown that the syndrome is caused by mutations in the TFAP2B transcription factor
gene. Ongoing analyses are poised to determine the contribution of these genes as
well as others yet to be identified to common, sporadic forms of congenital heart
disease.

PMID: 11376442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. DNA Cell Biol. 2001 Mar;20(3):141-8.

Genomic analysis and localization of murine Deltex, a modulator of notch
activity, to mouse chromosome 5 and its human homolog to chromosome 12.

Pampeno CL(1), Vallerie AM, Choi J, Meruelo NC, Meruelo D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Kaplan Cancer Center, New York University Medical 
School, New York, New York 10016, USA. pampec01@med.nyu.edu

Deltex is a component of the Notch signaling network, which mediates cellular
differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis during development. Murine Deltex
was initially isolated as a cDNA transcript that displayed increased expression
in T-cell tumors induced by gamma irradiation. The in vivo function of Deltex is 
unknown; however, the emerging role of Notch signaling in T-cell development and 
lymphomagenesis indirectly supports a role for Deltex in these processes. To
investigate the regulation of Deltex expression in both normal and transformed
tissue, we have begun analyzing the Deltex genomic locus. Here, we report the
exon-intron organization of Deltex and map the locus to the middistal region of
mouse chromosome 5, tightly linked to the Adam1a, Lnk, Tbx5, and Nos1 loci. The
human homolog of Deltex has been localized to chromosome 12.

PMID: 11313017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Dev Biol. 2001 Feb 15;230(2):177-88.

TBX5 transcription factor regulates cell proliferation during cardiogenesis.

Hatcher CJ(1), Kim MS, Mah CS, Goldstein MM, Wong B, Mikawa T, Basson CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Cardiology Division, 
Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 525 E. 68th Street, New York, New
York, 10021, USA.

Mutations in human TBX5, a member of the T-box transcription factor gene family, 
cause congenital cardiac septation defects and isomerism in autosomal dominant
Holt-Oram syndrome. To determine the cellular function of TBX5 in cardiogenesis, 
we overexpressed wild-type and mutant human TBX5 isoforms in vitro and in vivo.
TBX5 inhibited cell proliferation of D17 canine osteosarcoma cells and MEQC quail
cardiomyocyte-like cells in vitro. Mutagenesis of the 5' end of the T-box but not
the 3' end of the T-box abolished this effect. Overexpression of TBX5 in
embryonic chick hearts showed that TBX5 inhibits myocardial growth and
trabeculation. TBX5 effects in vivo were abolished by Gly80Arg missense mutation 
of the 5' end of the T-box. PCNA analysis in transgenic chick hearts revealed
that TBX5 overexpression does suppress embryonic cardiomyocyte proliferation in
vivo. Inhibitory effects of TBX5 on cardiomyocyte proliferation include a noncell
autonomous process in vitro and in vivo. TBX5 inhibited proliferation of both
nontransgenic cells cocultured with transgenic cells in vitro and nontransgenic
cardiomyocytes in transgenic chick hearts with mosaic expression of TBX5 in vivo.
Immunohistochemical studies of human embryonic tissues, including hearts, also
demonstrated that TBX5 expression is inversely related to cellular proliferation.
We propose that TBX5 can act as a cellular arrest signal during vertebrate
cardiogenesis and thereby participate in modulation of cardiac growth and
development.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11161571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Dev Dyn. 2000 Sep;219(1):90-5.

Identification and localization of TBX5 transcription factor during human cardiac
morphogenesis.

Hatcher CJ(1), Goldstein MM, Mah CS, Delia CS, Basson CT.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine and Department of Cell Biology,
Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Mutations in the TBX5 transcription factor gene cause human cardiac malformation 
in Holt-Oram syndrome. To identify and localize TBX5 during cardiac
morphogenesis, we performed immunohistochemical studies of TBX5 protein cardiac
expression during human embryogenesis. Specific antibody to human TBX5 was
generated in rabbits with a TBX5 synthetic peptide and affinity purification of
antiserum. Anti-TBX5 was used in immunohistochemical analyses of human cardiac
tissue. In embryonic and adult heart, TBX5 is expressed throughout the epicardium
and in cardiomyocyte nuclei in myocardium of all four cardiac chambers.
Endocardial expression of TBX5 is only present in left ventricle. Asymmetric
left-sided transmyocardial gradients of TBX5 protein expression were observed in 
embryonic but not adult hearts. Human cardiac expression of TBX5 protein
correlates with the cardiac manifestations of Holt-Oram syndrome. TBX5
transmyocardial protein gradients may contribute to normal patterning of the
human heart during embryogenesis.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10974675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Genomics. 2000 Jul 1;67(1):92-5.

Virtual cloning and physical mapping of a human T-box gene, TBX4.

Yi CH(1), Russ A, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
United Kingdom.

The Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily is one of the largest subgroupings within the T-box gene
family, the members of which encode developmentally critical transcription
factors. TBX4, a human member of the Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily, has been identified
and characterized from a high-throughput genomic sequence. The genomic
organization of TBX4 was elucidated by computational sequence analysis, and the
putative cDNA sequence was assembled. The genomic organization of TBX4 is very
similar to that of TBX5, as is the situation for TBX2 and TBX3. The physical
configuration of the TBX4-TBX2 cluster on human chromosome 17q21-q22 is similar
to that of the TBX5-TBX3 cluster on chromosome 12q23-q24. The assembled TBX4 cDNA
sequence was searched against the EST databases, and a TBX4 EST was identified.

PMID: 10945475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2000 Aug;17(4):233-5.

[TBX5 mutation in Chinese patients with Holt-Oram syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang J(1), Hu D, Xia J, Yang Y, Yin B, Hu J, Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital, Hunan
Medical University, Changsha, Hunan, P. R. China. markzhou@public.cs.hn.cn

OBJECTIVE: To analyse TBX5 mutation in Chinese patients with Holt-Oram
syndrome(HOS).
METHODS: Seven HOS families were analysed with single strand conformation
polymorphism(SSCP) and sequencing.
RESULTS: Three SSCP changes were detected and identified as the TBX5 gene
mutation at three new sites. One of the changes is a frameshift mutation caused
by a base cytidine deletion at the cDNA sequence of 416, which altered all the
codons after the point, thus it can not encode the protein of normal amino acid
sequence; another is a missense mutation induced by a base substitution(C-->A) at
the cDNA sequence of 145, which made the codon of that point change from
CAG-->AAG, and encoded amino acid changed from glutamine(Gln) to lysine(Lys),
consequently the change weakened the function of TBX5 protein; the third is also 
a missense mutation which resulted from a base substitution (T-->C) at the cDNA
sequence of 161, this change made the codon of that point change from ATC-->ACC, 
it changed the encoded amino acid from isoleucine(Ile) to threonine(Thr), which
reduced the function of TBX5 protein.
CONCLUSION: HOS in Chinese is caused by mutation in TBX5.

PMID: 10932003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Dev Biol. 2000 Jul 15;223(2):266-78.

Chamber formation and morphogenesis in the developing mammalian heart.

Christoffels VM(1), Habets PE, Franco D, Campione M, de Jong F, Lamers WH, Bao
ZZ, Palmer S, Biben C, Harvey RP, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy & Embryology, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 1105, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Dev Biol 2000 Sep 1;225(1):266.

In this study we challenge the generally accepted view that cardiac chambers form
from an array of segmental primordia arranged along the anteroposterior axis of
the linear and looping heart tube. We traced the spatial pattern of expression of
genes encoding atrial natriuretic factor, sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase, 
Chisel, Irx5, Irx4, myosin light chain 2v, and beta-myosin heavy chain and
related these to morphogenesis. Based on the patterns we propose a two-step model
for chamber formation in the embryonic heart. First, a linear heart forms, which 
is composed of "primary" myocardium that nonetheless shows polarity in phenotype 
and gene expression along its anteroposterior and dorsoventral axes. Second,
specialized ventricular chamber myocardium is specified at the ventral surface of
the linear heart tube, while distinct left and right atrial myocardium forms more
caudally on laterodorsal surfaces. The process of looping aligns these primordial
chambers such that they face the outer curvature. Myocardium of the inner
curvature, as well as that of inflow tract, atrioventricular canal, and outflow
tract, retains the molecular signature originally found in linear heart tube
myocardium. Evidence for distinct transcriptional programs which govern
compartmentalization in the forming heart is seen in the patterns of expression
of Hand1 for the dorsoventral axis, Irx4 and Tbx5 for the anteroposterior axis,
and Irx5 for the distinction between primary and chamber myocardium.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10882515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Dev Biol. 2000 Jul 1;223(1):169-80.

Ventricular expression of tbx5 inhibits normal heart chamber development.

Liberatore CM(1), Searcy-Schrick RD, Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, The Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

The T-box gene tbx5 is expressed in the developing heart, forelimb, eye, and
liver in vertebrate embryos during critical stages of morphogenesis and
patterning. In humans, mutations in the TBX5 gene have been associated with
Holt-Oram syndrome, which is characterized by developmental anomalies in the
heart and forelimbs. In chicken and mouse embryos, tbx5 expression is initiated
at the earliest stages of heart formation throughout the heart primordia and is
colocalized with other cardiac transcription factors such as nkx-2.5 and GATA4.
As the heart differentiates, tbx5 expression is restricted to the posterior
sinoatrial segments of the heart, consistent with the timing of atrial chamber
determination. The correlation between tbx5 expression and atrial lineage
determination was examined in retinoic acid (RA)-treated chicken embryos. tbx5
expression is maintained throughout the hearts of RA-treated embryos under
conditions that also expand atrial-specific gene expression. The downstream
effects of persistent tbx5 expression in the ventricles were examined directly in
transgenic mice. Embryos that express tbx5 driven by a beta-myosin heavy chain
promoter throughout the primitive heart tube were generated. Loss of
ventricular-specific gene expression and retardation of ventricular chamber
morphogenesis were observed in these embryos. These studies provide direct
evidence for an essential role for tbx5 in early heart morphogenesis and
chamber-specific gene expression.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10864469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Jun 5;92(4):237-40.

Three novel TBX5 mutations in Chinese patients with Holt-Oram syndrome.

Yang J(1), Hu D, Xia J, Yang Y, Ying B, Hu J, Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Hunan
Medical University, Changsha, China. Yangjmfu@public.hk.hi.cn

Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is an autosomal dominant syndrome that comprises upper
limb and cardiac defects. The gene responsible for HOS, TBX5, was isolated and
many mutations have been identified in HOS patients. We analyzed 11 Chinese HOS
patients (7 from three families and 4 sporadic cases) for TBX5 mutation by single
strand conformation polymorphisms (SSCPs). Three SSCP changes were detected in
two of the three familial cases and one sporadic case. Sequence analysis
identified three novel, heterozygous mutations in TBX5: a frameshift mutation
caused by one base deletion [C416del] in one family, a mis-sense mutation
(Gln49Lys) induced by a base substitution (C145A) in another family, and the
other mis-sense mutation (Ile54Thr) by T161C in one sporadic case. The patients
with the frameshift mutations had severer clinical manifestations that involved
aplasia/hypoplasia of the arm and thumbs, while those with the mis-sense
mutations presented with milder anomalies such as absent or hypoplastic thumbs
but without arm abnormalities. These observations may support a
genotype-phenotype correlation in HOS patients with TBX5 mutation.

PMID: 10842287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Development. 2000 Jun;127(12):2573-82.

The bHLH transcription factor hand2 plays parallel roles in zebrafish heart and
pectoral fin development.

Yelon D(1), Ticho B, Halpern ME, Ruvinsky I, Ho RK, Silver LM, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and Programs in Developmental
Biology, Genetics and Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA, USA.

The precursors of several organs reside within the lateral plate mesoderm of
vertebrate embryos. Here, we demonstrate that the zebrafish hands off locus is
essential for the development of two structures derived from the lateral plate
mesoderm - the heart and the pectoral fin. hands off mutant embryos have defects 
in myocardial development from an early stage: they produce a reduced number of
myocardial precursors, and the myocardial tissue that does form is improperly
patterned and fails to maintain tbx5 expression. A similar array of defects is
observed in the differentiation of the pectoral fin mesenchyme: small fin buds
form in a delayed fashion, anteroposterior patterning of the fin mesenchyme is
absent and tbx5 expression is poorly maintained. Defects in these mesodermal
structures are preceded by the aberrant morphogenesis of both the cardiogenic and
forelimb-forming regions of the lateral plate mesoderm. Molecular analysis of two
hands off alleles indicates that the hands off locus encodes the bHLH
transcription factor Hand2, which is expressed in the lateral plate mesoderm
starting at the completion of gastrulation. Thus, these studies reveal early
functions for Hand2 in several cellular processes and highlight a genetic
parallel between heart and forelimb development.

PMID: 10821756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Wiad Lek. 1999;52(11-12):606-9.

[Genetical basis of Holt-Oram syndrome].

[Article in Polish]

Rokicka A(1), Rokicki W.

Author information: 
(1)Zakladu Genetyki Medycznej Slaskiej Akademii Medycznej w Katowicach.

On the basis of literature the review of data concerning genetical ground of
Holt--Oram syndrome was presented. This disease is characterized by coexistence
of congenital heart malformation and osseous abnormalities of upper limbs. It has
been known since 1994 that the locus of the gene responsible for Holt--Oram
syndrome appearance is situated in the region 12q21-q22 of chromosome 12. In 1997
this gene was defined as the TBX5 belonging to the family T-box which codes the
transcription factors during embryonic development. In the cases of familial and 
sporadic appearance of Holt--Oram syndrome different mutations in the TBX5 gene
were described. No correlation was found between mutation type and the clinical
features. It is suspected that TBX5 gene is interacting with the other ones
during embryonic differentiation processes.

PMID: 10745699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mech Dev. 2000 Mar 1;91(1-2):433-7.

Conserved and divergent expression of T-box genes Tbx2-Tbx5 in Xenopus.

Takabatake Y(1), Takabatake T, Takeshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Human Informatics, Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya,
Japan.

We report here the identification of four members of T-box family genes,
Xltbx2-Xltbx5, in Xenopus. Two of them are probable pseudovariant genes of XTbx5 
and ET, a putative Xenopus ortholog of Tbx3. We compared their expression
patterns in both embryos and limbs. In embryos, expression of Xltbx2 and Xltbx3
showed novel diversities, such as Xltbx2 in the neural crest cells and Xltbx3 in 
the ventral spinal cord, together with mutual similarities in the following
regions: dorsal retina, proctoderm, lateral line organ, cement gland and cranial 
ganglia. The patterns in limbs were highly conserved with mouse and chick
orthologs, including the limb-type specific expression of Xltbx4 and Xltbx5. In
addition, RT-PCR analysis showed that they are expressed weakly even in adult
limbs as previously reported in the newt.

PMID: 10704879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Dev Genes Evol. 2000 Feb;210(2):82-91.

The evolution of paired appendages in vertebrates: T-box genes in the zebrafish.

Ruvinsky I(1), Oates AC, Silver LM, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08544, USA.

The presence of two sets of paired appendages is one of the defining features of 
jawed vertebrates. We are interested in identifying genetic systems that could
have been responsible for the origin of the first set of such appendages, for
their subsequent duplication at a different axial level, and/or for the
generation of their distinct identities. It has been hypothesized that four genes
of the T-box gene family (Tbx2-Tbx5) played important roles in the course of
vertebrate limb evolution. To test this idea, we characterized the orthologs of
tetrapod limb-expressed T-box genes from a teleost, Danio rerio. Here we report
isolation of three of these genes, tbx2, tbx4, and tbx5. We found that their
expression patterns are remarkably similar to those of their tetrapod
counterparts. In particular, expression of tbx5 and tbx4 is restricted to
pectoral and pelvic fin buds, respectively, while tbx2 can be detected at the
anterior and posterior margins of the outgrowing fin buds. This, in combination
with conserved expression patterns in other tissues, suggests that the last
common ancestor of teleosts and tetrapods possessed all four of these
limb-expressed T-box genes (Tbx2-Tbx5), and that these genes had already
acquired, and have subsequently maintained, their gene-specific functions.
Furthermore, this evidence provides molecular support for the notion that teleost
pectoral and pelvic fins and tetrapod fore- and hindlimbs, respectively, are
homologous structures, as suggested by comparative morphological analyses.

PMID: 10664151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mech Dev. 2000 Feb;90(2):299-304.

Developmental regulation of Tbx5 in zebrafish embryogenesis.

Begemann G(1), Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Programme, The Krebs Institute, University of
Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield, UK.

T-box (tbx) genes constitute a large family of transcriptional regulators
involved in developmental patterning processes. In tetrapods, tbx5 has been
implicated in specifying forelimb type identity. Here, we report the cloning of
the zebrafish tbx5.1 gene and characterise its expression during zebrafish
embryogenesis and early larval development of wild type and mutant embryos that
affect pectoral fin patterning. tbx5.1 is expressed during development of the
heart, the pectoral fins and the eye. Notably, its expression in the lateral
plate mesoderm defines a single and continuous region of heart and pectoral fin
precursor cells, and constitutes the earliest specific marker for pectoral fin
development in the zebrafish.

PMID: 10640716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Science. 2000 Jan 7;287(5450):134-7.

Tbx5 and the retinotectum projection.

Koshiba-Takeuchi K(1), Takeuchi JK, Matsumoto K, Momose T, Uno K, Hoepker V,
Ogura K, Takahashi N, Nakamura H, Yasuda K, Ogura T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5, Takayama, Ikoma, Nara, Japan 630-0101.

Dorsal and ventral aspects of the eye are distinct from the early stages of
development. The developing eye cup grows dorsally, and the choroidal fissure is 
formed on its ventral side. Retinal axons from the dorsal and ventral retina
project to the ventral and dorsal tectum, respectively. Misexpression of the Tbx5
gene induced dorsalization of the ventral side of the eye and altered projections
of retinal ganglion cell axons. Thus, Tbx5 is involved in eye morphogenesis and
is a topographic determinant of the visual projections between retina and tectum.

PMID: 10615048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Neuron. 1999 Nov;24(3):541-53.

Misexpression of the Emx-related homeobox genes cVax and mVax2 ventralizes the
retina and perturbs the retinotectal map.

Schulte D(1), Furukawa T, Peters MA, Kozak CA, Cepko CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The mechanisms that establish the dorsal-ventral (D-V) axis of the eye are poorly
understood. We isolated two homeobox genes from mouse and chicken, mVax2 and
cVax, whose expression during early eye development is restricted to the ventral 
retina. In chick, ectopic expression of either Vax leads to ventralization of the
early retina, as assayed by expression of the transcription factors Pax2 and
Tbx5, and the Eph family members EphB2, EphB3, ephrinB1, and ephrinB2, all of
which are normally dorsally or ventrally restricted. Moreover, the projections of
dorsal but not ventral ganglion cell axons onto the optic tectum showed profound 
targeting errors following cVax misexpression. mVax2/cVax thus specify positional
identity along the D-V axis of the retina and influence retinotectal mapping.

PMID: 10595508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mech Dev. 1999 Sep;87(1-2):181-4.

Differential expression of Tbx4 and Tbx5 in Zebrafish fin buds.

Tamura K(1), Yonei-Tamura S, Izpisúa Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Gene expression Laboratory, 10010
N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037-1099, USA.

In here we report the identification of two new members of the T-box gene family,
zf-tbx5 and zf-tbx4, from the Zebrafish, Danio rerio. The amino acid sequences
within the T-box domain share high homology with the mouse, chick, and newt
orthologs. Whole mount in situ hybridization revealed specific expression of
these genes in the eye and Fin buds. zf-tbx5 expression is restricted to the
pectoral Fin bud, whilst zf-tbx4 transcripts are confined in the pelvic Fin bud. 
These results reveal the conserved expression pattern of Tbx5 and Tbx4 during
appendage development in all animal species studied to date.

PMID: 10495283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Dev Biol. 1999 Jul 1;211(1):100-8.

Chamber-specific cardiac expression of Tbx5 and heart defects in Holt-Oram
syndrome.

Bruneau BG(1), Logan M, Davis N, Levi T, Tabin CJ, Seidman JG, Seidman CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical
School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts, 02115, USA.

To further define the role of a T-box transcription factor, Tbx5, in cardiac
development, we have examined its expression in the developing mouse and chick
heart and correlated this pattern with cardiac defects caused by human TBX5
mutations in Holt-Oram syndrome. Early in the developing heart, Tbx5 is uniformly
expressed throughout the entire cardiac crescent. Upon formation of the linear
heart tube, Tbx5 is expressed in a graded fashion, stronger near the posterior
end and weaker at the anterior end. As the heart tube loops, asymmetric Tbx5
expression continues; Tbx5 is expressed in the presumptive left ventricle, but
not the right ventricle or outflow tract. This pattern of expression is
maintained in more mature hearts. Expression in the ventricular septum is
restricted to the left side and is contiguous with left ventricular free wall
expression. Trabeculae, vena cavae (inferior and superior), and the atrial aspect
of the atrioventricular valves also express high levels of Tbx5. These patterns
of Tbx5 expression provide an embryologic basis for the prevalence of atrial
septal defects (ostium primum and secundum), ventricular muscular septal defects,
and left-sided malformations (endocardial cushion defects, hypoplastic left
heart, and aberrant trabeculation) observed in patients with Holt-Oram syndrome.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10373308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nature. 1999 Apr 29;398(6730):814-8.

The T-box genes Tbx4 and Tbx5 regulate limb outgrowth and identity.

Rodriguez-Esteban C(1), Tsukui T, Yonei S, Magallon J, Tamura K, Izpisua Belmonte
JC.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, California
92037-1099, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1999 Apr 29;398(6730):751-2.

During embryonic development, initially similar fields can develop into distinct 
structures, such as the vertebrate fore- and hindlimbs. Although considerable
progress has been made in our understanding of the genetic control underlying the
establishment of the different limb axes, the molecular cues that specify the
differential development of the fore- and hindlimbs are unknown. Possible
candidates for genes determining limb identity are Pitx1, a gene whose
transcripts are detected in the early hind- but not forelimb bud, and two members
of the T-box (Tbx) gene family, Tbx4 and Tbx5, which are specifically expressed
in the hindlimb and forelimb buds, respectively. Here we show that Tbx4 and Tbx5 
are essential regulators of limb outgrowth whose roles seem to be tightly linked 
to the activity of three signalling proteins that are required for limb outgrowth
and patterning: fibroblast growth factor (FGF), bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 
and Wnt. In addition, we provide evidence that Tbx4 and Tbx5 are involved in
controlling limb identity. Our findings provide insight into how similar
developmental fields can evolve into homologous but distinct structures.

PMID: 10235264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Nature. 1999 Apr 29;398(6730):810-4.

Tbx5 and Tbx4 genes determine the wing/leg identity of limb buds.

Takeuchi JK(1), Koshiba-Takeuchi K, Matsumoto K, Vogel-Höpker A, Naitoh-Matsuo M,
Ogura K, Takahashi N, Yasuda K, Ogura T.

Author information: 
(1)Nara Institute of Science and Technology Graduate School of Biological
Sciences, Ikoma, Japan.

Comment in
    Nature. 1999 Apr 29;398(6730):751-2.

Much progress has been made in understanding limb development. Most genes are
expressed equally and in the same pattern in the fore- and hindlimbs, which
nevertheless develop into distinct structures. The T-box genes Tbx5 and Tbx4, on 
the other hand, are expressed differently in chick wing (Tbx5) and leg (Tbx4)
buds. Molecular analysis of the optomotor blind gene, which belongs to the same
family of transcription factors, has revealed that this gene is involved in the
transdetermination of Drosophila wing and leg imaginal discs. In addition,
expression of Tbx5 and Tbx4 correlates well with the identity of ectopic limb
buds induced by fibroblast growth factor. Thus, it is thought that Tbx5 and Tbx4 
might be involved in determining limb identity. Another candidate is the Pitx1
gene, which encodes a bicoid-type homeodomain transcription factor that is
expressed in leg buds. Here we determine the importance of these factors in
establishing limb identity.

PMID: 10235263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Development. 1999 May;126(9):1805-10.

Hindlimb patterning and mandible development require the Ptx1 gene.

Lanctôt C(1), Moreau A, Chamberland M, Tremblay ML, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, Institut de recherches cliniques de
Montréal, Montréal Québec, Canada H2W 1R7.

The restricted expression of the Ptx1 (Pitx1) gene in the posterior half of the
lateral plate mesoderm has suggested that it may play a role in specification of 
posterior structures, in particular, specification of hindlimb identity. Ptx1 is 
also expressed in the most anterior ectoderm, the stomodeum, and in the first
branchial arch. Ptx1 expression overlaps with that of Ptx2 in stomodeum and in
posterior left lateral plate mesoderm. We now show that targeted inactivation of 
the mouse Ptx1 gene severely impairs hindlimb development: the ilium and knee
cartilage are absent and the long bones are underdeveloped. Greater reduction of 
the right femur size in Ptx1 null mice suggests partial compensation by Ptx2 on
the left side. The similarly sized tibia and fibula of mutant hindlimbs may be
taken to resemble forelimb bones: however, the mutant limb buds appear to have
retained their molecular identity as assessed by forelimb expression of Tbx5 and 
by hindlimb expression of Tbx4, even though Tbx4 expression is decreased in Ptx1 
null mice. The hindlimb defects appear to be, at least partly, due to abnormal
chondrogenesis. Since the most affected structures derive from the dorsal side of
hindlimb buds, the data suggest that Ptx1 is responsible for patterning of these 
dorsal structures and that as such it may control development of
hindlimb-specific features. Ptx1 inactivation also leads to loss of bones derived
from the proximal part of the mandibular mesenchyme. The dual role of Ptx1
revealed by the gene knockout may reflect features of the mammalian jaw and
hindlimbs that were acquired at a similar time during tetrapod evolution.

PMID: 10101115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Am J Med Genet. 1999 Mar 19;83(3):201-6.

GATA4 haploinsufficiency in patients with interstitial deletion of chromosome
region 8p23.1 and congenital heart disease.

Pehlivan T(1), Pober BR, Brueckner M, Garrett S, Slaugh R, Van Rheeden R, Wilson 
DB, Watson MS, Hing AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Previous studies have shown that patients with deletion of distal human
chromosome arm 8p may have congenital heart disease and other physical anomalies.
The gene encoding GATA-4, a zinc finger transcription factor implicated in
cardiac gene expression and development, localizes to chromosome region 8p23.1.
To examine whether GATA-4 deficiency is present in patients with monosomy of
8p23.1 with congenital heart disease, we performed fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) with a GATA4 probe on cells from a series of patients with
interstitial deletion of 8p23.1. Four individuals with del(8)(p23.1) and
congenital heart disease were found to be haploinsufficient at the GATA4 locus by
FISH. The GATA4 gene was not deleted in a fifth patient with del(8)(p23.1) who
lacked cardiac anomalies. FISH analysis on cells from 48 individuals with
congenital heart disease and normal karyotypes failed to detect any
submicroscopic deletions at the GATA4 locus. We conclude that haploinsufficiency 
at the GATA4 locus is often seen in patients with del(8)(p23.1) and congenital
heart disease. Based on these findings and recent studies showing that
haploinsufficiency for other cardiac transcription factor genes (e.g., TBX5,
NKX2-5) causes congenital heart disease, we postulate that GATA-4 deficiency may 
contribute to the phenotype of patients with monosomy of 8p23.1.

PMID: 10096597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Development. 1999 Apr;126(8):1739-51.

Tbx5 is essential for heart development.

Horb ME(1), Thomsen GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Institute of Cell and
Developmental Biology, State University of New York, Stony Brook, NY 11794-5215, 
USA. gthomsen@notes.cc.sunysb.edu

Mutations in the Tbx5 transcription factor cause heart septal defects found in
human Holt-Oram Syndrome. The complete extent to which Tbx5 functions in heart
development, however, has not been established. Here we show that, in Xenopus
embryos, Tbx5 is expressed in the early heart field, posterior to the cardiac
homeobox transcription factor, Nkx2.5. During morphogenesis, Tbx5 is expressed
throughout the heart tube except the anterior portion, the bulbus cordis. When
Tbx5 activity is antagonized with a hormone-inducible, dominant negative version 
of the protein, the heart fails to develop. These results suggest that, in
addition to its function in heart septation, Tbx5 has a more global role in
cardiac specification and heart development in vertebrate embryos.

PMID: 10079235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Mar 16;96(6):2919-24.

Different TBX5 interactions in heart and limb defined by Holt-Oram syndrome
mutations.

Basson CT(1), Huang T, Lin RC, Bachinsky DR, Weremowicz S, Vaglio A, Bruzzone R, 
Quadrelli R, Lerone M, Romeo G, Silengo M, Pereira A, Krieger J, Mesquita SF,
Kamisago M, Morton CC, Pierpont ME, Müller CW, Seidman JG, Seidman CE.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine and Department of Cell Biology and
Anatomy, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, The New York Hospital, New 
York, NY 10021, USA.

To better understand the role of TBX5, a T-box containing transcription factor in
forelimb and heart development, we have studied the clinical features of
Holt-Oram syndrome caused by 10 different TBX5 mutations. Defects predicted to
create null alleles caused substantial abnormalities both in limb and heart. In
contrast, missense mutations produced distinct phenotypes: Gly80Arg caused
significant cardiac malformations but only minor skeletal abnormalities; and
Arg237Gln and Arg237Trp caused extensive upper limb malformations but less
significant cardiac abnormalities. Amino acids altered by missense mutations were
located on the three-dimensional structure of a related T-box transcription
factor, Xbra, bound to DNA. Residue 80 is highly conserved within T-box sequences
that interact with the major groove of target DNA; residue 237 is located in the 
T-box domain that selectively binds to the minor groove of DNA. These structural 
data, taken together with the predominant cardiac or skeletal phenotype produced 
by each missense mutation, suggest that organ-specific gene activation by TBX5 is
predicated on biophysical interactions with different target DNA sequences.

PMCID: PMC15870
PMID: 10077612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Genomics. 1999 Jan 1;55(1):10-20.

Identification, mapping, and phylogenomic analysis of four new human members of
the T-box gene family: EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19.

Yi CH(1), Terrett JA, Li QY, Ellington K, Packham EA, Armstrong-Buisseret L,
McClure P, Slingsby T, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Nottingham, Queen's
Medical Centre, Nottingham, NG7 2UH.

Brachyury(T) is a mouse mutation, first described over 70 years ago, that causes 
defects in mesoderm formation. Recently several related genes, the T-box gene
family, that encode a similar N-terminal DNA binding domain, the T-box, and that 
play critical roles in human embryonic development have been identified. It has
been shown that human TBX5 and TBX3, if mutated, cause developmental disorders,
Holt-Oram syndrome (OMIM 142900) and ulnar-mammary syndrome (OMIM 181450),
respectively. We have identified four new human members of the T-box gene family,
EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19, and these genes have been mapped to different
chromosomal regions by radiation hybrid mapping. The four T-box genes were
classified into four different subfamilies and have also been subjected to
phylogenomic analysis. Human EOMES maps at 3p21.3-p21.2. This Tbr1-subfamily gene
is likely to play a significant role in early embryogenesis similar to that
described for Xenopus eomesodermin. Human TBX6 maps at 16p12-q12. This
Tbx6-subfamily gene is likely to participate in paraxial mesoderm formation and
somitogenesis in human embryo. TBX18 is a novel member of the Tbx1 subfamily that
maps at 6q14-q15. Two subgroups, TBX1/10 and TBX15/18 subgroups, could be
distinguished within the Tbx1 subfamily. TBX19 is an orthologue of chick TbxT and
maps at 1q23-q24. The genomic organization of TBX19 is highly similar to that of 
human T(Brachyury), another human member of the same subfamily.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9888994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mech Dev. 1998 Jun;74(1-2):165-9.

Expression of T-box genes Tbx2-Tbx5 during chick organogenesis.

Gibson-Brown JJ(1), I Agulnik S, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, 701 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

T-box genes encode putative transcription factors implicated in diverse
developmental processes (Papaioannou, V.E. and Silver, L.M., 1998. BioEssays 20, 
9-19). We have previously reported the embryonic expression patterns of T-box
genes in mice (Chapman, D.L., Garvey, N., Hancock, S., Alexiou, M., Agulnik,
S.I., Gibson-Brown, J.J., Cebra-Thomas, J., Bollag, R.J., Silver, L.M.,
Papaioannou, V.E., 1996. Dev. Dyn. 206, 379-390; Chapman, D.L., Agulnik, I.,
Hancock, S., Silver, L.M. and Papaioannou, V.E., 1996. Dev. Biol. 180, 534-542;
Gibson-Brown, J.J., Agulnik, S.I., Chapman, D.L., Alexiou, M., Garvey, N.,
Silver, L.M., Papaioannou, V.E., 1996. Mech. Dev. 56, 93-101). Four of these
genes (Tbx2-Tbx5) are represented in the mouse genome as two cognate, linked gene
pairs (Agulnik, S.I., Garvey, N., Hancock, S., Ruvinsky, I., Chapman, D.L.,
Agulnik, I., Bollag, R., Papaioannou, V.E., Silver, L.M., 1996. Genetics 144,
249-254), and have all been implicated in playing important roles in limb
development (Gibson-Brown, J.J., Agulnik, S.I., Chapman, D.L., Alexiou, M.,
Garvey, N., Silver, L.M., Papaioannou, V.E., 1996. Mech. Dev. 56, 93-101). To
investigate the role of these genes in limb development, we cloned the chicken
orthologs and report functional studies, as well as patterns of expression in the
developing limbs, elsewhere (Gibson-Brown, J.J., Agulnik, S.I., Silver, L.M.,
Niswander, L., Papaioannou, V.E., Development, in press). This report details the
patterns of expression of Tbx2-Tbx5 in chick embryonic tissues other than the
limbs.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved

PMID: 9651516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Gene. 1998 Jun 8;212(2):237-48.

Isolation of a Drosophila T-box gene closely related to human TBX1.

Porsch M(1), Hofmeyer K, Bausenwein BS, Grimm S, Weber BH, Miassod R, Pflugfelder
GO.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Genetik, Theodor-Boveri-Institut, Biozentrum, Am Hubland, D
97074, Würzburg, Germany.

T-box genes, in all metazoans studied from nematode to man, exist in small gene
families. They encode transcription factors with a novel, large, and highly
conserved DNA binding domain termed the T-domain. In all cases studied, T-box
genes have important developmental roles. Two familial diseases, Holt-Oram
syndrome and ulnar-mammary syndrome, were recently shown to be caused by
mutations in the human T-box genes TBX5 and TBX3, respectively. T-box genes were 
first identified in Drosophila and mouse. Two of the three known Drosophila T-box
genes show a close sequence homology to mammalian genes. Similarities in the
phenotypes of fly and mammalian mutants can be taken as evidence of functional
conservation. We report here the isolation of a fourth Drosophila T-box gene,
optomotor-blind-related gene-1 (org-1), closely related to mouse and human TBX1. 
We localized TBX1 to chromosomal band 22q11, confirming a recent report, and
discuss TBX1 as a candidate gene for DiGeorge and related syndromes.

PMID: 9611267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Development. 1998 Jul;125(13):2499-509.

Involvement of T-box genes Tbx2-Tbx5 in vertebrate limb specification and
development.

Gibson-Brown JJ(1), Agulnik SI, Silver LM, Niswander L, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

We have recently shown in mice that four members of the T-box family of
transcription factors (Tbx2-Tbx5) are expressed in developing limb buds, and that
expression of two of these genes, Tbx4 and Tbx5, is primarily restricted to the
developing hindlimbs and forelimbs, respectively. In this report, we investigate 
the role of these genes in limb specification and development, using the chick as
a model system. We induced the formation of ectopic limbs in the flank of chick
embryos to examine the relationship between the identity of the limb-specific
T-box genes being expressed and the identity of limb structures that subsequently
develop. We found that, whereas bud regions expressing Tbx4 developed
characteristic leg structures, regions expressing Tbx5 developed characteristic
wing features. In addition, heterotopic grafts of limb mesenchyme (wing bud into 
leg bud, and vice versa), which are known to retain the identity of the donor
tissue after transplantation, retained autonomous expression of the appropriate, 
limb-specific T-box gene, with no evidence of regulation by the host bud. Thus
there is a direct relationship between the identity of the structures that
develop in normal, ectopic and recombinant limbs, and the identity of the T-box
gene(s) being expressed. To investigate the regulation of T-box gene expression
during limb development, we employed several other embryological manipulations.
By surgically removing the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) from either wing or leg 
buds, we found that, in contrast to all other genes implicated in the patterning 
of developing appendages, maintenance of T-box gene expression is not dependent
on the continued provision of signals from the AER or the zone of polarizing
activity (ZPA). By generating an ectopic ZPA, by grafting a sonic hedgehog
(SHH)-expressing cell pellet under the anterior AER, we found that Tbx2
expression can lie downstream of SHH. Finally, by grafting a SHH-expressing cell 
pellet to the anterior margin of a bud from which the AER had been removed, we
found that Tbx2 may be a direct, short-range target of SHH. Our findings suggest 
that these genes are intimately involved in limb development and the
specification of limb identity, and a new model for the evolution of vertebrate
appendages is proposed.

PMID: 9609833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mamm Genome. 1998 Jan;9(1):70-3.

Genomic structure of TBX2 indicates conservation with distantly related T-box
genes.

Campbell CE(1), Casey G, Goodrich K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Ohio 44195-5001, USA.

TBX2 is a member of a recently discovered gene family of transcription factors,
named T-box genes after the Brachyury or T gene. Mutations in two of these family
members, TBX5 and TBX3, have recently been shown to be responsible for the
congenital abnormalities associated with Holt Oram syndrome and ulnar-mammary
syndrome respectively, while mutations in T-box genes in other species also
result in developmental abnormalities in the tissues where the gene is normally
expressed. Thus, it likely that other T-box genes are responsible for additional 
human developmental anomalies. Here we report the exon/intron boundaries of TBX2 
and a polymorphism within intron 2 of TBX2 that should be useful for exploring
the involvement of this gene in human genetic disease. We further note that the
exon/intron boundaries of TBX2 are highly conserved within the T-box domain with 
those of both T and TBX5, as well as with a new human T-box gene and more
distantly related genes from Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila. This
observation should facilitate the analysis of the genomic structure of other
members of this gene family. It is also of interest that several members of this 
gene family have an additional intron that is variably present within members of 
at least two different lineages of the T-box family. This observation has
implications regarding the evolution of T-box genes.

PMID: 9434949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Development. 1998 Jan;125(1):51-60.

Correlation of wing-leg identity in ectopic FGF-induced chimeric limbs with the
differential expression of chick Tbx5 and Tbx4.

Ohuchi H(1), Takeuchi J, Yoshioka H, Ishimaru Y, Ogura K, Takahashi N, Ogura T,
Noji S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Faculty of Engineering, The
University of Tokushima, Japan.

It has been reported that members of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family
can induce additional limb formation in the flank of chick embryos. The phenotype
of the ectopic limb depends on the somite level at which it forms: limbs in the
anterior flank resemble wings, whereas those in the posterior flank resemble
legs. Ectopic limbs located in the mid-flank appear chimeric, possessing
characteristics of both wings and legs; feather buds are present in the anterior 
halves with scales and claws in the posterior halves. To study the mechanisms
underlying the chimerism of these additional limbs, we cloned chick Tbx5 and Tbx4
to use as forelimb and hindlimb markers and examined their expression patterns in
FGF-induced limb buds. We found that Tbx5 and Tbx4 were differentially expressed 
in the anterior and posterior halves of additional limb buds in the mid-flank,
respectively, consistent with the chimeric patterns of the integument. A boundary
of Tbx5/Tbx4 exists in all ectopic limbs, indicating that the additional limbs
are essentially chimeric, although the degree of chimerism is dependent on the
position. The boundary of Tbx5/Tbx4 expression is not fixed at a specific
position within the interlimb region, but dependent upon where FGF was applied.
Since the ectopic expression patterns of Tbx5/Tbx4 in the additional limbs are
closely correlated with the patterns of their chimeric phenotypes, it is likely
that Tbx5 and Tbx4 expression in the limb bud is involved in determination of the
forelimb and hindlimb identities, respectively, in vertebrates.

PMID: 9389663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1997 Aug;7(4):474-80.

Brachyury and the T-box genes.

Smith J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
London, UK. jim@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Brachyury, or T, is the founder member of a family of transcription factors that 
share the so-called T-box-a 200 amino acid DNA-binding domain. Recent work has
addressed the regulation of Brachyury expression and its function in the embryo. 
New T-box family members have been found in vertebrate and invertebrate embryos
and the importance of this gene family is illustrated by the discovery that
mutations in human TBX5 are responsible for Holt-Oram syndrome, which is
characterised by abnormalities in heart and forelimb development.

PMID: 9309177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Nat Genet. 1997 Jul;16(3):311-5.

Mutations in human TBX3 alter limb, apocrine and genital development in
ulnar-mammary syndrome.

Bamshad M(1), Lin RC, Law DJ, Watkins WC, Krakowiak PA, Moore ME, Franceschini P,
Lala R, Holmes LB, Gebuhr TC, Bruneau BG, Schinzel A, Seidman JG, Seidman CE,
Jorde LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake
City 84112, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 1998 May;19(1):102.

Ulnar-mammary syndrome is a rare pleiotropic disorder affecting limb, apocrine
gland, tooth and genital development. We demonstrate that mutations in human
TBX3, a member of the T-box gene family, cause ulnar-mammary syndrome in two
families. Each mutation (a single nucleotide deletion and a splice-site mutation)
is predicted to cause haploinsufficiency of TBX3, implying that critical levels
of this transcription factor are required for morphogenesis of several organs.
Limb abnormalities of ulnar-mammary syndrome involve posterior elements.
Mutations in TBX5, a related and linked gene, cause anterior limb abnormalities
in Holt-Oram syndrome. We suggest that during the evolution of TBX3 and TBX5 from
a common ancestral gene, each has acquired specific yet complementary roles in
patterning the mammalian upper limb.

PMID: 9207801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Nat Genet. 1997 Jan;15(1):30-5.

Mutations in human TBX5 [corrected] cause limb and cardiac malformation in
Holt-Oram syndrome.

Basson CT(1), Bachinsky DR, Lin RC, Levi T, Elkins JA, Soults J, Grayzel D,
Kroumpouzou E, Traill TA, Leblanc-Straceski J, Renault B, Kucherlapati R, Seidman
JG, Seidman CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 1997 Apr;15(4):411.

Holt-Oram syndrome is characterized by upper limb malformations and cardiac
septation defects. Here, we demonstrate that mutations in the human TBX5 gene
underlie this disorder. TBX5 was cloned from the disease locus on human
chromosome 12q24.1 and identified as a member of the T-box transcription factor
family. A nonsense mutation in TBX5 causes Holt-Oram syndrome in affected members
of one family; a TBX5 missense mutation was identified in affected members of
another. We conclude that TBX5 is critical for limb and heart development and
suggest that haploinsufficiency of TBX5 causes Holt-Oram syndrome.

PMID: 8988165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nat Genet. 1997 Jan;15(1):21-9.

Holt-Oram syndrome is caused by mutations in TBX5, a member of the Brachyury (T) 
gene family.

Li QY(1), Newbury-Ecob RA, Terrett JA, Wilson DI, Curtis AR, Yi CH, Gebuhr T,
Bullen PJ, Robson SC, Strachan T, Bonnet D, Lyonnet S, Young ID, Raeburn JA,
Buckler AJ, Law DJ, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre, UK.

Holt-Oram syndrome is a developmental disorder affecting the heart and upper
limb, the gene for which was mapped to chromosome 12 two years ago. We have now
identified a gene for this disorder (HOS1). The gene (TBX5) is a member of the
Brachyury (T) family corresponding to the mouse Tbx5 gene. We have identified six
mutations, three in HOS families and three in sporadic HOS cases. Each of the
mutations introduces a premature stop codon in the TBX5 gene product. Tissue in
situ hybridization studies on human embryos from days 26 to 52 of gestation
reveal expression of TBX5 in heart and limb, consistent with a role in human
embryonic development.

PMID: 8988164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dev Biol. 1996 Dec 15;180(2):534-42.

Tbx6, a mouse T-Box gene implicated in paraxial mesoderm formation at
gastrulation.

Chapman DL(1), Agulnik I, Hancock S, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, 701 West 168th Street, New York, New York, 10032, USA.

The T-box genes constitute an evolutionarily conserved family of putative
transcription factors which are expressed in discrete domains during
embryogenesis, suggesting that they may play roles in inductive interactions.
Members have been identified by virtue of their homology to the prototypical
T-box gene, T or Brachyury, which is required for mesoderm formation and axial
elongation during embryogenesis. We have previously reported the discovery of six
new mouse T-box genes, Tbx1-Tbx6, and described the expression patterns of
Tbx1-Tbx5 (Bollag et al., 1994; Agulnik et al., 1996; Chapman et al., 1996;
Gibson-Brown et al., 1996). We have obtained cDNA clones encoding the full-length
Tbx6 protein from screens of gastrulation-stage mouse cDNA libraries and
determined the spatial and temporal distribution of Tbx6 transcripts during
embryogenesis. The gene codes for a 1.9-kb transcript with an open reading frame 
coding for a 540-amino acid protein, with a predicted molecular weight of 59 kDa.
Tbx6 maps to chromosome 7 and does not appear to be linked to any known mutation.
Unlike other members of the mouse T-box gene family which are expressed in a wide
variety of tissues derived from all germ layers, Tbx6 expression is quite
restricted. Tbx6 transcripts are first detected in the gastrulation stage embryo 
in the primitive streak and newly recruited paraxial mesoderm. Later in
development, Tbx6 expression is restricted to presomitic, paraxial mesoderm and
to the tail bud, which replaces the streak as the source of mesoderm. Expression 
in the tail bud persists until 12. 5 days postcoitus. Tbx6 expression thus
overlaps that of Brachyury in the primitive streak and tail bud, although
Brachyury is expressed earlier in the primitive streak. Brachyury is also
expressed in a second domain, the node and notochord, that is not shared with
Tbx6. The onset of Tbx6 expression is not affected in homozygous null Brachyury
mutant embryos at 7.5 days postcoitus. However, Tbx6 expression is extinguished
in mutant embryos as soon as the Brachyury phenotype becomes evident at 8.5 days 
postcoitus, indicating that the continued expression of Tbx6 is directly or
indirectly dependent upon Brachyury expression.

PMID: 8954725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Genetics. 1996 Sep;144(1):249-54.

Evolution of mouse T-box genes by tandem duplication and cluster dispersion.

Agulnik SI(1), Garvey N, Hancock S, Ruvinsky I, Chapman DL, Agulnik I, Bollag R, 
Papaioannou V, Silver LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, New Jersey 08544-1014, 
USA.

The T-box genes comprise an ancient family of putative transcription factors
conserved across species as divergent as Mus musculus and Caenorhabditis elegans.
All T-box gene products are characterized by a novel 174-186-amino acid DNA
binding domain called the T-box that was first discovered in the polypeptide
products of the mouse T locus and the Drosophila melanogaster optomotor-blind
gene. Earlier studies allowed the identification of five mouse T-box genes, T,
Tbx1-3, and Tbr1, that all map to different chromosomal locations and are
expressed in unique temporal and spatial patterns during embryogenesis. Here, we 
report the discovery of three new members of the mouse T-box gene family, named
Tbx4, Tbx5, and Tbx6. Two of these newly discovered genes, Tbx4 and Tbx5, were
found to be tightly linked to previously identified T-box genes. Combined results
from phylogenetic, linkage, and physical mapping studies provide a picture for
the evolution of a T-box subfamily by unequal crossing over to form a two-gene
cluster that was duplicated and dispersed to two chromosomal locations. This
analysis suggests that Tbx4 and Tbx5 are cognate genes that diverged apart from a
common ancestral gene during early vertebrate evolution.

PMCID: PMC1207498
PMID: 8878690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dev Dyn. 1996 Aug;206(4):379-90.

Expression of the T-box family genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, during early mouse development.

Chapman DL(1), Garvey N, Hancock S, Alexiou M, Agulnik SI, Gibson-Brown JJ,
Cebra-Thomas J, Bollag RJ, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicans and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

A novel family of genes, characterized by the presence of a region of homology to
the DNA-binding domain of the Brachyury (T) locus product, has recently been
identified. The region of homology has been named the T-box, and the new mouse
genes that contain the T-box domain have been named T-box 1-6 (Tbx1 through
Tbx6). As the basis for further study of the function and evolution of these
genes, we have examined the expression of 5 of these genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, across a
wide range of embryonic stages from blastocyst through gastrulation and early
organogenesis by in situ hybridization of wholemounts and tissue sections. Tbx3
is expressed earliest, in the inner cell mass of the blastocyst. Four of the
genes are expressed in different components of the mesoderm or mesoderm/endoderm 
during gastrulation (Tbx1 and Tbx3-5). All of these genes have highly specific
patterns of expression during later embryogenesis, notably in areas undergoing
inductive tissue interactions. In several cases there is complementary expression
of different genes in 2 interacting tissues, as in the lung epithelium (Tbx1) and
lung mesenchyme (Tbx2-5), and in mammary buds (Tbx3) and mammary stroma (Tbx2).
Tbx1 shows very little overlap in the sites of expression with the other 4 genes,
in contrast to a striking similarity in expression between members of the 2
cognate gene sets, Tbx2/Tbx3 and Tbx4/Tbx5. This is a clear reflection of the
evolutionary relationship between the 5 genes since the divergence of Tbx1
occurred long before the relatively recent divergence of Tbx2 and 3 and Tbx4 and 
5 from common ancestral genes. These studies are a good indication that the T-box
family of genes has important roles in inductive interactions in many stages of
mammalian embryogenesis.

PMID: 8853987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mech Dev. 1996 May;56(1-2):93-101.

Evidence of a role for T-box genes in the evolution of limb morphogenesis and the
specification of forelimb/hindlimb identity.

Gibson-Brown JJ(1), Agulnik SI, Chapman DL, Alexiou M, Garvey N, Silver LM,
Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Tetrapod fore-and hindlimbs have evolved from the pectoral and pelvic fins of an 
ancient vertebrate ancestor. In this ancestor, the pectoral fin appears to have
arisen following the rostral homeotic recapitulation of an existing pelvic
appendage (Tabin and Laufer (1993), Nature 361, 692-693). Thus the basic
appendage outgrowth program is reiterated in both tetrapod fore- and hindlimbs
and the pectoral and pelvic fins of extant teleost fishes (Sordino et al. (1995) 
Nature 375, 678-681). Recently a novel family of putative transcription factors, 
which includes the T (Brachyury) locus, has been identified and dubbed the
"T-box' family. In mice, all of these genes have expression patterns indicative
of involvement in embryonic induction (Chapman et al. (1996) Dev. Dyn., in
press), and four (Tbx2-Tbx5) are represented as two cognate, linked gene pairs
(Agulnik et al., (1996), Genetics, in press). We now report that, whereas Tbx2
and Tbx3 are expressed in similar spatiotemporal patterns in both limbs, Tbx5 and
Tbx4 expression is primarily restricted to the developing fore- and hindlimb
buds, respectively. These observations suggest that T-box genes have played a
role in the evolution of fin and limb morphogenesis, and that Tbx5 and Tbx4 may
have been divergently selected to play a role in the differential specification
of fore- (pectoral) versus hind- (pelvic) limb (fin) identity.

PMID: 8798150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


