
1. Stem Cells. 2016 Apr 1. doi: 10.1002/stem.2371. [Epub ahead of print]

Different Concentrations of FGF Ligands, FGF2 or FGF8 Determine Distinct States
of WNT-Induced Presomitic Mesoderm.

Sudheer S(1), Liu J(1), Marks M(1), Koch F(1), Anurin A(1,)(2), Scholze M(1),
Dorothea Senft A(1), Wittler L(1), Macura K(1), Grote P(1), Herrmann BG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Ihnestrasse 63-73, 14195, Berlin, Germany. (2)Department of Biology,
Chemistry and Pharmacy, Free University Berlin, Takustrasse 3, 14195, Berlin,
Germany.

Presomitic mesoderm (PSM; also called paraxial mesoderm) cells are the precursors
of the somites, which flank both sides of the neural tube and give rise to the
musculo-skeletal system shaping the vertebrate body. WNT and FGF signaling
control the formation of both the PSM and the somites, and show a graded
distribution with highest levels in the posterior PSM. We have employed reporters
for the mesoderm/PSM control genes T, Tbx6 and Msgn1 to investigate the
differentiation of mouse ESCs from the naïve state via EpiSCs to PSM cells. Here 
we show that the activation of WNT signaling by CHIR99021 (CH) in combination
with FGF ligand induces embryo-like PSM at high efficiency. By varying the FGF
ligand concentration, the state of PSM cells formed can be altered. High FGF
concentration supports posterior PSM formation, whereas low FGF generates
anterior/differentiating PSM, in line with in vivo data. Furthermore, the level
of Msgn1 expression depends on the FGF ligand concentration. We also show that
Activin/Nodal signaling inhibits CH-mediated PSM induction in EpiSCs, without
affecting T-expression. Inversely, Activin/Nodal inhibition enhances PSM
induction by WNT/high FGF signaling. The ability to generate PSM cells of either 
posterior or anterior PSM identity with high efficiency in vitro will promote the
investigation of the gene regulatory networks controlling the formation of
nascent PSM cells and their switch to differentiating/somitic paraxial mesoderm. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 27038343  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Hepatol. 2016 Jan 23. pii: S0168-8278(16)00022-2. doi:
10.1016/j.jhep.2016.01.016. [Epub ahead of print]

Gene expression profiling in human precision cut liver slices in response to the 
FXR agonist obeticholic acid.

Ijssennagger N(1), Janssen AW(2), Milona A(1), Ramos Pittol JM(1), Hollman DA(1),
Mokry M(3), Betzel B(4), Berends FJ(4), Janssen IM(4), van Mil SW(5), Kersten
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine,
University Medical Center Utrecht, 3508 AB Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Nutrition, Metabolism & Genomics Group, Division of Human Nutrition,
Wageningen University, 6703 HD Wageningen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of
Pediatric Gastroenterology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University Medical
Center Utrecht, 3508 AB Utrecht, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Surgery,
Rijnstate Hospital, 6815 AD Arnhem, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Molecular
Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center
Utrecht, 3508 AB Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
S.W.C.vanmil@umcutrecht.nl.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The bile acid-activated farnesoid X receptor (FXR) is a
nuclear receptor regulating bile acid, glucose and cholesterol homeostasis.
Obeticholic acid (OCA), a promising drug for the treatment of non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH) and type 2 diabetes, activates FXR. Mouse studies
demonstrated that FXR activation by OCA alters hepatic expression of many genes. 
However, no data are available on the effects of OCA in the human liver. Here we 
generated gene expression profiles in human precision cut liver slices (hPCLS)
after treatment with OCA.
METHODS: hPCLS were incubated with OCA for 24h. Wild-type or FXR(-/-) mice
received OCA or vehicle by oral gavage for 7days.
RESULTS: Transcriptomic analysis showed that well-known FXR target genes,
including NR0B2 (SHP), ABCB11 (BSEP), SLC51A (OSTa) and SLC51B (OSTß), and ABCB4 
(MDR3) are regulated by OCA in hPCLS. Ingenuity pathway analysis confirmed that
'FXR/RXR activation' is the most significantly changed pathway upon OCA
treatment. Comparison of gene expression profiles in hPCLS and mouse livers
identified 18 common potential FXR targets. ChIP-sequencing in mouse liver
confirmed FXR binding to IR1 sequences of Akap13, Cgnl1, Dyrk3, Pdia5, Ppp1r3b
and Tbx6.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows that hPCLS respond to OCA treatment by upregulating 
well-known FXR target genes, demonstrating its suitability to study FXR-mediated 
gene regulation. We identified six novel bona-fide FXR target genes in both mouse
and human liver. Finally, we discuss a possible explanation for changes in high
or low density lipoprotein observed in NASH and primary biliary cholangitis
patients treated with OCA based on the genomic expression profile in hPCLS.

Copyright © 2016 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26812075  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Clin Genet. 2015 Nov 26. doi: 10.1111/cge.12701. [Epub ahead of print]

Mutations in WNT9B are associated with Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome.

Waschk DE(1), Tewes AC(1), Römer T(2), Hucke J(3), Kapczuk K(4), Schippert C(5), 
Hillemanns P(5), Wieacker P(1), Ledig S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Münster, Germany.
(2)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Evangelisches Krankenhaus
Köln-Weyertal, Germany. (3)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Agaplesion
Bethesda Krankenhaus, Wuppertal, Germany. (4)Division of Gynecology, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poland. (5)Department of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, University Hospital of Hannover, Germany.

Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome (MRKHS) is a well-known malformation
pattern of the Müllerian ducts (MDs) characterized by congenital absence of the
uterus and vagina. To date, most cases remain unexplained at molecular level.
Since female Wnt9b-/- mice show a MRKHS-like phenotype, WNT9B has emerged as a
promising candidate gene for this disease. We performed retrospective sequence
analyses of WNT9B in 226 female patients with disorders of the MDs, including 109
patients with MRKHS, as well as in 135 controls. One nonsense mutation and five
likely pathogenic missense mutations were detected in WNT9B. Five of these
mutations were found in cases with MRKHS accounting for 4.6% of the patients with
this phenotype. No pathogenic mutations were detected in the control group
(p=0.017). Interestingly, all of the MRKHS patients with a WNT9B mutation were
classified as MRKHS type 1, representing 8.5% of the cases from this subgroup. In
previous studies, two of the patients with a WNT9B mutation were found to carry
either an additional deletion of LHX1 or a missense mutation in TBX6. We conclude
that mutations in WNT9B were frequently associated with MRKHS in our cohort and
some cases may be explained by a digenic disease-model.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26610373  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 14;10(9):e0137894. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137894.
eCollection 2015.

Retinoic Acid Activity in Undifferentiated Neural Progenitors Is Sufficient to
Fulfill Its Role in Restricting Fgf8 Expression for Somitogenesis.

Cunningham TJ(1), Brade T(1), Sandell LL(2), Lewandoski M(3), Trainor PA(4),
Colas A(5), Mercola M(5), Duester G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Development, Aging, and Regeneration Program, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical
Discovery Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Craniofacial Biology, University of
Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky, United States of America. (3)Laboratory of
Cancer and Developmental Biology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes 
of Health, Frederick, Maryland, United States of America. (4)Stowers Institute
for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, United States of America; Department
of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City,
Kansas, United States of America. (5)Development, Aging, and Regeneration
Program, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla,
California, United States of America; Department of Bioengineering, University of
California at San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of America.

Bipotent axial stem cells residing in the caudal epiblast during late
gastrulation generate neuroectodermal and presomitic mesodermal progeny that
coordinate somitogenesis with neural tube formation, but the mechanism that
controls these two fates is not fully understood. Retinoic acid (RA) restricts
the anterior extent of caudal fibroblast growth factor 8 (Fgf8) expression in
both mesoderm and neural plate to control somitogenesis and neurogenesis, however
it remains unclear where RA acts to control the spatial expression of caudal
Fgf8. Here, we found that mouse Raldh2-/- embryos, lacking RA synthesis and
displaying a consistent small somite defect, exhibited abnormal expression of key
markers of axial stem cell progeny, with decreased Sox2+ and Sox1+
neuroectodermal progeny and increased Tbx6+ presomitic mesodermal progeny. The
Raldh2-/- small somite defect was rescued by treatment with an FGF receptor
antagonist. Rdh10 mutants, with a less severe RA synthesis defect, were found to 
exhibit a small somite defect and anterior expansion of caudal Fgf8 expression
only for somites 1-6, with normal somite size and Fgf8 expression thereafter.
Rdh10 mutants were found to lack RA activity during the early phase when somites 
are small, but at the 6-somite stage RA activity was detected in neural plate
although not in presomitic mesoderm. Expression of a dominant-negative RA
receptor in mesoderm eliminated RA activity in presomitic mesoderm but did not
affect somitogenesis. Thus, RA activity in the neural plate is sufficient to
prevent anterior expansion of caudal Fgf8 expression associated with a small
somite defect. Our studies provide evidence that RA restriction of Fgf8
expression in undifferentiated neural progenitors stimulates neurogenesis while
also restricting the anterior extent of the mesodermal Fgf8 mRNA gradient that
controls somite size, providing new insight into the mechanism that coordinates
somitogenesis with neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4569375
PMID: 26368825  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Anat. 2015 Sep;227(3):361-82. doi: 10.1111/joa.12353.

Time course and side-by-side analysis of mesodermal, pre-myogenic, myogenic and
differentiated cell markers in the chicken model for skeletal muscle formation.

Berti F(1), Nogueira JM(1,)(2), Wöhrle S(1), Sobreira DR(1,)(3), Hawrot K(1),
Dietrich S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical and Biomolecular Science (IBBS), School of Pharmacy
and Biomedical Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, UK. (2)Instituto
de Ciências Biológicas, Departamento de Morfologia, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais (UFMG), Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. (3)Department of Human
Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

The chicken is a well-established model for amniote (including human) skeletal
muscle formation because the developmental anatomy of chicken skeletal muscle
matches that of mammals. The accessibility of the chicken in the egg as well as
the sequencing of its genome and novel molecular techniques have raised the
profile of this model. Over the years, a number of regulatory and marker genes
have been identified that are suited to monitor the progress of skeletal
myogenesis both in wildtype and in experimental embryos. However, in the various 
studies, differing markers at different stages of development have been used.
Moreover, contradictory results on the hierarchy of regulatory factors are now
emerging, and clearly, factors need to be able to cooperate. Thus, a reference
paper describing in detail and side-by-side the time course of marker gene
expression during avian myogenesis is needed. We comparatively analysed onset and
expression patterns of the key markers for the chicken immature paraxial
mesoderm, for muscle-competent cells, for cells committed to myogenesis and for
cells entering terminal differentiation. We performed this analysis from stages
when the first paraxial mesoderm is being laid down to the stage when mesoderm
formation comes to a conclusion. Our data show that, although the sequence of
marker gene expression is the same at the various stages of development, the
timing of the expression onset is quite different. Moreover, marker gene
expression in myogenic cells being deployed from the dorsomedial and
ventrolateral lips of the dermomyotome is different from those being deployed
from the rostrocaudal lips, suggesting different molecular programs. Furthermore,
expression of Myosin Heavy Chain genes is overlapping but different along the
length of a myotube. Finally, Mef2c is the most likely partner of Mrf proteins,
and, in contrast to the mouse and more alike frog and zebrafish fish, chicken
Mrf4 is co-expressed with MyoG as cells enter terminal differentiation.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Anatomy published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on
behalf of Anatomical Society.

PMID: 26278933  [PubMed - in process]


6. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Nov;167A(11):2795-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37263. Epub 2015 
Aug 4.

Rare variants in the notch signaling pathway describe a novel type of autosomal
recessive Klippel-Feil syndrome.

Karaca E(1), Yuregir OO(2), Bozdogan ST(3), Aslan H(4), Pehlivan D(1), Jhangiani 
SN(1,)(5), Akdemir ZC(1), Gambin T(1), Bayram Y(1), Atik MM(1), Erdin S(6,)(7),
Muzny D(1,)(5), Gibbs RA(1,)(5), Lupski JR(1,)(5,)(8,)(9); Baylor-Hopkins Center 
for Mendelian Genomics.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas. (2)Department of Medical Genetics, Numune Training and Research
Hospital, Adana, Turkey. (3)Department of Medical Genetics, Mersin University,
Mersin, Turkey. (4)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty of Eskisehir
Osmangazi University, Eskisehir, Turkey. (5)Human Genome Sequencing Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. (6)Center for Human Genetic Research,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. (7)Program in Medical and 
Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas. (9)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.

Klippel-Feil syndrome is a rare disorder represented by a subgroup of
segmentation defects of the vertebrae and characterized by fusion of the cervical
vertebrae, low posterior hairline, and short neck with limited motion. Both
autosomal dominant and recessive inheritance patterns were reported in families
with Klippel-Feil. Mutated genes for both dominant (GDF6 and GDF3) and recessive 
(MEOX1) forms of Klippel-Feil syndrome have been shown to be involved in somite
development via transcription regulation and signaling pathways. Heterotaxy
arises from defects in proteins that function in the development of left-right
asymmetry of the developing embryo. We describe a consanguineous family with a
male proband who presents with classical Klippel-Feil syndrome together with
heterotaxy (situs inversus totalis). The present patient also had Sprengel's
deformity, deformity of the sternum, and a solitary kidney. Using exome
sequencing, we identified a homozygous frameshift mutation (c.299delT; p.L100fs) 
in RIPPLY2, a gene shown to play a crucial role in somitogenesis and participate 
in the Notch signaling pathway via negatively regulating Tbx6. Our data confirm
RIPPLY2 as a novel gene for autosomal recessive Klippel-Feil syndrome, and in
addition-from a mechanistic standpoint-suggest the possibility that mutations in 
RIPPLY2 could also lead to heterotaxy. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26238661  [PubMed - in process]


7. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 29;10(7):e0134527. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134527.
eCollection 2015.

Correction: Novel ENU-Induced Mutation in Tbx6 Causes Dominant Spondylocostal
Dysostosis-Like Vertebral Malformations in the Rat.

Abe K, Takamatsu N, Ishikawa K, Tsurumi T, Tanimoto S, Sakurai Y, Lisse TS, Imai 
K, Serikawa T, Mashimo T.

Erratum for
    PLoS One. 2015;10(6):e0130231. Lisse, Thomas [corrected to Lisse, Thomas S].

PMCID: PMC4519102
PMID: 26222705  [PubMed]


8. Spine Deform. 2015 Jul;3(4):288-296.

Sequencing of the TBX6 Gene in Families with Familial Idiopathic Scoliosis.

Baschal EE(1), Swindle K(1), Justice CM(2), Baschal RM(3), Perera A(4), Wethey
CI(1), Poole A(1), Pourquié O(5), Tassy O(5), Miller NH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, University of Colorado Denver Anschutz Medical
Campus, 13001 E 17th Place, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. (2)Genometrics Section, 
National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 333
Cassell Drive, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA. (3)Musculoskeletal Research
Center, Children's Hospital Colorado, 13123 East 16 Avenue, Aurora, Colorado,
80045. (4)Molecular Biology Facility, Stowers Institute, 1000 E. 50th Street,
Kansas City, Missouri 64110, United States. (5)Department of Cell Biology and
Development, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire
(IGBMC), 1 rue Laurent Fries, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch CEDEX, France.
(6)Department of Orthopedics, University of Colorado Denver Anschutz Medical
Campus, 13001 E 17th Place, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA ; Musculoskeletal
Research Center, Children's Hospital Colorado, 13123 East 16 Avenue, Aurora,
Colorado, 80045.

STUDY DESIGN: A hypothesis-driven study was conducted in a familial cohort to
determine the potential association between variants within the TBX6 gene and
Familial Idiopathic Scoliosis (FIS).
OBJECTIVE: To determine if variants within exons of the TBX6 gene segregate with 
the FIS phenotype within a sample of families with FIS.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Idiopathic Scoliosis (IS) is a structural curvature
of the spine whose underlying genetic etiology has not been established. IS has
been reported to occur at a higher rate than expected in family members of
individuals with congenital scoliosis (CS), suggesting that the two diseases
might have a shared etiology. The TBX6 gene on chromosome 16p, essential to
somite development, has been associated with CS in a Chinese population. Previous
studies have identified linkage to this locus in families with FIS, and
specifically with rs8060511, located in an intron of the TBX6 gene.
METHODS: Parent-offspring trios from 11 families (13 trios, 42 individuals) with 
FIS were selected for Sanger sequencing of the TBX6 gene. Trios were selected
from a large population of families with FIS in which a genome-wide scan had
resulted in linkage to 16p.
RESULTS: Sequencing analyses of the subset of families resulted in the
identification of five coding variants. Three of the five variants were novel;
the remaining two variants were previously characterized and account for 90% of
the observed variants in these trios. In all cases, there was no correlation
between transmission of the TBX6 variant allele and FIS phenotype. However, an
analysis of regulatory markers in osteoblasts showed that rs8060511 is in a
putative enhancer element.
CONCLUSIONS: Although this study did not identify any TBX6 coding variants that
segregate with FIS, we identified a variant that is located in a potential TBX6
enhancer element. Therefore, further investigation of the region is needed.

PMCID: PMC4480874 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26120555  [PubMed]


9. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 19;10(6):e0130231. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130231.
eCollection 2015.

Novel ENU-Induced Mutation in Tbx6 Causes Dominant Spondylocostal Dysostosis-Like
Vertebral Malformations in the Rat.

Abe K(1), Takamatsu N(2), Ishikawa K(1), Tsurumi T(3), Tanimoto S(1), Sakurai
Y(2), Lisse TS, Imai K(1), Serikawa T(3), Mashimo T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Life Science, Tokai University School of Medicine,
Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan. (2)Department of Biosciences, School of Science,
Kitasato University, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan. (3)Institute of Laboratory
Animals, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. (4)MDI
Biological Laboratory, Davis Center for Regenerative Biology and Medicine, Bar
Harbor, Maine, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0134527. Lisse, Thomas [corrected to Lisse, Thomas S].

Congenital vertebral malformations caused by embryonic segmentation defects are
relatively common in humans and domestic animals. Although reverse genetics
approaches in mice have provided information on the molecular mechanisms of
embryonic somite segmentation, hypothesis-driven approaches cannot adequately
reflect human dysmorphology within the population. In a N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea
(ENU) mutagenesis project in Kyoto, the Oune mutant rat strain was isolated due
to a short and kinked caudal vertebra phenotype. Skeletal staining of
heterozygous rats showed partial loss of the cervical vertebrae as well as
hemivertebrae and fused vertebral blocks in lumbar and sacral vertebrae. In
homozygous embryos, severe displacement of the whole vertebrae was observed. The 
Oune locus was genetically mapped to rat chromosome 1 using 202 backcross animals
and 50 genome-wide microsatellite markers. Subsequently, a miss-sense mutation in
the Tbx6 gene was identified in the critical region. Although the mutation is
located within the T-box domain near a predicted dimmer-interface, in vitro
experiments revealed that the Tbx6 variant retains normal DNA binding ability and
translational efficiency. However, the variant has decreased transcriptional
activation potential in response to Notch-mediated signaling. Recently, it was
reported that a dominant type of familial spondylocostal dysostosis is caused by 
a stoploss mutation in TBX6. Thus, we propose that partial dysfunction of Tbx6
leads to similar congenital vertebral malformations in both humans and rats. The 
Oune strain could be a unique animal model for dominant spondylocostal dysostosis
and is useful for molecular dissection of the pathology of congenital vertebral
malformations in humans.

PMCID: PMC4474719
PMID: 26090680  [PubMed - in process]


10. Fertil Steril. 2015 May;103(5):1313-8. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.02.014.
Epub 2015 Mar 23.

Variations in RBM8A and TBX6 are associated with disorders of the müllerian
ducts.

Tewes AC(1), Rall KK(2), Römer T(3), Hucke J(4), Kapczuk K(5), Brucker S(2),
Wieacker P(1), Ledig S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, WWU Münster, Münster, Germany. (2)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Evangelisches Krankenhaus
Köln-Weyertal, Köln, Germany. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Agaplesion Bethesda Krankenhaus, Wuppertal, Germany. (5)Division of Gynecology,
Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. (6)Institute of Human
Genetics, WWU Münster, Münster, Germany. Electronic address:
sledig@uni-muenster.de.

OBJECTIVE: To identify genetic causes of malformations of the müllerian ducts.
DESIGN: Retrospective laboratory study.
SETTING: University hospital.
PATIENT(S): A total of 167 patients with disorders of the müllerian ducts: 116
patients with Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome and 51 patients with fusion
disorders of the müllerian ducts. The control group was composed of 94 fertile
women with at least one child.
INTERVENTION(S): Sequential analysis of RBM8A and TBX6 in a group of 167
clinically well-defined patients with disorders of the müllerian ducts.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Identification of rare variants in RBM8A and TBX6.
RESULT(S): In total, we detected four RBM8A variants in 13 patients with
disorders of the müllerian ducts and two heterozygous TBX6 variants in 5 of 167
patients.
CONCLUSION(S): Mutations of RBM8A and TBX6 are associated with disorders of the
müllerian ducts.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25813282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Development. 2015 Mar 15;142(6):1159-68. doi: 10.1242/dev.113431. Epub 2015 Feb
27.

Tbx6, Mesp-b and Ripply1 regulate the onset of skeletal myogenesis in zebrafish.

Windner SE(1), Doris RA(1), Ferguson CM(1), Nelson AC(2), Valentin G(3), Tan
H(2), Oates AC(3), Wardle FC(2), Devoto SH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT 06459, USA.
(2)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, New Hunt's House, King's
College London, Guy's Campus, London, SE1 1UL, UK. (3)MRC National Institute for 
Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, UK. (4)Department of 
Biology, Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT 06459, USA sdevoto@wesleyan.edu.

During embryonic development, the paraxial mesoderm becomes segmented into
somites, within which proliferative muscle progenitors and muscle fibers
establish the skeletal musculature. Here, we demonstrate that a gene network
previously implicated in somite boundary formation, involving the transcriptional
regulators Tbx6, Mesp-b and Ripply1, also confers spatial and temporal regulation
to skeletal myogenesis in zebrafish. We show that Tbx6 directly regulates mesp-b 
and ripply1 expression in vivo, and that the interactions within the regulatory
network are largely conserved among vertebrates. Mesp-b is necessary and
sufficient for the specification of a subpopulation of muscle progenitors, the
central proportion of the Pax3(+)/Pax7(+) dermomyotome. Conditional ubiquitous
expression indicates that Mesp-b acts by inhibiting myogenic differentiation and 
by inducing the dermomyotome marker meox1. By contrast, Ripply1 induces a
negative-feedback loop by promoting Tbx6 protein degradation. Persistent Tbx6
expression in Ripply1 knockdown embryos correlates with a deficit in dermomyotome
and myotome marker gene expression, suggesting that Ripply1 promotes myogenesis
by terminating Tbx6-dependent inhibition of myogenic maturation. Together, our
data suggest that Mesp-b is an intrinsic upstream regulator of skeletal muscle
progenitors and that, in zebrafish, the genes regulating somite boundary
formation also regulate the development of the dermomyotome in the anterior
somite compartment.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4360180
PMID: 25725067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 6;10(2):e0117055. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117055.
eCollection 2015.

Canine disorder mirrors human disease: exonic deletion in HES7 causes autosomal
recessive spondylocostal dysostosis in miniature Schnauzer dogs.

Willet CE(1), Makara M(1), Reppas G(2), Tsoukalas G(1), Malik R(3), Haase B(1),
Wade CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)Vetnostics, North Ryde, NSW, Australia. (3)Centre for Veterinary Education,
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Spondylocostal dysostosis is a congenital disorder of the axial skeleton
documented in human families from diverse racial backgrounds. The condition is
characterised by truncal shortening, extensive hemivertebrae and rib anomalies
including malalignment, fusion and reduction in number. Mutations in the Notch
signalling pathway genes DLL3, MESP2, LFNG, HES7 and TBX6 have been associated
with this defect. In this study, spondylocostal dysostosis in an outbred family
of miniature schnauzer dogs is described. Computed tomography demonstrated that
the condition mirrors the skeletal defects observed in human cases, but unlike
most human cases, the affected dogs were stillborn or died shortly after birth.
Through gene mapping and whole genome sequencing, we identified a single-base
deletion in the coding region of HES7. The frameshift mutation causes loss of
functional domains essential for the oscillatory transcriptional autorepression
of HES7 during somitogenesis. A restriction fragment length polymorphism test was
applied within the immediate family and supported a highly penetrant autosomal
recessive mode of inheritance. The mutation was not observed in wider testing of 
117 randomly sampled adult miniature schnauzer and six adult standard schnauzer
dogs; providing a significance of association of Praw = 4.759e-36 (genome-wide
significant). Despite this apparently low frequency in the Australian population,
the allele may be globally distributed based on its presence in two unrelated
sires from geographically distant locations. While isolated hemivertebrae have
been observed in a small number of other dog breeds, this is the first clinical
and genetic diagnosis of spontaneously occurring spondylocostal dysostosis in a
non-human mammal and offers an excellent model in which to study this devastating
human disorder. The genetic test can be utilized by dog breeders to select away
from the disease and avoid unnecessary neonatal losses.

PMCID: PMC4319916
PMID: 25659135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Dev Biol. 2015 Apr 1;400(1):105-17. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.01.020. Epub 2015
Jan 30.

Segmental border is defined by Ripply2-mediated Tbx6 repression independent of
Mesp2.

Zhao W(1), Ajima R(2), Ninomiya Y(3), Saga Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of
Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (2)Department of Genetics, 
SOKENDAI, Japan; National Institute of Genetics, Research Organization of
Information and Systems, Yata 1111, Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.
(3)National Institute of Genetics, Research Organization of Information and
Systems, Yata 1111, Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan. (4)Department of
Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of Tokyo, Hongo
7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan; Department of Genetics, SOKENDAI, Japan;
National Institute of Genetics, Research Organization of Information and Systems,
Yata 1111, Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan. Electronic address:
ysaga@nig.ac.jp.

The precise border of somites formed during mouse somitogenesis is defined by a
Tbx6 expression domain, which is established by Mesp2-mediated Tbx6 suppression
in the anterior part of the presomitic mesoderm (PSM). Ripply2, a target of
Mesp2, is proposed to be involved in this down-regulation because Ripply2
deficiency causes an anterior expansion of the Tbx6 domain, resembling the
Mesp2-null phenotype. However, it is unclear whether Ripply2 acts on Tbx6
independently or in association with Mesp2. To address this question, we
generated three sets of transgenic mice with the following Ripply2 expression
patterns: (1) overexpression in the endogenous expression domain, (2) expression 
instead of Mesp2 (Ripply2-knockin), and (3) ectopic expression in the entire PSM.
We found accelerated Tbx6 degradation in the embryos showing Ripply2
overexpression. In the Ripply2-knockin embryos, the anterior limit of Tbx6 domain
was generated by Ripply2 even in the absence of Mesp2. Ectopic Ripply2 expression
along the entire PSM suppressed Tbx6 and induced Sox2-positive neural tube
formation at the bilateral domain, resembling the Tbx6-null phenotype. This
phenotype resulted from Tbx6 protein and not mRNA elimination, suggesting the
post-translational down-regulation of Tbx6 by Ripply2. Taken together, our
results demonstrate that Ripply2 represses Tbx6 in a Mesp2-independent manner,
which contributes to the accurate segmental border formation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25641698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. N Engl J Med. 2015 Jan 22;372(4):341-50. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1406829. Epub 2015
Jan 7.

TBX6 null variants and a common hypomorphic allele in congenital scoliosis.

Wu N(1), Ming X, Xiao J, Wu Z, Chen X, Shinawi M, Shen Y, Yu G, Liu J, Xie H,
Gucev ZS, Liu S, Yang N, Al-Kateb H, Chen J, Zhang J, Hauser N, Zhang T, Tasic V,
Liu P, Su X, Pan X, Liu C, Wang L, Shen J, Shen J, Chen Y, Zhang T, Zhang J, Choy
KW, Wang J, Wang Q, Li S, Zhou W, Guo J, Wang Y, Zhang C, Zhao H, An Y, Zhao Y,
Wang J, Liu Z, Zuo Y, Tian Y, Weng X, Sutton VR, Wang H, Ming Y, Kulkarni S,
Zhong TP, Giampietro PF, Dunwoodie SL, Cheung SW, Zhang X, Jin L, Lupski JR, Qiu 
G, Zhang F.

Author information: 
(1)The authors' affiliations are listed in the Appendix.

BACKGROUND: Congenital scoliosis is a common type of vertebral malformation.
Genetic susceptibility has been implicated in congenital scoliosis.
METHODS: We evaluated 161 Han Chinese persons with sporadic congenital scoliosis,
166 Han Chinese controls, and 2 pedigrees, family members of which had a 16p11.2 
deletion, using comparative genomic hybridization, quantitative
polymerase-chain-reaction analysis, and DNA sequencing. We carried out tests of
replication using an additional series of 76 Han Chinese persons with congenital 
scoliosis and a multicenter series of 42 persons with 16p11.2 deletions.
RESULTS: We identified a total of 17 heterozygous TBX6 null mutations in the 161 
persons with sporadic congenital scoliosis (11%); we did not observe any null
mutations in TBX6 in 166 controls (P<3.8×10(-6)). These null alleles include
copy-number variants (12 instances of a 16p11.2 deletion affecting TBX6) and
single-nucleotide variants (1 nonsense and 4 frame-shift mutations). However, the
discordant intrafamilial phenotypes of 16p11.2 deletion carriers suggest that
heterozygous TBX6 null mutation is insufficient to cause congenital scoliosis. We
went on to identify a common TBX6 haplotype as the second risk allele in all 17
carriers of TBX6 null mutations (P<1.1×10(-6)). Replication studies involving
additional persons with congenital scoliosis who carried a deletion affecting
TBX6 confirmed this compound inheritance model. In vitro functional assays
suggested that the risk haplotype is a hypomorphic allele. Hemivertebrae are
characteristic of TBX6-associated congenital scoliosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Compound inheritance of a rare null mutation and a hypomorphic
allele of TBX6 accounted for up to 11% of congenital scoliosis cases in the
series that we analyzed. (Funded by the National Basic Research Program of China 
and others.).

PMCID: PMC4326244
PMID: 25564734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 5;9(11):e112364. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112364.
eCollection 2014.

A novel gain-of-function mutation of the proneural IRX1 and IRX2 genes disrupts
axis elongation in the Araucana rumpless chicken.

Freese NH(1), Lam BA(1), Staton M(2), Scott A(1), Chapman SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, South
Carolina, United States of America. (2)Department of Entomology and Plant
Pathology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee, United States of
America.

Axis elongation of the vertebrate embryo involves the generation of cell lineages
from posterior progenitor populations. We investigated the molecular mechanism
governing axis elongation in vertebrates using the Araucana rumpless chicken.
Araucana embryos exhibit a defect in axis elongation, failing to form the
terminal somites and concomitant free caudal vertebrae, pygostyle, and associated
tissues of the tail. Through whole genome sequencing of six Araucana we have
identified a critical 130 kb region, containing two candidate causative SNPs.
Both SNPs are proximal to the IRX1 and IRX2 genes, which are required for neural 
specification. We show that IRX1 and IRX2 are both misexpressed within the
bipotential chordoneural hinge progenitor population of Araucana embryos.
Expression analysis of BRA and TBX6, required for specification of mesoderm,
shows that both are downregulated, whereas SOX2, required for neural patterning, 
is expressed in ectopic epithelial tissue. Finally, we show downregulation of
genes required for the protection and maintenance of the tailbud progenitor
population from the effects of retinoic acid. Our results support a model where
the disruption in balance of mesoderm and neural fate results in early depletion 
of the progenitor population as excess neural tissue forms at the expense of
mesoderm, leading to too few mesoderm cells to form the terminal somites.
Together this cascade of events leads to axis truncation.

PMCID: PMC4221472
PMID: 25372603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Mar 1;24(5):1234-42. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu534. Epub 2014 Oct
24.

Compound heterozygous mutations in RIPPLY2 associated with vertebral segmentation
defects.

McInerney-Leo AM(1), Sparrow DB(2), Harris JE(1), Gardiner BB(1), Marshall MS(1),
O'Reilly VC(3), Shi H(3), Brown MA(1), Leo PJ(1), Zankl A(4), Dunwoodie SL(5),
Duncan EL(6).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Translational Research
Institute, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Woolloongabba QLD 4102, Australia.
(2)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Division, Victor Chang Cardiac Research
Institute, Sydney, Australia, St Vincent's Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine. 
(3)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Division, Victor Chang Cardiac Research
Institute, Sydney, Australia. (4)Discipline of Genetic Medicine, The University
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, Academic Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney
Children's Hospital Network (Westmead), Sydney, Australia. (5)Developmental and
Stem Cell Biology Division, Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Sydney,
Australia, St Vincent's Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, School of
Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of New
South Wales, Sydney, Australia. (6)The University of Queensland Diamantina
Institute, Translational Research Institute, Princess Alexandra Hospital,
Woolloongabba QLD 4102, Australia, Department of Endocrinology, James Mayne
Building, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Butterfield Road, Herston, QLD
4029, Australia The University of Queensland, University of Queensland Centre for
Clinical Research, Herston, QLD 4029, Australia e.duncan@uq.edu.au.

Segmentation defects of the vertebrae (SDV) are caused by aberrant somite
formation during embryogenesis and result in irregular formation of the vertebrae
and ribs. The Notch signal transduction pathway plays a critical role in somite
formation and patterning in model vertebrates. In humans, mutations in several
genes involved in the Notch pathway are associated with SDV, with both autosomal 
recessive (MESP2, DLL3, LFNG, HES7) and autosomal dominant (TBX6) inheritance.
However, many individuals with SDV do not carry mutations in these genes. Using
whole-exome capture and massive parallel sequencing, we identified compound
heterozygous mutations in RIPPLY2 in two brothers with multiple regional SDV,
with appropriate familial segregation. One novel mutation (c.A238T:p.Arg80*)
introduces a premature stop codon. In transiently transfected C2C12 mouse
myoblasts, the RIPPLY2 mutant protein demonstrated impaired transcriptional
repression activity compared with wild-type RIPPLY2 despite similar levels of
expression. The other mutation (c.240-4T>G), with minor allele frequency <0.002, 
lies in the highly conserved splice site consensus sequence 5' to the terminal
exon. Ripply2 has a well-established role in somitogenesis and vertebral column
formation, interacting at both gene and protein levels with SDV-associated Mesp2 
and Tbx6. We conclude that compound heterozygous mutations in RIPPLY2 are
associated with SDV, a new gene for this condition.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25343988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 26;9(9):e107928. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107928.
eCollection 2014.

Tbx protein level critical for clock-mediated somite positioning is regulated
through interaction between Tbx and Ripply.

Wanglar C(1), Takahashi J(1), Yabe T(1), Takada S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience and National Institute for Basic 
Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi, Japan; The
Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Okazaki, Aichi, Japan.

Somitogenesis in vertebrates is a complex and dynamic process involving many
sequences of events generated from the segmentation clock. Previous studies with 
mouse embryos revealed that the presumptive somite boundary is periodically
created at the anterior border of the expression domain of Tbx6 protein. Ripply1 
and Ripply2 are required for the determination of the Tbx6 protein border, but
the mechanism by which this Tbx6 domain is regulated remains unclear.
Furthermore, since zebrafish and frog Ripplys are known to be able to suppress
Tbx6 function at the transcription level, it is also unclear whether
Ripply-mediated mechanism of Tbx6 regulation is conserved among different
species. Here, we tested the generality of Tbx6 protein-mediated process in
somite segmentation by using zebrafish and further examined the mechanism of
regulation of Tbx6 protein. By utilizing an antibody against zebrafish Tbx6/Fss, 
previously referred to as Tbx24, we found that the anterior border of Tbx6 domain
coincided with the presumptive intersomitic boundary even in the zebrafish and it
shifted dynamically during 1 cycle of segmentation. Consistent with the findings 
in mice, the tbx6 mRNA domain was located far anterior to its protein domain,
indicating the possibility of posttranscriptional regulation. When both ripply1/2
were knockdown, the Tbx6 domain was anteriorly expanded. We further directly
demonstrated that Ripply could reduce the expression level of Tbx6 protein
depending on physical interaction between Ripply and Tbx6. Moreover, the onset of
ripply1 and ripply2 expression occurred after reduction of FGF signaling at the
anterior PSM, but this expression initiated much earlier on treatment with
SU5402, a chemical inhibitor of FGF signaling. These results strongly suggest
that Ripply is a direct regulator of the Tbx6 protein level for the establishment
of intersomitic boundaries and mediates a reduction in FGF signaling for the
positioning of the presumptive intersomitic boundary in the PSM.

PMCID: PMC4178057
PMID: 25259583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Sep 9;3(3):516-29. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.07.001.
Epub 2014 Aug 7.

Derivation and expansion of PAX7-positive muscle progenitors from human and mouse
embryonic stem cells.

Shelton M(1), Metz J(1), Liu J(1), Carpenedo RL(2), Demers SP(2), Stanford WL(3),
Skerjanc IS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada. (2)Sprott Centre for Stem Cell Research,
Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON K1H
8L6, Canada; Faculty of Graduate and Postdoctoral Studies, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and
Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada; Sprott Centre for
Stem Cell Research, Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research
Institute, Ottawa, ON K1H 8L6, Canada; Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8L6, Canada; Faculty of Graduate
and Postdoctoral Studies, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada.
Electronic address: wstanford@ohri.ca. (4)Department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada.
Electronic address: iskerjan@uottawa.ca.

Erratum in
    Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Dec 9;3(6):1159.

Cell therapies treating pathological muscle atrophy or damage requires an
adequate quantity of muscle progenitor cells (MPCs) not currently attainable from
adult donors. Here, we generate cultures of approximately 90% skeletal myogenic
cells by treating human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) with the GSK3 inhibitor
CHIR99021 followed by FGF2 and N2 supplements. Gene expression analysis
identified progressive expression of mesoderm, somite, dermomyotome, and myotome 
markers, following patterns of embryonic myogenesis. CHIR99021 enhanced
transcript levels of the pan-mesoderm gene T and paraxial-mesoderm genes MSGN1
and TBX6; immunofluorescence confirmed that 91% ± 6% of cells expressed T
immediately following treatment. By 7 weeks, 47% ± 3% of cells were MYH(+ve)
myocytes/myotubes surrounded by a 43% ± 4% population of PAX7(+ve) MPCs,
indicating 90% of cells had achieved myogenic identity without any cell sorting. 
Treatment of mouse ESCs with these factors resulted in similar enhancements of
myogenesis. These studies establish a foundation for serum-free and chemically
defined monolayer skeletal myogenesis of ESCs.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4266001
PMID: 25241748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Dev Growth Differ. 2014 Jun;56(5):376-86. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12141. Epub 2014 May
23.

Control of the number of cell division rounds in distinct tissues during ascidian
embryogenesis.

Yamada A(1), Nishida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Osaka
University, Toyonaka, Osaka, Japan; International College, Osaka University,
Toyonaka, Osaka, Japan.

An important question in developmental biology is how the number of cells
constituting the body is regulated during development. After termination of cell 
divisions, cells enter the postmitotic phase, but the mechanisms determining the 
timing of final cell division remain unclear. In ascidians, the egg develops into
a tadpole larva consisting of a relatively small number of cells (approximately
2800), indicating that embryonic cells divide 11.5 times on average after
fertilization, although the number of cell division rounds differs among tissues.
This article discusses the possible mechanisms that control the timing of the
final cell division: these include (i) the analog and digital clock models, in
which the elapsed time and number of cell division cycles are measured after
fertilization, respectively, and (ii) the analog and digital timer models, in
which the elapsed time and number of cell divisions are measured after cell fate 
specification, respectively. In notochord and muscle cells of ascidian embryos,
cell division termination involves cell fate specification by inductive FGF
signaling, followed by activation of the tissue-specific key transcription
factors, Brachyury and Tbx6, which then induce gene expression of an effector,
Cdk inhibitor. The present evidence suggests that these timing mechanisms
comprise two functional phases: (i) an analog timer, which is mediated by
accumulation of Cdk inhibitor protein after cell fate specification, and (ii) a
timekeeper, which confines the timing, when the above timer is triggered by
Brachyury and Tbx6, to the appropriate stage.

© 2014 The Authors Development, Growth & Differentiation © 2014 Japanese Society 
of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 24853834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Dev Growth Differ. 2014 May;56(4):310-22. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12133. Epub 2014 Apr
11.

Transcription factor Tbx6 plays a central role in fate determination between
mesenchyme and muscle in embryos of the ascidian, Halocynthia roretzi.

Kumano G(1), Negoro N, Nishida H.

Author information: 
(1)Asamushi Research Center for Marine Biology, Graduate School of Life Science, 
Tohoku University, 9 Sakamoto, Asamushi, Aomori, 039-3501, Japan.

Developmental fates are determined in relation to other fates in surrounding
cells within the embryo, creating diversified tissue or cell types in the course 
of development. In ascidian embryos, maternally localized factors and inductive
signals play essential and cooperative roles in fate determination at appropriate
spatial and temporal positions during embryogenesis. Here, to clarify fate
determination mechanisms of mesenchyme and muscle during mesenchyme induction by 
the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signal in Halocynthia roretzi, we examined the
function of transcription factor Tbx6, which acts as a pivotal mediator of the
maternally localized muscle differentiation determinant Macho-1. Our results
suggest that the level of Tbx6 expression increases in muscle lineage cells
through positive feedback regulation that promotes muscle differentiation as well
as mesenchymal fate suppression. In addition, the FGF signal inactivated Tbx6
transcriptional activity and positive feedback, leading to induction of the
mesenchymal lineage. Taken together, our finding suggests that Tbx6 is an
important factor for determining mesenchyme and muscle fates.

© 2014 The Authors Development, Growth & Differentiation © 2014 Japanese Society 
of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 24720515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 7;9(3):e90188. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090188. eCollection 
2014.

Regulation of the number of cell division rounds by tissue-specific transcription
factors and Cdk inhibitor during ascidian embryogenesis.

Kuwajima M(1), Kumano G(1), Nishida H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Osaka
University, Toyonaka, Osaka, Japan.

Mechanisms that regulate the number of cell division rounds during embryogenesis 
have remained largely elusive. To investigate this issue, we used the ascidian,
which develops into a tadpole larva with a small number of cells. The embryonic
cells divide 11.45 times on average from fertilization to hatching. The number of
cell division rounds varies depending on embryonic lineages. Notochord and muscle
consist of large postmitotic cells and stop dividing early in developing embryos.
Here we show that conversion of mesenchyme to muscle cell fates by inhibition of 
inductive FGF signaling or mis-expression of a muscle-specific key transcription 
factor for muscle differentiation, Tbx6, changed the number of cell divisions in 
accordance with the altered fate. Tbx6 likely activates a putative mechanism to
halt cell division at a specific stage. However, precocious expression of Tbx6
has no effect on progression of the developmental clock itself. Zygotic
expression of a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, CKI-b, is initiated in muscle 
and then in notochord precursors. CKI-b is possibly downstream of tissue-specific
key transcription factors of notochord and muscle. In the two distinct muscle
lineages, postmitotic muscle cells are generated after 9 and 8 rounds of cell
division depending on lineage, but the final cell divisions occur at a similar
developmental stage. CKI-b gene expression starts simultaneously in both muscle
lineages at the 110-cell stage, suggesting that CKI-b protein accumulation halts 
cell division at a similar stage. The difference in the number of cell divisions 
would be due to the cumulative difference in cell cycle length. These results
suggest that muscle cells do not count the number of cell division rounds, and
that accumulation of CKI-b protein triggered by tissue-specific key transcription
factors after cell fate determination might act as a kind of timer that measures 
elapsed time before cell division termination.

PMCID: PMC3946487
PMID: 24608898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Evodevo. 2013 Dec 2;4(1):33. doi: 10.1186/2041-9139-4-33.

Myogenesis in the sea urchin embryo: the molecular fingerprint of the myoblast
precursors.

Andrikou C, Iovene E, Rizzo F, Oliveri P, Arnone MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Developmental Biology, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Napoli
80121, Italy. miarnone@szn.it.

BACKGROUND: In sea urchin larvae the circumesophageal fibers form a prominent
muscle system of mesodermal origin. Although the morphology and later development
of this muscle system has been well-described, little is known about the
molecular signature of these cells or their precise origin in the early embryo.
As an invertebrate deuterostome that is more closely related to the vertebrates
than other commonly used model systems in myogenesis, the sea urchin fills an
important phylogenetic gap and provides a unique perspective on the evolution of 
muscle cell development.
RESULTS: Here, we present a comprehensive description of the development of the
sea urchin larval circumesophageal muscle lineage beginning with its mesodermal
origin using high-resolution localization of the expression of several myogenic
transcriptional regulators and differentiation genes. A few myoblasts are
bilaterally distributed at the oral vegetal side of the tip of the archenteron
and first appear at the late gastrula stage. The expression of the
differentiation genes Myosin Heavy Chain, Tropomyosin I and II, as well as the
regulatory genes MyoD2, FoxF, FoxC, FoxL1, Myocardin, Twist, and Tbx6 uniquely
identify these cells. Interestingly, evolutionarily conserved myogenic factors
such as Mef2, MyoR and Six1/2 are not expressed in sea urchin myoblasts but are
found in other mesodermal domains of the tip of the archenteron. The regulatory
states of these domains were characterized in detail. Moreover, using a
combinatorial analysis of gene expression we followed the development of the
FoxF/FoxC positive cells from the onset of expression to the end of gastrulation.
Our data allowed us to build a complete map of the Non-Skeletogenic Mesoderm at
the very early gastrula stage, in which specific molecular signatures identify
the precursors of different cell types. Among them, a small group of cells within
the FoxY domain, which also express FoxC and SoxE, have been identified as
plausible myoblast precursors. Together, these data support a very early gastrula
stage segregation of the myogenic lineage.
CONCLUSIONS: From this analysis, we are able to precisely define the regulatory
and differentiation signatures of the circumesophageal muscle in the sea urchin
embryo. Our findings have important implications in understanding the evolution
of development of the muscle cell lineage at the molecular level. The data
presented here suggest a high level of conservation of the myogenic specification
mechanisms across wide phylogenetic distances, but also reveal clear cases of
gene cooption.

PMCID: PMC4175510
PMID: 24295205  [PubMed]


23. Development. 2014 Jan;141(1):148-57. doi: 10.1242/dev.101550. Epub 2013 Nov 27.

ß-catenin regulates Pax3 and Cdx2 for caudal neural tube closure and elongation.

Zhao T(1), Gan Q, Stokes A, Lassiter RN, Wang Y, Chan J, Han JX, Pleasure DE,
Epstein JA, Zhou CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine at Shriners Hospitals for
Children-Northern California, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.

Non-canonical Wnt/planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling plays a primary role in
the convergent extension that drives neural tube closure and body axis
elongation. PCP signaling gene mutations cause severe neural tube defects (NTDs).
However, the role of canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in neural tube closure and
NTDs remains poorly understood. This study shows that conditional gene targeting 
of ß-catenin in the dorsal neural folds of mouse embryos represses the expression
of the homeobox-containing genes Pax3 and Cdx2 at the dorsal posterior neuropore 
(PNP), and subsequently diminishes the expression of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling 
target genes T, Tbx6 and Fgf8 at the tail bud, leading to spina bifida aperta,
caudal axis bending and tail truncation. We demonstrate that Pax3 and Cdx2 are
novel downstream targets of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Transgenic activation of
Pax3 cDNA can rescue the closure defect in the ß-catenin mutants, suggesting that
Pax3 is a key downstream effector of ß-catenin signaling in the PNP closure
process. Cdx2 is known to be crucial in posterior axis elongation and in neural
tube closure. We found that Cdx2 expression is also repressed in the dorsal PNPs 
of Pax3-null embryos. However, the ectopically activated Pax3 in the ß-catenin
mutants cannot restore Cdx2 mRNA in the dorsal PNP, suggesting that the presence 
of both ß-catenin and Pax3 is required for regional Cdx2 expression. Thus,
ß-catenin signaling is required for caudal neural tube closure and elongation,
acting through the transcriptional regulation of key target genes in the PNP.

PMCID: PMC3865756
PMID: 24284205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Aug 16;8:125. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-125.

TBX6, LHX1 and copy number variations in the complex genetics of Müllerian
aplasia.

Sandbacka M(1), Laivuori H, Freitas É, Halttunen M, Jokimaa V, Morin-Papunen L,
Rosenberg C, Aittomäki K.

Author information: 
(1)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland.
kristiina.aittomaki@hus.fi.

BACKGROUND: Müllerian aplasia (MA) is a congenital disorder of the female
reproductive tract with absence of uterus and vagina with paramount impact on a
woman's life. Despite intense research, no major genes have been found to explain
the complex genetic etiology.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We have used several genetic methods to study 112 patients
with MA. aCGH identified CNVs in 8/50 patients (16%), including 16p11.2 and 17q12
deletions previously associated with MA. Subsequently, another four patients were
shown to carry the ~0.53 Mb deletion in 16p11.2. More importantly, sequencing of 
TBX6, residing within 16p11.2, revealed two patients carrying a splice site
mutation. Two previously reported TBX6 variants in exon 4 and 6 were shown to
have a significantly higher frequency in patients (8% and 5%, respectively) than 
in controls (2% each). We also sequenced LHX1 and found three apparently
pathogenic missense variants in 5/112 patients. Altogether, we identified either 
CNVs or variations in TBX6 or LHX1 in 30/112 (26.8%) MA patients. CNVs were found
in 12/112 (10.7%), patients, novel variants in TBX6 or LHX1 in 7/112 (6.3%), and 
rare variants in TBX6 in 15/112 (13.4%) patients. Furthermore, four of our
patients (4/112, 3.6%) were shown to carry variants in both TBX6 and LHX1 or a
CNV in combination with TBX6 variants lending support to the complex genetic
etiology of MA.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified TBX6 as a new gene associated with MA. Our
results also support the relevance of LHX1 and CNVs in the development of this
congenital malformation.

PMCID: PMC3847609
PMID: 23954021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2013 Jun;53(2):61-6. doi: 10.1111/cga.12017.

Mechanism of cell fate choice between neural and mesodermal development during
early embryogenesis.

Takemoto T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
take@fbs.osaka-u.ac.jp

During early embryogenesis, Sox2 expression distinguishes the neural plate from
other embryonic domains, suggesting that the mechanism underlying the activation 
of the Sox2 gene is highly relevant to the development of this tissue. At the
earliest stages of neural plate development, the Sox2 enhancer N1 regulates Sox2 
expression in the extending posterior end of the neural plate. The N1 enhancer is
initially activated in the axial stem cells, bipotential precursors of both
neural and mesodermal lineages, therefore the activation does not immediately
lead to Sox2 expression. A population of axial stem cells that remains in the
superficial layer starts expressing Sox2, whereas another population that
migrates through the primitive streak loses the N1 activity and becomes mesoderm.
Multiple signaling cascades and transcription factors, including Wnt, fibroblast 
growth factor (FGF), bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and Tbx6, are responsible
for the regulation of Sox2 expression in axial stem cells to guide the
development of the posterior neural plate and paraxial mesoderm.

© 2013 The Author. Congenital Anomalies © 2013 Japanese Teratology Society.

PMID: 23751038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Apr 15;22(8):1625-31. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt012. Epub 2013 Jan 
17.

Autosomal dominant spondylocostal dysostosis is caused by mutation in TBX6.

Sparrow DB(1), McInerney-Leo A, Gucev ZS, Gardiner B, Marshall M, Leo PJ, Chapman
DL, Tasic V, Shishko A, Brown MA, Duncan EL, Dunwoodie SL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Division, Victor Chang Cardiac Research
Institute, Sydney, NSW 2010, Australia.

In humans, congenital spinal defects occur with an incidence of 0.5-1 per 1000
live births. One of the most severe syndromes with such defects is spondylocostal
dysostosis (SCD). Over the past decade, the genetic basis of several forms of
autosomal recessive SCD cases has been solved with the identification of four
causative genes (DLL3, MESP2, LFNG and HES7). Autosomal dominant forms of SCD
have also been reported, but to date no genetic etiology has been described for
these. Here, we have used exome capture and next-generation sequencing to
identify a stoploss mutation in TBX6 that segregates with disease in two
generations of one family. We show that this mutation has a deleterious effect on
the transcriptional activation activity of the TBX6 protein, likely due to
haploinsufficiency. In mouse, Tbx6 is essential for the patterning of the
vertebral precursor tissues, somites; thus, mutation of TBX6 is likely to be
causative of SCD in this family. This is the first identification of the genetic 
cause of an autosomal dominant form of SCD, and also demonstrates the potential
of exome sequencing to identify genetic causes of dominant diseases even in small
families with few affected individuals.

PMID: 23335591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53323. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053323. Epub 2013 Jan 9.

Control of Hes7 expression by Tbx6, the Wnt pathway and the chemical Gsk3
inhibitor LiCl in the mouse segmentation clock.

González A(1), Manosalva I, Liu T, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
agonzale@igbmc.fr

The mouse segmentation is established from somites, which are iteratively induced
every two hours from the presomitic mesoderm (PSM) by a system known as the
segmentation clock. A crucial component of the segmentation clock is the gene
Hes7, which is regulated by the Notch and Fgf/Mapk pathways, but its relation to 
other pathways is unknown. In addition, chemical alteration of the Wnt pathway
changes the segmentation clock period but the mechanism is unclear.To clarify
these questions, we have carried out Hes7 promoter analysis in transgenic mouse
embryos and have identified an essential 400 bp region, which contains binding
sites of Tbx6 and the Wnt signaling effector Lef1. We have found that the Hes7
promoter is activated by Tbx6, and normal activity of the Hes7 promoter in the
mouse PSM requires Tbx6 binding sites. Our results demonstrate that Wnt pathway
molecules activate the Hes7 promoter cooperatively with Tbx6 in cell culture and 
are necessary for its proper expression in the mouse PSM. Furthermore, it is
shown that the chemical Gsk3 inhibitor LiCl lengthens the oscillatory period of
Hes7 promoter activity.Our data suggest that Tbx6 and the Wnt pathway
cooperatively regulate proper Hes7 expression. Furthermore, proper Hes7 promoter 
activity and expression is important for the normal pace of oscillation.

PMCID: PMC3541138
PMID: 23326414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Biol Open. 2012 Aug 15;1(8):806-14. doi: 10.1242/bio.20121958. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Fss/Tbx6 is required for central dermomyotome cell fate in zebrafish.

Windner SE(1), Bird NC, Patterson SE, Doris RA, Devoto SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Wesleyan University , Middletown, CT 06459 , USA ;
Division of Zoology and Functional Anatomy, Department of Organismic Biology,
University of Salzburg , A-5020 Salzburg, Austria.

The dermomyotome is a pool of progenitor cells on the surface of the myotome. In 
zebrafish, dermomyotome precursors (anterior border cells, ABCs) can be first
identified in the anterior portion of recently formed somites. They must be
prevented from undergoing terminal differentiation during segmentation, even
while mesodermal cells around them respond to signaling cues and
differentiate.T-box containing transcription factors regulate many aspects of
mesoderm fate including segmentation and somite patterning. The fused somites
(fss) gene is the zebrafish ortholog of tbx6. We demonstrate that in addition to 
its requirement for segmentation, fss/tbx6 is also required for the specification
of ABCs and subsequently the central dermomyotome. The absence of Tbx6-dependent 
central dermomyotome cells in fss/tbx6 mutants is spatially coincident with a
patterning defect in the myotome.Using transgenic fish with a heat-shock
inducible tbx6 gene in the fss/tbx6 mutant background, we further demonstrate
that ubiquitous fss/tbx6 expression has spatially distinct effects on recovery of
the dermomyotome and segment boundaries, suggesting that the mechanism of
Fss/Tbx6 action is distinct with respect to dermomyotome development and
segmentation.We propose that Fss/Tbx6 is required for preventing myogenic
differentiation of central dermomyotome precursors before and after segmentation 
and that central dermomyotome cells represent a genetically and functionally
distinct subpopulation within the zebrafish dermomyotome.

PMCID: PMC3507223
PMID: 23213474  [PubMed]


29. J Neurosci. 2012 Sep 26;32(39):13439-53.

Spatially coordinated kinase signaling regulates local axon degeneration.

Chen M(1), Maloney JA, Kallop DY, Atwal JK, Tam SJ, Baer K, Kissel H, Kaminker
JS, Lewcock JW, Weimer RM, Watts RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, California
94080, USA.

In addition to being a hallmark of neurodegenerative disease, axon degeneration
is used during development of the nervous system to prune unwanted connections.
In development, axon degeneration is tightly regulated both temporally and
spatially. Here, we provide evidence that degeneration cues are transduced
through various kinase pathways functioning in spatially distinct compartments to
regulate axon degeneration. Intriguingly, glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3) acts 
centrally, likely modulating gene expression in the cell body to regulate
distally restricted axon degeneration. Through a combination of genetic and
pharmacological manipulations, including the generation of an analog-sensitive
kinase allele mutant mouse for GSK3ß, we show that the ß isoform of GSK3, not the
a isoform, is essential for developmental axon pruning in vitro and in vivo.
Additionally, we identify the dleu2/mir15a/16-1 cluster, previously characterized
as a regulator of B-cell proliferation, and the transcription factor tbx6, as
likely downstream effectors of GSK3ß in axon degeneration.

PMID: 23015435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Dev Biol. 2012 Nov 15;371(2):256-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.08.027. Epub 2012 
Aug 31.

Early transcriptional targets of MyoD link myogenesis and somitogenesis.

Maguire RJ(1), Isaacs HV, Pownall ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, University of York, Heslington, York, North Yorkshire YO10
5YW, UK.

In order to identify early transcriptional targets of MyoD prior to skeletal
muscle differentiation, we have undertaken a transcriptomic analysis on gastrula 
stage Xenopus embryos in which MyoD has been knocked-down. Our validated list of 
genes transcriptionally regulated by MyoD includes Esr1 and Esr2, which are known
targets of Notch signalling, and Tbx6, mesogenin, and FoxC1; these genes are all 
are known to be essential for normal somitogenesis but are expressed surprisingly
early in the mesoderm. In addition we found that MyoD is required for the
expression of myf5 in the early mesoderm, in contrast to the reverse relationship
of these two regulators in amniote somites. These data highlight a role for MyoD 
in the early mesoderm in regulating a set of genes that are essential for both
myogenesis and somitogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22954963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mol Biol Evol. 2012 Dec;29(12):3959-83. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mss199. Epub 2012 Aug
21.

Evolution of the tbx6/16 subfamily genes in vertebrates: insights from zebrafish.

Ahn D(1), You KH, Kim CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Republic of
Korea.

In any comparative studies striving to understand the similarities and
differences of the living organisms at the molecular genetic level, the crucial
first step is to establish the homology (orthology and paralogy) of genes between
different organisms. Determination of the homology of genes becomes complicated
when the genes have undergone a rapid divergence in sequence or when the involved
genes are members of a gene family that has experienced a differential gain or
loss of its constituents in different taxonomic groups. Organisms with duplicated
genomes such as teleost fishes might have been especially prone to these problems
because the functional redundancies provided by the duplicate copies of genes
would have allowed a rapid divergence or loss of genes during evolution. In this 
study, we will demonstrate that much of the ambiguities in the determination of
the homology between fish and tetrapod genes resulting from the problems like
these can be eliminated by complementing the sequence-based phylogenies with
nonsequence information, such as the exon-intron structure of a gene or the
composition of a gene's genomic neighbors. We will use the Tbx6/16 subfamily
genes of zebrafish (tbx6, tbx16, tbx24, and mga genes), which have been well
known for the ambiguity of their evolutionary relationships to the Tbx6/16
subfamily genes of tetrapods, as an illustrative example. We will show that,
despite the similarity of sequence and expression to the tetrapod Tbx6 genes,
zebrafish tbx6 gene is actually a novel T-box gene more closely related to the
tetrapod Tbx16 genes, whereas the zebrafish tbx24 gene, hitherto considered to be
a novel gene due to the high level of sequence divergence, is actually an
ortholog of tetrapod Tbx6 genes. We will also show that, after their initial
appearance by the multiplication of a common ancestral gene at the beginning of
vertebrate evolution, the Tbx6/16 subfamily of vertebrate T-box genes might have 
experienced differential losses of member genes in different vertebrate groups
and gradual pooling of member gene's functions in surviving members, which might 
have prevented the revelation of the true identity of member genes by way of the 
comparison of sequence and function.

PMID: 22915831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Differentiation. 2012 Sep;84(2):176-84. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2012.04.007. Epub
2012 Jun 19.

Tbx6 is a determinant of cardiac and neural cell fate decisions in multipotent
P19CL6 cells.

Gavrilov S(1), Nührenberg TG, Ashton AW, Peng CF, Moore JC, Konstantinidis K,
Mummery CL, Kitsis RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA.

Multipotent P19CL6 cells differentiate into cardiac myocytes or neural lineages
when stimulated with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or retinoic acid (RA),
respectively. Expression of the transcription factor Tbx6 was found to increase
during cardiac myocyte differentiation and to decrease during neural
differentiation. Overexpression of Tbx6 was not sufficient to drive P19CL6 cells 
to a cardiac myocyte fate or to accelerate DMSO-induced differentiation. In
contrast, knockdown of Tbx6 dramatically inhibited DMSO-induced differentiation
of P19CL6 cells to cardiac myocytes, as evidenced by the loss of striated
muscle-specific markers and spontaneous beating. Tbx6 knockdown was also
accompanied by almost complete loss of Nkx2.5, a transcription factor involved in
the specification of the cardiac myocyte lineage, indicating that Nkx2.5 is
downstream of Tbx6. In distinction to its positive role in cardiac myocyte
differentiation, Tbx6 knockdown augmented RA-induced differentiation of P19CL6
cells to both neurons and glia, and accelerated the rate of neurite formation.
Conversely, Tbx6 overexpression attenuated differentiation to neural lineages.
Thus, in the P19CL6 model, Tbx6 is required for cardiac myocyte differentiation
and represses neural differentiation. We propose a model in which Tbx6 is a part 
of a molecular switch that modulates divergent differentiation programs within a 
single progenitor cell.

Copyright © 2012 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3835676
PMID: 22721678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2012 Aug;22(4):374-80. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2012.03.006. Epub 
2012 May 9.

Axial stem cells deriving both posterior neural and mesodermal tissues during
gastrulation.

Kondoh H(1), Takemoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, 1-3 Yamadaoka,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. kondohh@fbs.osaka-u.ac.jp

The posterior neural plate is primarily derived from the axial stem cells
bipotential for neural and paraxial mesodermal development, which reside in the
caudal lateral epiblast (CLE) of gastrulating amniote embryos. This process has
been demonstrated only recently through cell lineage analyses and determination
of Sox2 activation mechanisms. The alternative developmental pathways depend on
the activation of either transcription factor genes Sox2 (neural) or Tbx6
(mesodermal); the latter occurs in association with cell ingression through the
primitive streak. Tbx6 mutant embryos develop ectopic neural tubes at the expense
of the paraxial mesoderm, as Sox2 is expressed even after cell ingression. While 
producing alternative somatic cell populations, the axial stem cells
proliferatively maintain themselves through a process dependent on the
Brachyury-Wnt3a coregulatory loop, and even contribute to a fraction of later
stem cells of the tail bud in the chordoneural hinge (CNH). Experimental evidence
for the above processes is discussed, and unsolved problems indicated.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22575683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Dev Biol. 2012 Jul 1;367(1):1-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.04.012. Epub 2012 Apr
24.

Interaction of Wnt3a, Msgn1 and Tbx6 in neural versus paraxial mesoderm lineage
commitment and paraxial mesoderm differentiation in the mouse embryo.

Nowotschin S(1), Ferrer-Vaquer A, Concepcion D, Papaioannou VE, Hadjantonakis AK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Ave, New
York, NY 10065, USA.

Paraxial mesoderm is the tissue which gives rise to the skeletal muscles and
vertebral column of the body. A gene regulatory network operating in the
formation of paraxial mesoderm has been described. This network hinges on three
key factors, Wnt3a, Msgn1 and Tbx6, each of which is critical for paraxial
mesoderm formation, since absence of any one of these factors results in complete
absence of posterior somites. In this study we determined and compared the
spatial and temporal patterns of expression of Wnt3a, Msgn1 and Tbx6 at a time
when paraxial mesoderm is being formed. Then, we performed a comparative
characterization of mutants in Wnt3a, Msgn1 and Tbx6. To determine the epistatic 
relationship between these three genes, and begin to decipher the complex
interplay between them, we analyzed double mutant embryos and compared their
phenotypes to the single mutants. Through the analysis of molecular markers in
mutants, our data support the bipotential nature of the progenitor cells for
paraxial mesoderm and establish regulatory relationships between genes involved
in the choice between neural and mesoderm fates.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3367124
PMID: 22546692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Genesis. 2012 Jun;50(6):490-5. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20827. Epub 2011 Dec 27.

A transgenic Tbx6;CreERT2 line for inducible gene manipulation in the presomitic 
mesoderm.

Peter Lopez T(1), Fan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

The rhythmic segmentation process of the presomitic mesoderm (PSM) orchestrates
the formation of somites, the fundamental units for the vertebrate axial body
plan. To aid the investigation of molecular components governing the conversion
from PSM into somites, we generated a transgenic mouse line that expresses a
tamoxifen (tmx) inducible CreER(T2) under the control of a 2.5 kb enhancer
element of Tbx6, a gene essential for PSM formation and somite patterning.
Combined with Cre reporters, this Tbx6;CreER(T2) line displays robust
tmx-inducible Cre activity in the PSM at various embryonic stages. This tool
should be useful for studying gene function during somitogenesis by either
conditional inactivation or mis-expression, and potentially coupled with cell
marking.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3329572
PMID: 22121035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb;20(2). doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.158. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

Clinical utility gene card for: Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome.

Morcel K(1), Dallapiccola B, Pasquier L, Watrin T, Bernardini L, Guerrier D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UMR 6061-IGDR, Equipe 'Génétique des Pathologies Liées au
Développement', Rennes, France.

PMCID: PMC3260917
PMID: 21897448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cell Res. 2011 May;21(5):708-10. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.54. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

An emerging molecular mechanism for the neural vs mesodermal cell fate decision.

Li RA(1), Storey KG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, College of Life Sciences,
University of Dundee, UK. thomas.brabletz@uniklinik-freiburg.de

PMCID: PMC3203676
PMID: 21445099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nature. 2011 Feb 17;470(7334):394-8. doi: 10.1038/nature09729.

Tbx6-dependent Sox2 regulation determines neural or mesodermal fate in axial stem
cells.

Takemoto T(1), Uchikawa M, Yoshida M, Bell DM, Lovell-Badge R, Papaioannou VE,
Kondoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, 1-3 Yamadaoka,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The classical view of neural plate development held that it arises from the
ectoderm, after its separation from the mesodermal and endodermal lineages.
However, recent cell-lineage-tracing experiments indicate that the caudal neural 
plate and paraxial mesoderm are generated from common bipotential axial stem
cells originating from the caudal lateral epiblast. Tbx6 null mutant mouse
embryos which produce ectopic neural tubes at the expense of paraxial mesoderm
must provide a clue to the regulatory mechanism underlying this neural versus
mesodermal fate choice. Here we demonstrate that Tbx6-dependent regulation of
Sox2 determines the fate of axial stem cells. In wild-type embryos, enhancer N1
of the neural primordial gene Sox2 is activated in the caudal lateral epiblast,
and the cells staying in the superficial layer sustain N1 activity and activate
Sox2 expression in the neural plate. In contrast, the cells destined to become
mesoderm activate Tbx6 and turn off enhancer N1 before migrating into the
paraxial mesoderm compartment. In Tbx6 mutant embryos, however, enhancer N1
activity persists in the paraxial mesoderm compartment, eliciting ectopic Sox2
activation and transforming the paraxial mesoderm into neural tubes. An
enhancer-N1-specific deletion mutation introduced into Tbx6 mutant embryos
prevented this Sox2 activation in the mesodermal compartment and subsequent
development of ectopic neural tubes, indicating that Tbx6 regulates Sox2 via
enhancer N1. Tbx6-dependent repression of Wnt3a in the paraxial mesodermal
compartment is implicated in this regulatory process. Paraxial mesoderm-specific 
misexpression of a Sox2 transgene in wild-type embryos resulted in ectopic neural
tube development. Thus, Tbx6 represses Sox2 by inactivating enhancer N1 to
inhibit neural development, and this is an essential step for the specification
of paraxial mesoderm from the axial stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3042233
PMID: 21331042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2011 Mar;156(2):225-32. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31147. Epub 2010 Dec 28.

Intra-family phenotypic heterogeneity of 16p11.2 deletion carriers in a
three-generation Chinese family.

Shen Y(1), Chen X, Wang L, Guo J, Shen J, An Y, Zhu H, Zhu Y, Xin R, Bao Y,
Gusella JF, Zhang T, Wu BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

The 16p11.2 deletion is a recurrent genomic event and a significant risk factor
for autism spectrum disorders (ASD). This genomic disorder also exhibits
extensive phenotypic variability and diverse clinical phenotypes. The full extent
of phenotypic heterogeneity associated with the 16p11.2 deletion disorder and the
factors that modify the clinical phenotypes are currently unknown. Multiplex
families with deletion offer unique opportunities for exploring the degree of
heterogeneity and implicating modifiers. Here we reported the clinical and
genomic characteristics of three 16p11.2 deletion carriers in a Chinese family.
The father carries a de novo 16p11.2 deletion, and it was transmitted to the
proband and sib. The proband presented with ASD, intellectual disability,
learning difficulty, congenital malformations such as atrial septal defect,
scoliosis. His dysmorphic features included myopia and strabismus, flat and broad
nasal bridge, etc. While the father shared same neurodevelopmental problems as
the proband, the younger brother did not show many of the proband's phenotypes.
The possible unmasked mutation of TBX6 and MVP gene in this deleted region and
the differential distribution of other genomic CNVs were explored to explain the 
phenotypic heterogeneity in these carriers. This report demonstrated the
different developmental trajectory and discordant phenotypes among family members
with the same 16p11.2 deletion, thus further illustrated the phenotypic
complexity and heterogeneity of the 16p11.2 deletion.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21302351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Gene Expr Patterns. 2011 Mar-Apr;11(3-4):239-43. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2010.12.006. 
Epub 2010 Dec 24.

Amphioxus Tbx6/16 and Tbx20 embryonic expression patterns reveal ancestral
functions in chordates.

Belgacem MR(1), Escande ML, Escriva H, Bertrand S.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS FRE 3355, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Observatoire océanologique, F-66650
Banyuls-sur-Mer, France.

T-box transcription factors are found in all metazoans and play diverse roles
during embryogenesis. In the cephalochordate amphioxus, nine T-box genes were
previously identified. In this work we undertook the analysis of the embryonic
expression pattern of Tbx6/16 and Tbx20, the last two T-box genes for which no
such data are available. We found that Tbx6/16 is expressed in the unsegmented
paraxial mesoderm, in a subpopulation of neurons, and in the tail epidermis.
Comparison with the expression patterns of the different vertebrate orthologues
indicates a conserved role of those genes in posterior mesoderm formation in
chordates. Tbx20 expression is detected in the ventral mesoderm of amphioxus
embryos, in cells that are proposed to be precursors of the amphioxus myocardium,
in some neurons of the neural tube, and in the pre-oral pit which is thought to
be the homologue of the vertebrate adenohypophysis. In vertebrates, Tbx20 is also
one of the first genes expressed in the embryonic heart field, suggesting that
the function of this gene in heart development has been conserved during chordate
evolution.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21185952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Dev Biol. 2010 Nov 15;347(2):404-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.09.001. Epub 2010 
Sep 9.

Tbx18 and Tbx15 null-like phenotypes in mouse embryos expressing Tbx6 in somitic 
and lateral plate mesoderm.

Wehn AK(1), Chapman DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15260, USA.

Members of the T-box family of transcription factors play essential roles in cell
type specification, differentiation, and proliferation during embryonic
development. All T-box family members share a common DNA binding domain - the
T-domain - and can therefore recognize similar sequences. Consequently, T-box
proteins that are co-expressed during development have the potential to compete
for binding at downstream targets. In the mouse, Tbx6 is expressed in the
primitive streak and presomitic mesoderm, and is sharply down-regulated upon
segmentation of the paraxial mesoderm. We sought to determine the phenotypic and 
molecular consequences of ectopically expressing Tbx6 within the segmented
paraxial mesoderm and its derivatives using a 3-component transgenic system. The 
vertebral column, ribs, and appendicular skeleton were all affected in these
embryos, which resembled Tbx18 and Tbx15 null embryos. We hypothesize that these 
phenotypes result from competition between the ectopically expressed Tbx6 and the
endogenously expressed Tbx18 and Tbx15 at the binding sites of target genes. In
vitro luciferase transcriptional assays provide further support for this
hypothesis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20832395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Dev Biol. 2010 Oct 15;346(2):170-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.028. Epub 2010 
Aug 5.

Paraxial T-box genes, Tbx6 and Tbx1, are required for cranial chondrogenesis and 
myogenesis.

Tazumi S(1), Yabe S, Uchiyama H.

Author information: 
(1)International Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, Yokohama City University, 
22-2 Seto, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0027, Japan.

We previously reported that Tbx6, a T-box transcription factor, is required for
the differentiation of ventral body wall muscle and for segment formation and
somitic muscle differentiation. Here, we show that Tbx6 is also involved, at
later stages, in cartilage differentiation from the cranial neural crest and head
muscle development. In Tbx6 knockdown embryos, the cranial neural crest was shown
to be correctly induced at the border of the neural plate and migrated in a
slightly delayed manner, but finally reached positions in the pharyngeal arches
nearly similar to those in the normal embryos as revealed by in situ
hybridization and the neural crest-transplantation experiments. However, the
neural crest cells failed to maintain Sox9 expression. Tbx6 knockdown also
reduced the expression of Tbx1, another T-box gene expressed in more anterior
paraxial structures. Tbx1 knockdown caused phenotypes milder but similar to those
of Tbx6 morphants, including reduced formation of head muscles and cartilages,
and attenuated Sox9 expression. Furthermore, the phenotypes caused by Tbx6
knockdown were partially rescued by Tbx1 plasmid injection. These results suggest
that Tbx6 is involved in the cranial cartilage and head muscle development by
regulating anterior paraxial genes such as Tbx1 and Sox9.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20692252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Cell Sci. 2010 Jul 15;123(Pt 14):2453-63. doi: 10.1242/jcs.066910.

Temporal regulation of the muscle gene cascade by Macho1 and Tbx6 transcription
factors in Ciona intestinalis.

Kugler JE(1), Gazdoiu S, Oda-Ishii I, Passamaneck YJ, Erives AJ, Di Gregorio A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, Box 60, New York, NY 10065, USA.

For over a century, muscle formation in the ascidian embryo has been
representative of 'mosaic' development. The molecular basis of muscle-fate
predetermination has been partly elucidated with the discovery of Macho1, a
maternal zinc-finger transcription factor necessary and sufficient for primary
muscle development, and of its transcriptional intermediaries Tbx6b and Tbx6c.
However, the molecular mechanisms by which the maternal information is decoded by
cis-regulatory modules (CRMs) associated with muscle transcription factor and
structural genes, and the ways by which a seamless transition from maternal to
zygotic transcription is ensured, are still mostly unclear. By combining
misexpression assays with CRM analyses, we have identified the mechanisms through
which Ciona Macho1 (Ci-Macho1) initiates expression of Ci-Tbx6b and Ci-Tbx6c, and
we have unveiled the cross-regulatory interactions between the latter
transcription factors. Knowledge acquired from the analysis of the Ci-Tbx6b CRM
facilitated both the identification of a related CRM in the Ci-Tbx6c locus and
the characterization of two CRMs associated with the structural muscle gene
fibrillar collagen 1 (CiFCol1). We use these representative examples to
reconstruct how compact CRMs orchestrate the muscle developmental program from
pre-localized ooplasmic determinants to differentiated larval muscle in ascidian 
embryos.

PMCID: PMC2894658
PMID: 20592183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jun;239(6):1768-78. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22282.

Dissecting the role of Fgf signaling during gastrulation and left-right axis
formation in mouse embryos using chemical inhibitors.

Oki S(1), Kitajima K, Meno C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Fgf signaling plays pivotal roles in mouse gastrulation and left-right axis
formation. However, although genetic analyses have revealed important aspects of 
Fgf signaling in these processes, the temporal resolution of genetic studies is
low. Here, we combined whole-embryo culture with application of chemical
compounds to inhibit Fgf signaling at specific time points. We found that sodium 
chlorate and PD173074 are potent inhibitors of Fgf signaling in early mouse
embryos. Fgf signaling is required for the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
of the primitive streak before the onset of gastrulation. Once gastrulation
begins, Fgf signaling specifies mesodermal fates via the Ras/MAPK downstream
cascade. Finally, Fgf signaling on the posterior side of the embryo during
gastrulation induces Nodal expression in the node via Tbx6-Dll1, the initial
event required for Nodal expression in the left lateral plate mesoderm.

PMID: 20503372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Dev Biol. 2010 Jun 15;342(2):134-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.03.015. Epub 2010 
Mar 25.

Analysis of Ripply1/2-deficient mouse embryos reveals a mechanism underlying the 
rostro-caudal patterning within a somite.

Takahashi J(1), Ohbayashi A, Oginuma M, Saito D, Mochizuki A, Saga Y, Takada S.

Author information: 
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Biosciences, National Institutes of Natural 
Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi, Japan.

The rostro-caudal patterning within a somite is periodically established in the
presomitic mesoderm (PSM). In the mouse, Mesp2 is required for the rostral
property whereas Notch signaling and Ripply2, a Mesp2-induced protein that
suppresses Mesp2 transcription, are required for the caudal property. Here, we
examined the mechanism behind rostro-caudal patterning by comparing the spatial
movement of Notch activity with Mesp2 protein localization in wild-type embryos
and those defective in Ripply1 and 2, both of which are expressed in the PSM.
Mesp2 protein appears first as a thin band in the middle of the traveling Notch
active domain in both wild-type and Ripply1/2-deficient embryos. In wild-type
embryos, the Mesp2 band expands anteriorly to the expression front of Tbx6, an
activator of Mesp2 transcription. Notch activity becomes localized further
anteriorly to this Mesp2 domain, but does not pass over the anterior Mesp2 domain
generated in the previous segmentation cycle. As a result, the Notch active
domain appears to be restricted between these two Mesp2 domains. In
Ripply1/2-deficient embryos, the Mesp2 band becomes more expanded and the Notch
domain is finally diminished. Interestingly, Ripply1/2-deficient embryos exhibit 
anterior expansion of the Tbx6 protein domain, suggesting that Ripply1/2
regulates Mesp2 expression by modulating elimination of Tbx6 proteins. We propose
that the rostro-caudal pattern is established by dynamic interaction of Notch
activity with two Mesp2 domains, which are defined in successive segmentation
cycles by Notch, Tbx6 and Ripply1/2.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20346937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2010 Apr 20;35(9):983-8. doi:
10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181bc963c.

The association analysis of TBX6 polymorphism with susceptibility to congenital
scoliosis in a Chinese Han population.

Fei Q(1), Wu Z, Wang H, Zhou X, Wang N, Ding Y, Wang Y, Qiu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.

STUDY DESIGN: A case-control association study was conducted to investigate the
genetic etiology for congenital scoliosis (CS) in a Chinese Han population.
OBJECTIVE: To identify whether TBX6 polymorphisms are associated with
susceptibility to CS in a Chinese Han population.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: CS is a 3-dimensional deformity of the spine,
resulting from defection of normal vertebral development. Although there are many
types of defects observed in CS, all result from abnormal formation and
segmentation of the vertebral precursors, called somites. Developmental studies
in animal models have identified many genes regulating somite formation and
segmentation. T-box factor, TBX6, is a prerequisite for somite segmentation in
vertebrates. In mouse TBX6 knockouts, the phenotypes are similar with that of
some human birth defects, such as CS, raises the possibility that TBX6 gene may
be a potential susceptibility gene for CS, so we investigated the relations
between TBX6 polymorphisms and CS.
METHODS: Two known single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of TBX6 gene were
genotyped among 254 Chinese Han subjects (127 CS patients and 127 controls with
matched sex and age) by GenomeLab SNPstream genotyping system. The 2 markers (the
only tagging SNP and a functional SNP) with minor allele frequency above 5% were 
analyzed by the allelic and genotypic association analysis, the
genotype-phenotype (CS patients were divided into type I 31 cases [failure of
formation], type II 46 cases [a failure of segmentation], and type III 50 cases
[mixed defects]) association analysis, and the haplotype analysis.
RESULTS: The single SNP analysis showed allele frequency of rs2289292 (exon 8,
the only tagging SNP) and rs3809624 (5' untranslated region) demonstrated
significant difference between CS cases and controls (P = 0.017 and P = 0.033).
No SNP was found to be correlated with clinical phenotype. Moreover, the 2 makers
(rs2289292 and rs3809624) in TBX6 gene were found to be in strong linkage
disequilibrium (D' = 1.0; gamma = 0.984; 95% confidence interval, 0.96-1.0; LOD =
57.48) in the controls. Both global haplotype analysis and individual haplotype
analysis showed that the haplotype of SNP1/SNP2 showed significant association
with the disease (P = 0.017), G-A haplotype was more frequently observed in
controls than in cases (odds ratio, 0.71; 95% confidence interval, 0.51-0.99).
CONCLUSION: This is the first report on SNPs of TBX6 gene in CS that suggests
genetic variants of TBX6 gene is associated with CS and may play an important
role in mediating susceptibility to developing CS in the Chinese Han population.

PMID: 20228709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Jun;25(6):1216-33. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.34.

Enhanced differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to mesenchymal progenitors
by inhibition of TGF-beta/activin/nodal signaling using SB-431542.

Mahmood A(1), Harkness L, Schrøder HD, Abdallah BM, Kassem M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biotechnology Centre, Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital
of Odense, University of South Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

Directing differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) into specific
cell types using an easy and reproducible protocol is a prerequisite for the
clinical use of hESCs in regenerative-medicine procedures. Here, we report a
protocol for directing the differentiation of hESCs into mesenchymal progenitor
cells. We demonstrate that inhibition of transforming growth factor beta
(TGF-beta)/activin/nodal signaling during embryoid body (EB) formation using
SB-431542 (SB) in serum-free medium markedly upregulated paraxial mesodermal
markers (TBX6, TBX5) and several myogenic developmental markers, including early 
myogenic transcriptional factors (Myf5, Pax7), as well as myocyte-committed
markers [NCAM, CD34, desmin, MHC (fast), alpha-smooth muscle actin, Nkx2.5,
cTNT]. Continuous inhibition of TGF-beta signaling in EB outgrowth cultures
(SB-OG) enriched for myocyte progenitor cells; markers were PAX7(+) (25%),
MYOD1(+) (52%), and NCAM(+) (CD56) (73%). DNA microarray analysis revealed
differential upregulation of 117 genes (>2-fold compared with control cells)
annotated to myogenic development and function. Moreover, these cells showed the 
ability to contract (80% of the population) and formed myofibers when implanted
intramuscularly in vivo. Interestingly, SB-OG cells cultured in 10% fetal bovine 
serum (FBS) developed into a homogeneous population of mesenchymal progenitors
that expressed CD markers characteristic of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs):
CD44(+) (100%), CD73(+) (98%), CD146(+) (96%), and CD166(+) (88%) with the
ability to differentiate into osteoblasts, adipocytes, and chondrocytes in vitro 
and in vivo. Furthermore, microarray analysis of these cells revealed
downregulation of genes related to myogenesis: MYH3 (-167.9-fold), ACTA1
(-161-fold), MYBPH (-139-fold), ACTC (-100.3-fold), MYH8 (-45.5-fold), and MYOT
(-41.8-fold) and marked upregulation of genes related to mesoderm-derived cell
lineages. In conclusion, our data provides a simple and versatile protocol for
directing the differentiation of hESCs into a myogenic lineage and then further
into mesenchymal progenitors by blocking the TGF-beta signaling pathway.

(c) 2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 20200949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 9;285(15):11129-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.087429. Epub 2010
Feb 3.

Pitx2-dependent occupancy by histone deacetylases is associated with T-box gene
regulation in mammalian abdominal tissue.

Hilton T(1), Gross MK, Kioussi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factor Pitx2 and the T-box transcription factors
are essential for organogenesis. Pitx2 and T-box genes are induced by growth
factors and function as transcriptional activators or repressors. Gene expression
analyses on abdominal tissue were used to identify seven of the T-box genes of
the genome as Pitx2 target genes in the abdomen at embryonic day.10.5. Pitx2
activated Tbx4, Tbx15, and Mga and repressed Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx5, and Tbx6
expression. As expected, activated genes showed reduced expression patterns, and 
repressed T-box genes showed increased expression patterns in the abdomen of
Pitx2 mutants. Pitx2 occupied chromatin sites near all of these T-box genes.
Co-occupancy by coactivators, corepressors, and histone acetylation at these
sites was frequently Pitx2-dependent. Genes repressed by Pitx2 generally showed
increased histone acetylation and decreased histone deacetylase
(HDAC)/corepressor occupancy in Pitx2 mutants. The lower N-CoR, HDAC1, and HDAC3 
occupancy observed at multiple sites along Tbx1 chromatin in mutants is
consistent with the model that increased histone acetylation and gene expression 
of Tbx1 may result from a loss of recruitment of corepressors by Pitx2. Genes
activated by Pitx2 showed less consistent patterns in chromatin analyses. Reduced
H4 acetylation and increased HDAC1/nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR) occupancy
at some Tbx4 sites were accompanied by increased H3 acetylation and reduced HDAC3
occupancy at the same or other more distal chromatin sites in mutants.
Pitx2-dependent occupancy by corepressors resulted in alteration of the
acetylation levels of several T-box genes, whereas Pitx2-dependent occupancy by
coactivators was more site-localized. These studies will provide the basic
scientific underpinning to understand abdominal wall syndromes.

PMCID: PMC2856990
PMID: 20129917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Dev Biol. 2010 Apr 1;340(1):75-87. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.01.013. Epub 2010
Jan 18.

A divergent Tbx6-related gene and Tbx6 are both required for neural crest and
intermediate mesoderm development in Xenopus.

Callery EM(1), Thomsen GH, Smith JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute and Department of
Zoology, The Henry Wellcome Building of Cancer and Developmental Biology,
University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK.
emc13@cam.ac.uk

T-box family transcription factors play many roles in Metazoan development. Here 
we characterise Tbx6r, a unique Tbx6 paralogue isolated from the amphibian
Xenopus. The evolution and developmental integration of this divergent T-box gene
within the vertebrates reveals an unexpected level of plasticity within this
conserved family of developmental regulators. We show that despite their
co-expression, Tbx6 and Tbx6r have dissimilar transcriptional responses to ligand
treatment, and their ability to activate ligand expression is also very
different. The two paralogues have distinct inductive properties: Tbx6 induces
mesoderm whereas Tbx6r induces anterior neural markers. We use hybrid proteins in
an effort to understand this difference, and implicate the C-terminal regions of 
the proteins in their inductive specificities. Through loss-of-function analyses 
using antisense morpholino oligonucleotides we show that both Tbx6 paralogues
perform essential functions in the development of the paraxial and intermediate
mesoderm and the neural crest in Xenopus. We demonstrate that Tbx6 and Tbx6r both
induce FGF8 expression as well as that of pre-placodal markers, and that Tbx6 can
also induce neural crest markers via a ligand-dependent mechanism involving FGF8 
and Wnt8. Our data thus identify an important new function for this key
developmental regulator.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2877776
PMID: 20083100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Dev Dyn. 2010 Feb;239(2):535-47. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22197.

The tbx/bHLH transcription factor mga regulates gata4 and organogenesis.

Rikin A(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA.

The mga gene encodes a unique transcription factor containing both TBOX and
bHLHzip DNA-binding domains. Here we describe the structure, expression pattern, 
and loss-of-function phenotype for zebrafish mga. The mga gene is conserved with 
mammalian homologs for both DNA-binding domains. It is expressed maternally, and 
subsequently in the developing brain, heart, and gut, and its depletion causes
morphogenetic defects in each of these organ systems. The heart and gut
phenotypes are similar to those described previously for loss of gata4, and the
mga morphant shows increased levels of gata4 transcripts in lateral mesoderm.
Knockdown of gata4 rescues the early heart-looping defect (but not the gut
defect), indicating that mga restricts the normal levels of Gata4 required for
heart tube looping, while both genes are important for gut development.
Transcript profiling experiments show that mga functions early to influence key
regulators of mesendoderm, including tbx6, cas, and sox17.

PMCID: PMC3613857
PMID: 20044811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(1):81-92. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082837mf.

Zygotic VegT is required for Xenopus paraxial mesoderm formation and is regulated
by Nodal signaling and Eomesodermin.

Fukuda M(1), Takahashi S, Haramoto Y, Onuma Y, Kim YJ, Yeo CY, Ishiura S,
Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Japan.

The T-box gene VegT plays a crucial role during mesendoderm specification of the 
amphibian embryo. While the function of maternal VegT (mVegT) has been
extensively investigated, little is known about the function and transcriptional 
regulation of zygotic VegT (zVegT). In the present study, we used comparative
genomics and a knockdown experiment to demonstrate that zVegT is the orthologous 
gene of zebrafish Spadetail/Tbx16 and chick Tbx6L/Tbx6, and has an essential role
in paraxial mesodermal formation. zVegT knockdown embryos show several defects in
the patterning of trunk mesoderm, such as abnormal segmentation of somites, a
reduction in muscle, and the formation of an abnormal mass of cells at the tail
tip. We also identified the cis-regulatory elements of zVegT that are necessary
and sufficient for mesoderm-specific expression. These cis-regulatory elements
are located in two separate upstream regions of zVegT, corresponding to the first
intron of mVegT. The results of in vitro binding and functional assays indicate
that Forkhead box H1 (FoxH1) and Eomesodermin (Eomes) are the trans-acting
factors required for zVegT expression. Our results highlight the essential role
of zVegT in organization of paraxial mesoderm, and reveal that zVegT is regulated
by a coherent feedforward loop of Nodal signaling via Eomes.

PMID: 20013651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Eur J Med Genet. 2009 Nov-Dec;52(6):433-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.09.007. Epub 
2009 Sep 19.

A familial 593-kb microdeletion of 16p11.2 associated with mental retardation and
hemivertebrae.

Shimojima K(1), Inoue T, Fujii Y, Ohno K, Yamamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)International Research and Educational Institute for Integrated Medical
Sciences (IREIIMS), Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho,
Shinjuku-ward, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

Through several large-scale screening studies for autism spectrum disorders
(ASD), a common 593-kb interstitial deletion of 16p11.2 has been identified as
one of the most common genomic disorders associated with ASD. In this study, a
familial occurrence of the 16p11.2 deletion was identified in association with
hemivertebrae. The proband was a 3-year-old boy who showed developmental delay,
displayed hyperactive but not autistic behavior, and had hemivertebrae, rib
anomalies, and inguinal hernia. Familial investigation revealed that his mother
shared the same deletion. Under the hypothesis of the existence of an unmasked
mutation in the deletion region, we analyzed the sequence of the T-box 6 gene
(TBX6) included in the deletion region, but did not detect any mutation. This
suggests that haploinsufficiency of TBX6 can lead to vertebral malformation in
low penetrance.

PMID: 19770079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 2009 Aug 28;284(35):23481-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.007864. Epub
2009 Jun 26.

Smad6 inhibits the transcriptional activity of Tbx6 by mediating its degradation.

Chen YL(1), Liu B, Zhou ZN, Hu RY, Fei C, Xie ZH, Ding X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China.

Members of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and T-box gene families play
several critical roles in the early embryonic development and tissue homeostasis.
Although BMP proteins are the upstream regulators of T-box genes, few studies
have investigated the molecular mechanisms between these two protein families.
Here, we report that Tbx6 interacts directly with Smad6, an inhibitory Smad that 
antagonizes the BMP signal. This interaction is mediated through the Mad homology
2 (MH2) domain of Smad6 and residues 90-180 of Tbx6. We demonstrate that Smad6
facilitates the degradation of Tbx6 protein through recruitment of Smurf1, a
ubiquitin E3 ligase. Consequently, Smad6 reduces Tbx6-mediated Myf-5 gene
activation. Furthermore, specific knockdown of endogenous Smad6 and Smurf1 by
small interfering RNA increases the protein levels of Tbx6 and enhance the
expression of Tbx6 target genes. Collectively, these findings reveal that Smad6
serves as a critical mediator of BMP signal via a functional interaction with
Tbx6, thus regulating the activation of Tbx6 downstream genes during cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2749122
PMID: 19561075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Sep;9(6):430-5. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2009.06.003. Epub
2009 Jun 17.

Effect of retinoic acid signaling on Wnt/beta-catenin and FGF signaling during
body axis extension.

Zhao X(1), Duester G.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, Development and Aging Program, 10901
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Cell-cell signaling regulated by retinoic acid (RA), Wnt/beta-catenin, and
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) is important during body axis extension, and
interactions between these pathways have been suggested. At early somite stages, 
Wnt/beta-catenin and FGF signaling domains exist both anterior and posterior to
the developing trunk, whereas RA signaling occurs in between in the trunk under
the control of the RA-synthesizing enzyme retinaldehyde dehydrogenase-2 (Raldh2).
Previous studies demonstrated that vitamin A deficient quail embryos and
Raldh2(-/-) mouse embryos lacking RA synthesis exhibit ectopic expression of Fgf8
and Wnt8a in the developing trunk. Here, we demonstrate that Raldh2(-/-) mouse
embryos display an expansion of FGF signaling into the trunk monitored by
Sprouty2 and Pea3 expression, and an expansion of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
detected by expression of Axin2, Tbx6, Cdx2, and Cdx4. Following loss of RA
signaling, the caudal expression domains of Fgf8, Wnt8a, and Wnt3a expand
anteriorly into the trunk, but no change is observed in caudal expression of Fgf4
or Fgf17 plus caudal expression of Fgf18 and Cdx1 is reduced. These findings
suggest that RA repression of Fgf8, Wnt8a, and Wnt3a in the developing trunk
functions to down-regulate FGF signaling and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling as the
body axis extends.

PMCID: PMC2791796
PMID: 19539783  [PubMed]


55. Dev Biol. 2009 Apr 15;328(2):552-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.01.033. Epub 2009 
Feb 3.

Spatio-temporal intersection of Lhx3 and Tbx6 defines the cardiac field through
synergistic activation of Mesp.

Christiaen L(1), Stolfi A, Davidson B, Levine M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Cell Biology, Division of Genetics, Genomics and
Development, Center for Integrative Genomics, University of California Berkeley, 
CA 94720-3200, USA. lionelchristiaen@berkeley.edu

Mesp encodes a bHLH transcription factor required for specification of the
cardiac mesoderm in Ciona embryos. The activities of Macho-1 and beta-catenin,
two essential maternal determinants, are required for Mesp expression in the B7.5
blastomeres, which constitute the heart field. The T-box transcription factor
Tbx6 functions downstream of Macho-1 as a direct activator of Mesp expression.
However, Tbx6 cannot account for the restricted expression of Mesp in the B7.5
lineage since it is expressed throughout the presumptive tail muscles. Here we
present evidence that the LIM-homeobox gene Lhx3, a direct target of
beta-catenin, is essential for localized Mesp expression. Lhx3 is expressed
throughout the presumptive endoderm and B7.5 blastomeres. Thus, the B7.5
blastomeres are the only cells to express sustained levels of the Tbx6 and Lhx3
activators. Like mammalian Lhx3 genes, Ci-Lhx3 encodes two isoforms with distinct
N-terminal peptides. The Lhx3a isoform appears to be expressed both maternally
and zygotically, while the Lhx3b isoform is exclusively zygotic. Misexpression of
Lhx3b is sufficient to induce ectopic Mesp activation in cells expressing Tbx6b. 
Injection of antisense morpholino oligonucleotides showed that the Lhx3b isoform 
is required for endogenous Mesp expression. Mutations in the Lhx3 half-site of
Tbx6/Lhx3 composite elements strongly reduced the activity of a minimal Mesp
enhancer. We discuss the delineation of the heart field by the synergistic action
of muscle and gut determinants.

PMID: 19389354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Int J Dev Biol. 2009;53(4):631-9. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082823kh.

The Xenopus Bowline/Ripply family proteins negatively regulate the
transcriptional activity of T-box transcription factors.

Hitachi K(1), Danno H, Tazumi S, Aihara Y, Uchiyama H, Okabayashi K, Kondow A,
Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

Bowline, which is a member of the Xenopus Bowline/Ripply family of proteins,
represses the transcription of somitogenesis-related genes before somite
segmentation, which makes Bowline indispensable for somitogenesis. Although there
are three bowline/Ripply family genes in each vertebrate species, it is not known
whether the Bowline/Ripply family proteins share a common role in development. To
elucidate their developmental roles, we examined the expression patterns and
functions of the Xenopus Bowline/Ripply family proteins Bowline, Ledgerline, and 
a novel member of this protein family, xRipply3. We found that the expression
patterns of bowline and ledgerline overlapped in the presomitic mesoderm (PSM),
whereas ledgerline was additionally expressed in the newly formed somites. In
addition, we isolated xRipply3, which is expressed in the pharyngeal region.
Co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Ledgerline and xRipply3 interacted
with T-box proteins and the transcriptional co-repressor Groucho/TLE. In
luciferase assays, xRipply3 weakly suppressed the transcriptional activity of
Tbx1, while Ledgerline strongly suppressed that of Tbx6. In line with the
repressive role of Ledgerline, knockdown of Ledgerline resulted in enlargement of
expression regions of the somitogenesis-related-genes mespb and Tbx6. Inhibition 
of histone deacetylase activity increased the expression of mespb, as seen in the
Bowline and Ledgerline knockdown experiments. These results suggest that the
Groucho-HDAC complex is required for the repressive activity of Bowline/Ripply
family proteins during Xenopus somitogenesis. We conclude that although the
Xenopus Bowline/Ripply family proteins Bowline, Ledgerline and xRipply3 are
expressed differentially, they all act as negative regulators of T-box proteins.

PMID: 19247927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Comput Biol. 2009 Feb;16(2):369-77. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2008.20TT.

Non-homologous structured CRMs from the Ciona genome.

Erives A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA. 
Albert.Erives@Dartmouth.edu

The internal functional organization of cis-regulatory modules (CRMs) lies at the
heart of our understanding the mode and tempo of gene regulatory evolution as
well as practical efforts at deciphering and annotating genomic sequences. In an 
open-ended search for loose clusters of known mesodermal enhancer motifs in the
Ciona intestinalis genome, I discovered the existence of a class of highly
organized CRMs in otherwise unrelated genes expressed early in development. Each 
such CRM is composed of distinct motifs located at specific positions along
approximately 160 bp of DNA sequence, and is able to drive expression in distinct
mesodermal compartments descended from the B4.1 blastomere. The majority of the
loci bearing these B4.1-specific modules encode important early mesodermal
transcription factors at the snail, paraxis, and tbx6 orthologous loci of this
invertebrate chordate system. These unrelated genes encode members of the C2H2
zinc-finger, bHLH, and T-box transcription factor families, and likely serve as a
chordate-specific trans-code for paraxial mesoderm. One other similarly organized
enhancer was discovered in the TNC3 muscle structural locus. These results
suggest that organization of binding sites over the length of the enhancer
sequence is a critical aspect of gene regulatory biology. The extent to which
this is a general principle will facilitate our ability to identify, decipher,
and categorize the regulatory functions contained in whole genome assemblies.

PMID: 19193153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Development. 2009 Mar;136(5):749-60. doi: 10.1242/dev.024703. Epub 2009 Jan 21.

Identification of direct T-box target genes in the developing zebrafish mesoderm.

Garnett AT(1), Han TM, Gilchrist MJ, Smith JC, Eisen MB, Wardle FC, Amacher SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology and Center for Integrative Genomics, 
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

The zebrafish genes spadetail (spt) and no tail (ntl) encode T-box transcription 
factors that are important for early mesoderm development. Although much has been
done to characterize these genes, the identity and location of target regulatory 
elements remain largely unknown. Here, we survey the genome for downstream target
genes of the Spt and Ntl T-box transcription factors. We find evidence for
extensive additive interactions towards gene activation and limited evidence for 
combinatorial and antagonistic interactions between the two factors. Using in
vitro binding selection assays to define Spt- and Ntl-binding motifs, we searched
for target regulatory sequence via a combination of binding motif searches and
comparative genomics. We identified regulatory elements for tbx6 and deltaD, and,
using chromatin immunoprecipitation, in vitro DNA binding assays and transgenic
methods, we provide evidence that both are directly regulated by T-box
transcription factors. We also find that deltaD is directly activated by T-box
factors in the tail bud, where it has been implicated in starting the
segmentation clock, suggesting that spt and ntl act upstream of this process.

PMCID: PMC2685943
PMID: 19158186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Dev Dyn. 2008 Dec;237(12):3749-61. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21791.

PMesogenin1 and 2 function directly downstream of Xtbx6 in Xenopus somitogenesis 
and myogenesis.

Tazumi S(1), Yabe S, Yokoyama J, Aihara Y, Uchiyama H.

Author information: 
(1)International Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, Yokohama City University, 
Yokohama, Japan.

T-box transcription factor tbx6 and basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor
pMesogenin1 are reported to be involved in paraxial mesodermal differentiation.
To clarify the relationship between these genes in Xenopus laevis, we isolated
pMesogenin2, which showed high homology with pMesogenin1. Both pMesogenin1 and 2 
appeared to be transcriptional activators and were induced by a hormone-inducible
version of Xtbx6 without secondary protein synthesis in animal cap assays. The
pMesogenin2 promoter contained three potential T-box binding sites with which
Xtbx6 protein was shown to interact, and a reporter gene construct containing
these sites was activated by Xtbx6. Xtbx6 knockdown reduced pMesogenin1 and 2
expressions, but not vice versa. Xtbx6 and pMesogenin1 and 2 knockdowns caused
similar phenotypic abnormalities including somite malformation and ventral body
wall muscle hypoplasia, suggesting that Xtbx6 is a direct regulator of
pMesogenin1 and 2, which are both involved in somitogenesis and myogenesis
including that of body wall muscle in Xenopus laevis.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19035338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Development. 2008 Nov;135(21):3511-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.027144.

Functional importance of evolutionally conserved Tbx6 binding sites in the
presomitic mesoderm-specific enhancer of Mesp2.

Yasuhiko Y(1), Kitajima S, Takahashi Y, Oginuma M, Kagiwada H, Kanno J, Saga Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Toxicology, National Institute of Health
Sciences, 1-18-1 Kamiyoga, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 158-8501, Japan.
yasuhiko@nihs.go.jp

The T-box transcription factor Tbx6 controls the expression of Mesp2, which
encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that has crucial roles in
somitogenesis. In cultured cells, Tbx6 binding to the Mesp2 enhancer region is
essential for the activation of Mesp2 by Notch signaling. However, it is not
known whether this binding is required in vivo. Here we report that an Mesp2
enhancer knockout mouse bearing mutations in two crucial Tbx6 binding sites does 
not express Mesp2 in the presomitic mesoderm. This absence leads to impaired
skeletal segmentation identical to that reported for Mesp2-null mice, indicating 
that these Tbx6 binding sites are indispensable for Mesp2 expression. T-box
binding to the consensus sequences in the Mesp2 upstream region was confirmed by 
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Further enhancer analyses indicated that
the number and spatial organization of the T-box binding sites are critical for
initiating Mesp2 transcription via Notch signaling. We also generated a knock-in 
mouse in which the endogenous Mesp2 enhancer was replaced by the core enhancer of
medaka mespb, an ortholog of mouse Mesp2. The homozygous enhancer knock-in mouse 
was viable and showed normal skeletal segmentation, indicating that the medaka
mespb enhancer functionally replaced the mouse Mesp2 enhancer. These results
demonstrate that there is significant evolutionary conservation of Mesp
regulatory mechanisms between fish and mice.

PMID: 18849530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2008 Oct;18(5):418-25. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2008.07.017. Epub 
2008 Sep 7.

Teasing out T-box targets in early mesoderm.

Wardle FC(1), Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, Downing Street,
Cambridge CB2 3DY, UK. fcw27@cam.ac.uk

T-box transcription factor genes are widely conserved in metazoan development and
widely involved in developmental processes. With the phase of T-box gene
discovery winding down, the phase of transcriptional target discovery for T-box
transcription factors is finally taking off and yielding rich rewards. Mutant
phenotypes in mouse and zebrafish as well as morpholino studies in zebrafish have
helped to link the T-box genes to a variety of signaling pathways through diverse
target genes and feedback loops. Particularly in early mesoderm development, it
is emerging that a network of T-box genes interacts with Wnt/beta-catenin and
Notch/Delta signaling pathways, among others, to control the important processes 
of mesoderm specification, somite segmentation, and left/right body axis
determination.

PMCID: PMC2700021
PMID: 18778771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Development. 2008 Aug;135(15):2555-62. doi: 10.1242/dev.019877. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Mesp2 and Tbx6 cooperatively create periodic patterns coupled with the clock
machinery during mouse somitogenesis.

Oginuma M(1), Niwa Y, Chapman DL, Saga Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, SOKENDAI, 1111 Yata, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan.

The metameric structures in vertebrates are based on the periodicity of the
somites that are formed one by one from the anterior end of the presomitic
mesoderm (PSM). The timing and spacing of somitogenesis are regulated by the
segmentation clock, which is characterized by the oscillation of several
signaling pathways in mice. The temporal information needs to be translated into 
a spatial pattern in the so-called determination front, at which cells become
responsive to the clock signal. The transcription factor Mesp2 plays a crucial
role in this process, regulating segmental border formation and rostro-caudal
patterning. However, the mechanisms regulating the spatially restricted and
periodic expression of Mesp2 have remained elusive. Using high-resolution
fluorescent in situ hybridization in conjunction with immunohistochemical
analyses, we have found a clear link between Mesp2 transcription and the periodic
waves of Notch activity. We also find that Mesp2 transcription is spatially
defined by Tbx6: Mesp2 transcription and Tbx6 protein initially share an
identical anterior border in the PSM, but once translated, Mesp2 protein leads to
the suppression of Tbx6 protein expression post-translationally via rapid
degradation mediated by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. This reciprocal
regulation is the spatial mechanism that successively defines the position of the
next anterior border of Mesp2. We further show that FGF signaling provides a
spatial cue to position the expression domain of Mesp2. Taken together, we
conclude that Mesp2 is the final output signal by which the temporal information 
from the segmentation clock is translated into segmental patterning during mouse 
somitogenesis.

PMID: 18579680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2008 Jun 25;3(6):e2511. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002511.

Tbx6 regulates left/right patterning in mouse embryos through effects on nodal
cilia and perinodal signaling.

Hadjantonakis AK(1), Pisano E, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York, 
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The determination of left/right body axis during early embryogenesis 
sets up a developmental cascade that coordinates the development of the viscera
and is essential to the correct placement and alignment of organ systems and
vasculature. Defective left-right patterning can lead to congenital cardiac
malformations, vascular anomalies and other serious health problems. Here we
describe a novel role for the T-box transcription factor gene Tbx6 in left/right 
body axis determination in the mouse.
RESULTS: Embryos lacking Tbx6 show randomized embryo turning and heart looping.
Our results point to multiple mechanisms for this effect. First, Dll1, a direct
target of Tbx6, is down regulated around the node in Tbx6 mutants and there is a 
subsequent decrease in nodal signaling, which is required for laterality
determination. Secondly, in spite of a lack of expression of Tbx6 in the node, we
document a profound effect of the Tbx6 mutation on the morphology and motility of
nodal cilia. This results in the loss of asymmetric calcium signaling at the
periphery of the node, suggesting that unidirectional nodal flow is disrupted. To
carry out these studies, we devised a novel method for direct labeling and live
imaging cilia in vivo using a genetically-encoded fluorescent protein fusion that
labels tubulin, combined with laser point scanning confocal microscopy for direct
visualization of cilia movement.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the transcription factor gene Tbx6 is essential for
correct left/right axis determination in the mouse and acts through effects on
notch signaling around the node as well as through an effect on the morphology
and motility of the nodal cilia.

PMCID: PMC2427182
PMID: 18575602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Aug 8;372(4):607-12. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.083. Epub 2008 May 27.

Physical interaction between Tbx6 and mespb is indispensable for the activation
of bowline expression during Xenopus somitogenesis.

Hitachi K(1), Danno H, Kondow A, Ohnuma K, Uchiyama H, Ishiura S, Kurisaki A,
Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

During vertebrate somitogenesis, various transcriptional factors function
coordinately to determine the position of the somite boundary. Previously, we
reported on the signaling crosstalk that occurs between two major transcription
factors involved in somitogenesis, Tbx6 and mespb/mesp2. These factors
synergistically activated the expression of a downstream gene, bowline/Ripply2,
which is essential for precise formation of the somite boundary. However, the
molecular mechanism underlying this synergistic effect remains unclear. In this
report, we found that the Tbx6 and mespb proteins interacted physically with each
other. Pulldown assays with various deletion mutants of these proteins identified
the essential domains for this physical interaction. Finally, we found that
interference with the physical interaction by a dominant-negative form of mespb, 
mespbDeltaDBD, abrogated the expression of the bowline gene during Xenopus
somitogenesis. These results indicate that the appropriate expression of
bowline/Ripply2 is regulated by a direct interaction between the Tbx6 and mespb
proteins during Xenopus somitogenesis.

PMID: 18510946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Bone Miner Res. 2008 Oct;23(10):1576-83. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.080503.

A missense T (Brachyury) mutation contributes to vertebral malformations.

Ghebranious N(1), Blank RD, Raggio CL, Staubli J, McPherson E, Ivacic L,
Rasmussen K, Jacobsen FS, Faciszewski T, Burmester JK, Pauli RM, Boachie-Adjei O,
Glurich I, Giampietro PF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diagnostic Research Laboratory, Marshfield Clinic, Marshfield,
Wisconsin 54449, USA.

No major susceptibility genes for sporadically occurring congenital vertebral
malformations (CVM) in humans have been identified to date. Body patterning genes
whose mutants cause axial skeletal anomalies in mice are candidates for human CVM
susceptibility. T (also known as Brachyury) and TBX6 are critical genes needed to
establish mesodermal identity. We hypothesized that mutations in T and/or TBX6
contribute to the pathogenesis of human CVMs. The complete T and TBX6 coding
regions, splice junctions, and proximal 500 bp of the promoters were sequenced in
50 phenotyped patients with CVM. Three unrelated patients with sacral agenesis,
Klippel-Feil syndrome, and multiple cervical and thoracic vertebral malformations
were heterozygous for a c.1013C>T substitution, resulting in a predicted
Ala338Val missense alteration in exon 8. A clinically unaffected parent of each
patient also harbored the substitution, but the variant did not occur in an
ethnically diverse, 443-person reference population. The c.1013C>T variant is
significantly associated with CVM (p < 0.001). Alanine 338 shows moderate
conservation across species, and valine at this position has not been reported in
any species. A fourth patient harbored a c.908-8C>T variant in intron 7. This
previously unreported variant was tested in 347 normal control subjects, and 11
heterozygotes and 2 T/T individuals were found. No TBX6 variants were identified.
We infer that the c.1013C>T substitution is pathogenic and represents the first
report of an association between a missense mutation in the T gene and the
occurrence of sporadic CVMs in humans. It is uncertain whether the splice
junction variant increases CVM risk. TBX6 mutations do not seem to be associated 
with CVM. We hypothesize that epistatic interactions between T and other
developmental genes and the environment modulate the phenotypic consequences of T
variants.

PMID: 18466071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Development. 2008 Jan;135(1):85-94. Epub 2007 Nov 28.

Wnt3a/beta-catenin signaling controls posterior body development by coordinating 
mesoderm formation and segmentation.

Dunty WC Jr(1), Biris KK, Chalamalasetty RB, Taketo MM, Lewandoski M, Yamaguchi
TP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Developmental Biology Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute-Frederick, NIH, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Somitogenesis is thought to be controlled by a segmentation clock, which consists
of molecular oscillators in the Wnt3a, Fgf8 and Notch pathways. Using conditional
alleles of Ctnnb1 (beta-catenin), we show that the canonical Wnt3a/beta-catenin
pathway is necessary for molecular oscillations in all three signaling pathways
but does not function as an integral component of the oscillator. Small,
irregular somites persist in abnormally posterior locations in the absence of
beta-catenin and cycling clock gene expression. Conversely, Notch pathway genes
continue to oscillate in the presence of stabilized beta-catenin but boundary
formation is delayed and anteriorized. Together, these results suggest that the
Wnt3a/beta-catenin pathway is permissive but not instructive for oscillating
clock genes and that it controls the anterior-posterior positioning of boundary
formation in the presomitic mesoderm (PSM). The Wnt3a/beta-catenin pathway does
so by regulating the activation of the segment boundary determination genes Mesp2
and Ripply2 in the PSM through the activation of the Notch ligand Dll1 and the
mesodermal transcription factors T and Tbx6. Spatial restriction of Ripply2 to
the anterior PSM is ensured by the Wnt3a/beta-catenin-mediated repression of
Ripply2 in posterior PSM. Thus, Wnt3a regulates somitogenesis by activating a
network of interacting target genes that promote mesodermal fates, activate the
segmentation clock, and position boundary determination genes in the anterior
PSM.

PMID: 18045842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 15;313(2):816-28. Epub 2007 Oct 23.

Tbx6, Thylacine1, and E47 synergistically activate bowline expression in Xenopus 
somitogenesis.

Hitachi K(1), Kondow A, Danno H, Inui M, Uchiyama H, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

T-box factor, Tbx6, is a prerequisite for somite segmentation in vertebrates. We 
recently identified a negative regulator of Tbx6, Bowline, which represses the
expression of genes involved in somite segmentation by suppressing the
transcriptional activity of Tbx6. According to this function, bowline gene
expression is restricted to the most anterior presomitic mesoderm where the
somite segmentation program terminates, although it remains unclear how bowline
expression is activated. To address this, we investigated the cis-regulatory
region of bowline. Measuring luciferase activity driven by the bowline promoter, 
we found that Tbx6, Thylacine1, and E47 synergistically activate bowline
expression in vitro. We also found that Tbx6, Thylacine1, and E47 are
spatiotemporally sufficient to induce bowline expression in Xenopus
somitogenesis. Our findings indicated that besides being a negative regulator of 
Tbx6, bowline itself is also regulated by Tbx6, suggesting the negative feedback 
loop of Tbx6-Bowline in the termination step of somite segmentation.

PMID: 18035347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. EMBO Rep. 2007 Aug;8(8):784-9. Epub 2007 Jul 13.

Expression of Msgn1 in the presomitic mesoderm is controlled by synergism of WNT 
signalling and Tbx6.

Wittler L(1), Shin EH, Grote P, Kispert A, Beckers A, Gossler A, Werber M,
Herrmann BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

The vertebral column and skeletal muscles of vertebrates are derived from the
paraxial mesoderm, which is laid down initially as two stripes of mesenchymal
cells alongside the neural tube and subsequently segmented. Previous work has
shown that the wingless-type MMTV integration site family (WNT), fibroblast
growth factor- and Delta-Notch signalling pathways control presomitic mesoderm
(psm) formation and segmentation. Here, we show that the expression of mesogenin 
1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, which is essential for psm
maturation, is regulated by synergism between WNT signalling and the T-box 6
transcription factor, involving a feed-forward control mechanism. These findings 
emphasize the crucial role of WNT signalling in the control of psm formation,
maturation and segmentation.

PMCID: PMC1978083
PMID: 17668009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Pigment Cell Res. 2007 Aug;20(4):279-87.

T-box factors: targeting to chromatin and interaction with the histone H3
N-terminal tail.

Demay F(1), Bilican B, Rodriguez M, Carreira S, Pontecorvi M, Ling Y, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Signalling and Development Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The
Chart, Oxted, Surrey, UK.

T-box transcription factors play a crucial role in development where they are
implicated in patterning and cell fate decisions. Tbx2 and Tbx3 have also been
implicated in several cancers including melanoma, and can act as antisenescence
factors through their ability to repress p19(ARF) and p21(CIP1) expression.
Although several target genes for T-box factors have been identified, it is
unknown whether this family of proteins can bind chromatin, a property that would
facilitate the epigenetic reprogramming that occurs in both development and
cancer progression. Here, we show that Tbx2 has the potential to recognize
mitotic chromatin in a DNA-dependent fashion, can interact specifically with the 
histone H3 N-terminal tail, a property shared with Tbx4, Tbx5 and Tbx6, and can
also recognize nucleosomal DNA, with binding to nucleosomes being antagonized by 
the presence of the histone tails. Strikingly, in vivo Tbx2 co-localization with 
pericentric heterochromatin appears to be regulated and ectopic expression of
Tbx2 leads to severe mitotic defects. Taken together our results suggest that
Tbx2, and most likely other members of the T-box family, are able to target
chromatin and may indicate a role for the T-box factors in epigenetic
reprogramming events.

PMID: 17630961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 31;282(35):25748-59. Epub 2007 Jun 21.

Transcriptional repression by the T-box proteins Tbx18 and Tbx15 depends on
Groucho corepressors.

Farin HF(1), Bussen M, Schmidt MK, Singh MK, Schuster-Gossler K, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30625
Hannover, Germany.

Tbox18 (Tbx18) and Tbox15 (Tbx15) encode a closely related pair of
vertebrate-specific T-box (Tbx) transcription factors. Functional analyses in the
mouse have proven the requirement of Tbx15 in skin and skeletal development and
of Tbx18 in the formation of the vertebral column, the ureter, and the posterior 
pole of the heart. Despite the accumulation of genetic data concerning the
embryological roles of these genes, it is currently unclear how Tbx18 and Tbx15
exert their function on the molecular level. Here, we have initiated a molecular 
analysis of Tbx18 and Tbx15 proteins and have characterized functional domains
for nuclear localization, DNA binding, and transcriptional modulation. We show
that both proteins homo- and heterodimerize, bind to various combinations of T
half-sites, and repress transcription in a Groucho-dependent manner. Competition 
with activating T-box proteins may constitute one mode of action as we show that 
Tbx18 interacts with Gata4 and Nkx2-5 and competes Tbx5-mediated activation of
the cardiac Natriuretic peptide precursor type a-promoter and that ectopic
expression of Tbx18 down-regulates Tbx6-activated Delta-like 1 expression in the 
somitic mesoderm in vivo.

PMID: 17584735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Aug 10;359(4):959-64. Epub 2007 Jun 11.

Bowline mediates association of the transcriptional corepressor XGrg-4 with Tbx6 
during somitogenesis in Xenopus.

Kondow A(1), Hitachi K, Okabayashi K, Hayashi N, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

Prior to the somite segmentation, the cells in the anterior presomitic mesoderm
(PSM) express a set of genes that is required for defining the segmental border
and polarity of the prospective somite. However, little is known how the
expression of these genes is repressed upon segmentation. Here we report that
Bowline, an associate protein of the transcriptional corepressor XGrg-4,
repressed Tbx6 dependent transcription of Thylacine1 by mediating interaction of 
Tbx6 with XGrg-4 in Xenopus laevis. In bowline-deficient embryos, segmental
border formation was disturbed, and expression of Thylacine1, X-Delta-2, and
bowline expanded anteriorly. Tbx6-dependent transcription of Thylacine1 was
suppressed by Bowline, together with XGrg-4. We also found that Bowline mediated 
the interaction of Tbx6 and XGrg-4. Based on our findings, we conclude that a
part of the transcriptional repression at the anterior end of the PSM is caused
by Bowline mediated transcriptional repression of Tbx6-dependent gene expression 
in X. laevis.

PMID: 17577580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Stem Cells. 2007 Sep;25(9):2200-5. Epub 2007 May 31.

Differentiation in vivo of cardiac committed human embryonic stem cells in
postmyocardial infarcted rats.

Tomescot A(1), Leschik J, Bellamy V, Dubois G, Messas E, Bruneval P, Desnos M,
Hagège AA, Amit M, Itskovitz J, Menasché P, Pucéat M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale/Evry University
Unité Mixte de Recherche 861, I-Stem, Association Française contre les
Myopathies, 5, rue Desbrières, Evry 91030, France.

Human embryonic stem (HES) cells can give rise to cardiomyocytes in vitro.
However, whether undifferentiated HES cells also feature a myocardial
regenerative capacity after in vivo engraftment has not been established yet. We 
compared two HES cell lines (HUES-1 and I6) that were specified toward a cardiac 
lineage by exposure to bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP2) and SU5402, a
fibroblast growth factor receptor inhibitor. Real-time polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) revealed that the cardiogenic inductive factor turned on expression of
mesodermal and cardiac genes (Tbx6, Isl1, FoxH1, Nkx2.5, Mef2c, and alpha-actin).
Thirty immunosuppressed rats underwent coronary artery ligation and, 2 weeks
later, were randomized and received in-scar injections of either culture medium
(controls) or BMP2 (+/-SU5402)-treated HES cells. After 2 months, human cells
were detected by anti-human lamin immunostaining, and their cardiomyocytic
differentiation was evidenced by their expression of cardiac markers by reverse
transcription-PCR and immunofluorescence using an anti-beta myosin antibody. No
teratoma was observed in hearts or any other organ of the body. The ability of
cardiac-specified HES cells to differentiate along the cardiomyogenic pathway
following transplantation into infarcted myocardium raises the hope that these
cells might become effective candidates for myocardial regeneration.

PMID: 17540853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Int J Dev Biol. 2007;51(3):191-200.

Retinoic acid is required for specification of the ventral eye field and for
Rathke's pouch in the avian embryo.

Maden M(1), Blentic A, Reijntjes S, Seguin S, Gale E, Graham A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, London, UK. 
malcolm.maden@kcl.ac.uk

We have investigated the role of retinoic acid (RA) in eye development using the 
vitamin A deficient quail model system, which overcomes problems of retinoic acid
synthesising enzyme redundancy in the embryo. In the absence of retinoic acid,
the ventral optic stalk and ventral retina are missing, whereas the dorsal optic 
stalk and dorsal retina develop appropriately. Other ocular abnormalities
observed were a thinner retina and the lack of differentiation of the lens. In an
attempt to explain this, we studied the expression of various dorsally and
ventrally expressed genes such as Pax2, Pax6, Tbx6, Vax2, Raldh1 and Raldh3 and
noted that they were unchanged in their expression patterns. In contrast, the RA 
catabolising enzymes Cyp26A1 and Cyp26B1 which are known to be RA-responsive were
not expressed at all in the developing eye. At much earlier stages, the
expression domain of Shh in the prechordal plate was reduced, as was Nkx2.1 and
we suggest a model whereby the eye field is specified according to the
concentration of SHH protein that is present. We also describe another organ,
Rathke's pouch which fails to develop in the absence of retinoic acid. We
attribute this to the down-regulation of Bmp2, Shh and Fgf8 which are known to be
involved in the induction of this structure.

PMID: 17486539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Dev Dyn. 2007 Feb;236(2):512-7.

BMP type I receptor ALK2 is essential for proper patterning at late gastrulation 
during mouse embryogenesis.

Komatsu Y(1), Scott G, Nagy A, Kaartinen V, Mishina Y.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Developmental Biology Group, Laboratory of Reproductive and
Developmental Toxicology, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, 
North Carolina 27709, USA.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) have multiple functions during vertebrate
development. Previously, it was shown that BMP type I receptor ALK2 (also known
as ACVRI, ActRI, or ActRIA) was important for normal mouse gastrulation by
deleting exon 4 or exon 5 of Alk2. Recently, flanking exon 7 by loxP sites
generated a conditional allele for Alk2. To assess whether the deletion of exon 7
causes functional null of ALK2, and does not produce a dominant negative form or 
a partially functional form of ALK2, we performed a comparative analysis between 
Alk2 homozygous mutant embryos with an exon 5 deletion (Alk2(Delta5/Delta5)) and 
embryos with an exon 7 deletion (Alk2(Delta7/Delta7)). Both Alk2(Delta5/Delta5)
and Alk2(Delta7/Delta7) mutants showed identical morphological gastrulation
defects. Histological examinations and molecular marker analyses revealed
identical abnormal gastrulation phenotypes in Alk2(Delta5/Delta5) and
Alk2(Delta7/Delta7) mutants. Although Fgf8 was expressed in the primitive streak 
of Alk2(Delta5/Delta5) and Alk2(Delta7/Delta7) mutants, Brachyury, Wnt3a, and
Tbx6 were dramatically downregulated in Alk2(Delta5/Delta5) and
Alk2(Delta7/Delta7) mutants. These results indicate that deletion of exon 7 for
Alk2 leads to a functionally null mutation in vivo, and Alk2 is crucial for
sustaining the proper gastrulation events in early mouse embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1780255
PMID: 17117439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Dev Biol. 2006;50(8):681-9.

Xtbx6r, a novel T-box gene expressed in the paraxial mesoderm, has anterior
neural-inducing activity.

Yabe S(1), Tazumi S, Yokoyama J, Uchiyama H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Science, Yokohama City University, Kanazawa-Ku, 
Yokohama, Japan.

T-box proteins are important transcriptional regulators in animal development. We
searched the Xenopus laevis expressed sequence tag (EST) database using zebrafish
tbx24 (Ztbx24) as a query and found a sequence. We then obtained corresponding
clones from a neurula cDNA library. This novel gene has a T-box showing 53%
homology with Xenopus laevis tbx6 (Xtbx6) and 51% with Ztbx24 at the amino acid
level and is relatively close to Xtbx6 indicated by alignment analysis. In situ
hybridization showed that it is expressed in the paraxial mesoderm in the caudal 
region in a very similar manner to Xtbx6, with a slight difference in that the
former is emphasized more dorsally and has a more restricted distribution along
the antero-posterior axis. From these results we named this gene Xtbx6r
(tbx6-related). Xtbx6r or Xtbx6r-EnR, when overexpressed in animal caps, induced 
anterior neural markers but not mesodermal markers. In contrast, Xtbx6r-VP16,
Xtbx6 and Ztbx24 induced various mesodermal markers. These results indicate that 
Xtbx6r is a transcriptional repressor and has activity different from that of
Xtbx6 or Ztbx24. Xtbx6r induced Otx2, XAG and Pax6 in animal caps. This activity 
differed from that of Xbra-EnR or Xtbx6-EnR, suggesting that some differences in 
biological activity exist among the tested repressor-type T-box genes. Depletion 
of Xtbx6r by antisense morpholino oligo produced curved embryos, but did not
affect expressions of MyoD, Myf5, XWnt8 or thylacine2, nor inhibited muscle
differentiation or segmentation. The results of knockdown and overexpression
experiments suggest that Xtbx6r is involved in some morphogenesis in the paraxial
mesoderm.

PMID: 17051478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cell Res. 2006 Sep;16(9):771-9.

Xenopus Tbx6 mediates posterior patterning via activation of Wnt and FGF
signalling.

Lou X(1), Fang P, Li S, Hu RY, Kuerner KM, Steinbeisser H, Ding X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

In vertebrates, the patterning of anterior-posterior (AP) axis is a fundamental
process during embryogenesis. Wnt and FGF signalling pathways play important
roles in regulating the patterning of embryo AP axis. Mouse Tbx6 encodes a
transcription factor that has been demonstrated to be involved in the
specification of the posterior tissue in mouse embryonic body. Here, we prove
that morpholino-induced knockdown of XTbx6 impairs posterior development,
indicating the requirement of XTbx6 in this process. Meanwhile, gain of XTbx6
function is sufficient to induce ectopic posterior structures in Xenopus embryos.
Furthermore, XTbx6 activates the expression of Xwnt8 and FGF8, which are two
mediators of posterior development, suggesting a mechanism by which XTbx6
modulates posterior patterning via Wnt and FGF signalling pathway activation.

PMID: 16953215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 7;103(10):3651-6. Epub 2006 Feb 27.

Tbx6-mediated Notch signaling controls somite-specific Mesp2 expression.

Yasuhiko Y(1), Haraguchi S, Kitajima S, Takahashi Y, Kanno J, Saga Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Toxicology Division, National Institute of Health
Sciences, Kamiyoga 1-18-1, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 158-8501, Japan.

Mesp2 is a transcription factor that plays fundamental roles in somitogenesis,
and its expression is strictly restricted to the anterior presomitic mesoderm
just before segment border formation. The transcriptional on-off cycle is linked 
to the segmentation clock. In our current study, we show that a T-box
transcription factor, Tbx6, is essential for Mesp2 expression. Tbx6 directly
binds to the Mesp2 gene upstream region and mediates Notch signaling, and
subsequent Mesp2 transcription, in the anterior presomitic mesoderm. Our data
therefore reveal that a mechanism, via Tbx6-dependent Notch signaling, acts on
the transcriptional regulation of Mesp2. This finding uncovers an additional
component of the interacting network of various signaling pathways that are
involved in somitogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1450137
PMID: 16505380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Dev Biol. 2006 Feb 15;290(2):470-81. Epub 2005 Dec 15.

FGF8, Wnt8 and Myf5 are target genes of Tbx6 during anteroposterior specification
in Xenopus embryo.

Li HY(1), Bourdelas A, Carron C, Gomez C, Boucaut JC, Shi DL.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Biologie Expérimentale, Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement,
CNRS UMR 7622, Université Pierre et Marie-Curie, 9 quai Saint-Bernard, 75005
Paris, France.

The T-box transcription factor Tbx6 is required for somite formation and
loss-of-function or reduced activity of Tbx6 result in absence of posterior
paraxial mesoderm or disorganized somites, but how it is involved in a regulatory
hierarchy during Xenopus early development is not clear. We show here that Tbx6
is expressed in the lateral and ventral mesoderm of early gastrula, and it is
necessary and sufficient to directly and indirectly regulate the expression of a 
subset of early mesodermal and endodermal genes. Ectopic expression of Tbx6
inhibits early neuroectodermal gene expression by strongly inducing the
expression of posterior mesodermal genes, and expands the mesoderm territory at
the expense of neuroectoderm. Conversely, overexpression of a dominant negative
Tbx6 mutant in the ventral mesoderm inhibits the expression of several mesodermal
genes and results in neural induction in a dose-dependent manner. Using a
hormone-inducible form of Tbx6, we have identified FGF8, Xwnt8 and XMyf5 as
immediate early responsive genes of Tbx6, and the induction of these genes by
Tbx6 is independent of Xbra and VegT. These target genes act downstream and
mediate the function of Tbx6 in anteroposterior specification. Our results
therefore identify a regulatory cascade governed by Tbx6 in the specification of 
posterior mesoderm during Xenopus early development.

PMID: 16343478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Development. 2005 Nov;132(21):4811-8. Epub 2005 Oct 5.

Uncoupling heart cell specification and migration in the simple chordate Ciona
intestinalis.

Davidson B(1), Shi W, Levine M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Division of Genetics and
Development, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
bandl@berkeley.edu

The bHLH transcription factor Mesp has an essential but ambiguous role in early
chordate heart development. Here, we employ the genetic and morphological
simplicity of the basal chordate Ciona intestinalis to elucidate Mesp regulation 
and function. Characterization of a minimal cardiac enhancer for the Ciona Mesp
gene demonstrated direct activation by the T-box transcription factor Tbx6c. The 
Mesp enhancer was fused to GFP, permitting high-resolution visualization of heart
cells as they migrate and divide. The enhancer was also used to drive targeted
expression of an activator form of Mesp, which induces heart formation without
migration. We discuss the implications of Tbx6-Mesp interactions for the
evolution of cardiac mesoderm in invertebrates and vertebrates.

PMID: 16207759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Dev Dyn. 2005 Oct;234(2):332-8.

Involvement of SIP1 in positioning of somite boundaries in the mouse embryo.

Maruhashi M(1), Van De Putte T, Huylebroeck D, Kondoh H, Higashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Periodical production of somites provides an excellent model system for
understanding genesis of metameric structures underlying embryonic development.
This study reports production of somites with roughly half rostro-caudal length
in homozygous Sip1 (Smad-interacting protein 1) knockout mouse embryos. This
altered periodicity of somitogenesis is caused by the rostral expansion of the
expression domain of genes involved in the maintenance of unsegmented state of
paraxial mesoderm, e.g., Fgf8, Wnt3a, Dll3, and Tbx6. This is accompanied by the 
rostral extension of oscillatory gene expression such as L-fng, Hes7, and Dll1,
and the rostrally shifted termination of Raldh2 expression that continues from
the anterior embryonic side. The phenotype of Sip1-/- embryo introduces a new
molecular component SIP1 in positioning of somite boundaries, and provides
support for the current "clock and wavefront" model.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16127714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. BMC Dev Biol. 2005 Aug 18;5:17.

Inactivation of the Huntington's disease gene (Hdh) impairs anterior streak
formation and early patterning of the mouse embryo.

Woda JM(1), Calzonetti T, Hilditch-Maguire P, Duyao MP, Conlon RA, MacDonald ME.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, CNY-149,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. jwoda@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Huntingtin, the HD gene encoded protein mutated by polyglutamine
expansion in Huntington's disease, is required in extraembryonic tissues for
proper gastrulation, implicating its activities in nutrition or patterning of the
developing embryo. To test these possibilities, we have used whole mount in situ 
hybridization to examine embryonic patterning and morphogenesis in homozygous
Hdh(ex4/5) huntingtin deficient embryos.
RESULTS: In the absence of huntingtin, expression of nutritive genes appears
normal but E7.0-7.5 embryos exhibit a unique combination of patterning defects.
Notable are a shortened primitive streak, absence of a proper node and diminished
production of anterior streak derivatives. Reduced Wnt3a, Tbx6 and Dll1
expression signify decreased paraxial mesoderm and reduced Otx2 expression and
lack of headfolds denote a failure of head development. In addition, genes
initially broadly expressed are not properly restricted to the posterior, as
evidenced by the ectopic expression of Nodal, Fgf8 and Gsc in the epiblast and T 
(Brachyury) and Evx1 in proximal mesoderm derivatives. Despite impaired posterior
restriction and anterior streak deficits, overall anterior/posterior polarity is 
established. A single primitive streak forms and marker expression shows that the
anterior epiblast and anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) are specified.
CONCLUSION: Huntingtin is essential in the early patterning of the embryo for
formation of the anterior region of the primitive streak, and for down-regulation
of a subset of dynamic growth and transcription factor genes. These findings
provide fundamental starting points for identifying the novel cellular and
molecular activities of huntingtin in the extraembryonic tissues that govern
normal anterior streak development. This knowledge may prove to be important for 
understanding the mechanism by which the dominant polyglutamine expansion in
huntingtin determines the loss of neurons in Huntington's disease.

PMCID: PMC1208873
PMID: 16109169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Genesis. 2005 Jul;42(3):193-202.

Dll1 is a downstream target of Tbx6 in the paraxial mesoderm.

White PH(1), Chapman DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15260, USA.

Tbx6 is a member of the T-box family of transcription factors. In the mouse, Tbx6
is expressed in the primitive streak, tail bud, and presomitic mesoderm and is
essential for the specification of posterior paraxial mesoderm; in its absence,
posterior somites are replaced by ectopic neural tubes. Analysis of embryos
expressing reduced levels of Tbx6 also revealed that it is required for the
correct patterning of the somites as well as their initial specification. As a
first step toward identifying downstream targets of Tbx6, we examined the DNA
binding properties of Tbx6 and identified a Tbx6 consensus binding site.
Previously, we have shown that expression of Dll1, which encodes a Notch ligand, 
is lost in the Tbx6 mutant and that Tbx6 and Dll1 genetically interact,
indicating that Dll1 may be a direct target of Tbx6 in the paraxial mesoderm. We 
uncovered four putative Tbx6 binding sites within a Dll1 paraxial mesoderm
enhancer and show that Tbx6 can bind two of these sites in vitro. Altogether,
these results lend further support for Dll1 being a direct target of Tbx6 in the 
presomitic mesoderm.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15986483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Genesis. 2005 Jun;42(2):61-70.

Regulation of Tbx6 expression by Notch signaling.

White PH(1), Farkas DR, Chapman DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15260, USA.

Somites are the first overt sign of segmentation in the vertebrate embryo and
form from bilateral strips of paraxial mesoderm. Paraxial mesoderm arises from
the primitive streak; it then migrates laterally and comes to lie on both sides
of the neural tube. In the mouse, the T-box transcription factor Tbx6 is required
for both somite formation and patterning. Tbx6 expression corresponds both
temporally and spatially to somite formation, with expression in the primitive
streak and presomitic mesoderm. Its expression in the latter could simply be
explained by maintenance following its initial activation in the primitive
streak. Alternatively, its expression in the presomitic mesoderm may be
contributed by separate regulatory elements possibly under the control of
different signals. We have begun to investigate how Tbx6 expression is controlled
during development using a transgenic approach to identify the cis-acting
regulatory regions. We show that it is possible to separate an element required
for presomitic mesoderm expression from that driving expression in the primitive 
streak. Further, we show that a binding site for the Notch transcription factor
RBP-Jkappa is necessary for Tbx6 presomitic mesoderm enhancer activity,
indicating that Notch signaling is upstream of Tbx6 in the pathway directing
somite formation and patterning.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15864811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Dev Growth Differ. 2005 Apr;47(3):173-85.

Both the functional specificity and autoregulative activity of two ascidian T-box
genes HrBra and HrTbx6 are likely to be mediated by the DNA-binding domain.

Takahashi H(1), Mitani Y, Satoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

T-box genes encode a family of transcription factors having conserved DNA-binding
domains and diverged transcription regulatory domains, and each family member
shows a specific expression pattern and plays a specific and crucial role in
animal development. Two fundamental questions to be answered are whether the
T-box gene functional specificity is located in the DNA-binding domain or in the 
transcription regulatory domain and how the specific expression of T-box genes is
controlled. In the ascidian Halocynthia roretzi, Brachyury (HrBra) is expressed
only in notochord cells while Tbx6 (HrTbx6) is expressed in muscle cells. In the 
present study, we made chimeric constructs of the two genes to determine the
above mentioned questions. Our results suggest that the functional specificity of
these two ascidian T-box genes is associated with the DNA-binding domain but not 
with the transcription regulatory domain. The 5' flanking region of both HrBra
and HrTbx6 contains T-protein binding motifs near their minimal promoters that
are associated with the autoregulative activation of these genes. Using the
chimeric constructs, we also determined whether the autoregulative activity is
mediated by the DNA-binding domain or by the transcription activation domain of
the gene products. Our results suggest that the autoregulative activity of these 
two ascidian T-box genes is also mediated by the DNA-binding domain, not by the
transcription activation domain of the encoded proteins.

PMID: 15840002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Jun;76(6):950-66. Epub 2005 Apr 13.

Candidate-gene screening and association analysis at the autism-susceptibility
locus on chromosome 16p: evidence of association at GRIN2A and ABAT.

Barnby G(1), Abbott A, Sykes N, Morris A, Weeks DE, Mott R, Lamb J, Bailey AJ,
Monaco AP; International Molecular Genetics Study of Autism Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

Autism is a highly heritable neurodevelopmental disorder whose underlying genetic
causes have yet to be identified. To date, there have been eight genome screens
for autism, two of which identified a putative susceptibility locus on chromosome
16p. In the present study, 10 positional candidate genes that map to 16p11-13
were examined for coding variants: A2BP1, ABAT, BFAR, CREBBP, EMP2, GRIN2A,
MRTF-B, SSTR5, TBX6, and UBN1. Screening of all coding and regulatory regions by 
denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography identified seven nonsynonymous 
changes. Five of these mutations were found to cosegregate with autism, but the
mutations are not predicted to have deleterious effects on protein structure and 
are unlikely to represent significant etiological variants. Selected variants
from candidate genes were genotyped in the entire International Molecular
Genetics Study of Autism Consortium collection of 239 multiplex families and were
tested for association with autism by use of the pedigree disequilibrium test.
Additionally, genotype frequencies were compared between 239 unrelated affected
individuals and 192 controls. Patterns of linkage disequilibrium were
investigated, and the transmission of haplotypes across candidate genes was
tested for association. Evidence of single-marker association was found for
variants in ABAT, CREBBP, and GRIN2A. Within these genes, 12 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were subsequently genotyped in 91 autism trios (one affected
individual and two unaffected parents), and the association was replicated within
GRIN2A (Fisher's exact test, P<.0001). Logistic regression analysis of SNP data
across GRIN2A and ABAT showed a trend toward haplotypic differences between cases
and controls.

PMCID: PMC1196454
PMID: 15830322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Gene Expr Patterns. 2005 Feb;5(3):429-37.

Macho-1 functions as transcriptional activator for muscle formation in embryos of
the ascidian Halocynthia roretzi.

Sawada K(1), Fukushima Y, Nishida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, 1-1
Machikaneyama-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan.

Various kinds of maternal factor that play crucial roles in embryogenesis are
present and localized in the ascidian egg cytoplasm. Localized maternal mRNA of
the macho-1 gene is a muscle determinant in the embryo of the ascidian
Halocynthia roretzi. The macho-1 protein has a zinc-finger domain and accumulates
in nuclei, being expected to function as a DNA-binding transcription factor. In
the present study, we show that macho-1 is, indeed, a DNA-binding transcriptional
activator, and directly or indirectly regulates the expression of six downstream 
genes. Macho-1 was required and sufficient for expression of the muscle actin,
myosin, calcium transporter, myogenic factor, Tbx6, and snail genes, whose
expression is initiated in muscle blastomeres at the cleavage stages in normal
embryos. Furthermore, when macho-1 conjugated with a transcription-repression
domain of Drosophila engrailed (En(R)) was expressed in embryos, it repressed
expression of these downstream genes. In contrast, expression of macho-1 fused
with a transcription-activation domain of VP16 caused ectopic expression of these
muscle genes in non-muscle blastomeres. PCR-assisted binding-site selection and
gel-retardation assay showed that macho-1 protein binds to the consensus target
sequence (TGGGTGGTC) for GLI/Zic-family proteins, and that three guanine residues
with underlines are crucial for the specificity. The 5' promoter region of the
muscle actin gene supported expression of the reporter gene only in muscle cells 
at late stage. By contrast, when the target sequence was added to the promoter,
it well reproduced early expression of muscle actin at the cleavage stage,
indicating that macho-1 can recognize the target sequence in vivo. In conclusion,
the maternal muscle determinant macho-1 functions as a transcription factor that 
positively regulates gene expression for muscle formation in ascidian embryos.

PMID: 15661650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Genes Dev. 2004 Nov 15;18(22):2712-7.

WNT signaling, in synergy with T/TBX6, controls Notch signaling by regulating
Dll1 expression in the presomitic mesoderm of mouse embryos.

Hofmann M(1), Schuster-Gossler K, Watabe-Rudolph M, Aulehla A, Herrmann BG,
Gossler A.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Immunobiology, Stübeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Notch signaling in the presomitic mesoderm (psm) is critical for somite formation
and patterning. Here, we show that WNT signals regulate transcription of the
Notch ligand Dll1 in the tailbud and psm. LEF/TCF factors cooperate with TBX6 to 
activate transcription from the Dll1 promoter in vitro. Mutating either T or
LEF/TCF sites in the Dll1 promoter abolishes reporter gene expression in vitro as
well as in the tail bud and psm of transgenic embryos. Our results indicate that 
WNT activity, in synergy with TBX6, regulates Dll1 transcription and thereby
controls Notch activity, somite formation, and patterning.

PMCID: PMC528888
PMID: 15545628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Dev Dyn. 2004 Aug;230(4):743-53.

T-box genes in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis: characterization of cDNAs and
spatial expression.

Takatori N(1), Hotta K, Mochizuki Y, Satoh G, Mitani Y, Satoh N, Satou Y,
Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto, Japan.

Members of the T-box family of transcription factors share an evolutionarily
conserved DNA-binding domain and play significant roles in various processes of
embryonic development. Vertebrate T-box genes are categorized into the following 
five major subfamilies (eight groups), depending on sequence similarities:
Brachyury, Tbx1 (Tbx1/10, Tbx15/18/22, Tbx20), Tbx2/3/4/5 (Tbx2/3 and Tbx4/5),
Tbx6, and Tbr/Eomes/TBX21. Ascidians are primitive chordates, and their tadpole
larva are considered to represent the simplified and basic body plan of
vertebrates. In addition, it has been revealed that the ascidian genome contains 
the basic ancestral complement of genes involved in development. The present
characterization of cDNAs and survey of the Ciona intestinalis draft genome
demonstrated that the Ciona genome contains a single copy gene for each of the
Brachyury, Tbx1/10, Tbx15/18/22, Tbx20, Tbx2/3, and Tbr/Eomes/TBX21 groups, and
at least three copies of the Tbx6 subfamily. Each of the Ciona T-box genes shows 
a characteristic expression pattern, although that of Tbx20 was not determined in
the present study. These results provide basic information that will be useful
for future studies of the function of each gene, genetic cascades of different
T-box genes, and genome-wide surveys of evolutionary changes in the T-box gene
structure and organization in this primitive chordate.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15254908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Development. 2004 Aug;131(15):3751-60. Epub 2004 Jul 7.

Combinatorial gene regulation by Bmp and Wnt in zebrafish posterior mesoderm
formation.

Szeto DP(1), Kimelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Box 357350, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 
98195-7350, USA.

Erratum in
    Development. 2004 Aug;131(6):4117.

Combinatorial signaling is an important mechanism that allows the embryo to
utilize overlapping signaling pathways to specify different territories. In
zebrafish, the Wnt and Bmp pathways interact to regulate the formation of the
posterior body. In order to understand how this works mechanistically, we have
identified tbx6 as a posterior mesodermal gene activated by both of these
signaling pathways. We isolated a genomic fragment from the tbx6 gene that
recapitulates the endogenous tbx6 expression, and used this to ask how the Bmp
and Wnt signaling pathways combine to regulate gene expression. We find that the 
tbx6 promoter utilizes distinct domains to integrate the signaling inputs from
each pathway, including multiple Tcf/LEF sites and a novel Bmp-response element. 
Surprisingly, we found that overexpression of either signaling pathway can
activate the tbx6 promoter and the endogenous gene, whereas inputs from both
pathways are required for the normal pattern of expression. These results
demonstrate that both Bmp and Wnt are present at submaximal levels, which allows 
the pathways to function combinatorially. We present a model in which overlapping
Wnt and Bmp signals in the ventrolateral region activate the expression of tbx6
and other posterior mesodermal genes, leading to the formation of posterior
structures.

PMID: 15240553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic. 2003 Oct;2(3):224-33.

The comparative genomics of T-box genes.

Minguillon C(1), Logan M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, NIMR, London, UK.

T-box genes are defined by the presence of a conserved sequence, the so-called
T-box; this codes for the T-domain, which is involved in DNA-binding and protein 
dimerisation. Members of this gene family have been found in all metazoans, from 
diploblasts to humans, and mutations in T-box gene family members in humans have 
been linked to several congenital disorders. Sequencing of the complete genomes
of a range of invertebrate and vertebrate species has allowed the classification 
of individual T-box genes into five subfamilies: Brachyury, T-brain1, Tbx1, Tbx2 
and Tbx6. This review will largely focus on T-box genes identified in organisms
whose genomes have been fully sequenced, emphasising how comparative studies of
the T-box gene family will help to reveal the roles of these genes during
development and in the adult.

PMID: 15239925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2004 Jun;36(6):390-6.

Multiple signaling pathways control Tbx6 expression during Xenopus myogenesis.

Fang PF(1), Hu RY, He XY, Ding XY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, and Institute of Biochemistry and
Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China.

Tbx6 is critical for somite specification and myogenesis initiation. It has been 
shown that Activin/Nodal, VegT/Nodal, FGF, and BMP signaling pathways are
involved early in specifying mesoderm or later in patterning mesoderm, and Xnot
plays roles in setting up the boundary between notochord and paraxial mesoderm.
In this study, we introduce the dominant negative form of above genes into
embryos to evaluate if they are responsible for regulating Tbx6 expression. The
results show that: (1) Activin/Nodal and VegT/Nodal signals are necessary for
both initiation and maintenance of Tbx6 expression, and Nodal is sufficient to
induce ectopic Tbx6 expression; (2) FGF signal is necessary for the initiation
and maintenance of Tbx6, but it is not sufficient to induce Tbx6 expression; (3) 
BMP is also necessary for the expression of Tbx6, and the induction of Tbx6
expression by BMP is dose dependent; (4) Xnot has no effect on the expression of 
Tbx6. Our results suggest that several signaling pathways are involved in
regulating Tbx6 expression, and pave the route to reveal the molecular mechanism 
of initiating myogenesis.

PMID: 15188053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Dev Biol. 2004 Jan 15;265(2):355-68.

Drosophila Tbx6-related gene, Dorsocross, mediates high levels of Dpp and Scw
signal required for the development of amnioserosa and wing disc primordium.

Hamaguchi T(1), Yabe S, Uchiyama H, Murakami R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Biology, and Informatics, Yamaguchi University,
Yamaguchi 753-8512, Japan.

Regional differentiation along the dorsoventral (DV) axis of the Drosophila
embryo primarily depends on a graded BMP signaling activity generated by
Decapentaplegic (Dpp) and Screw (Scw). We have identified triplicated Dpp and Scw
target genes Dorsocross1, 2 and 3 (Doc1, 2, 3) that have a conserved T-box domain
related to the vertebrate Tbx6 subfamily and act redundantly to induce dorsal
structures. Doc genes are expressed in the dorsal region in the early blastoderm.
After gastrulation, newly expressed Doc appears in a segmental pattern in the
ectoderm. This expression correlates spatially with the second phase of Dpp
expression in the ectoderm. Doc expression in the early blastoderm is abolished
in either dpp or scw mutant embryos, whereas the ectodermal segmented expression 
depends only on Dpp. Inactivation of Doc genes with RNAi dramatically affected
the development of amnioserosa and wing disc primordia, both of which depend on
high levels of BMP signaling, although leg disc primordium, which depends on low 
levels of BMP, remained intact. Doc1 mRNA expressed in Xenopus embryos induced
ventral mesoderm, suppressed activin-induced events and induced Xvent genes,
which are analogous to the effects of native Tbx6 and its upstream regulator,
BMP-4. These results suggest that the Tbx6 subfamily act in the BMP signaling
pathway required for embryonic patterning in both animals.

PMID: 14732398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cell. 2003 Nov 26;115(5):603-13.

Churchill, a zinc finger transcriptional activator, regulates the transition
between gastrulation and neurulation.

Sheng G(1), dos Reis M, Stern CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Cell. 2003 Nov 26;115(5):510-2.

Gastrulation generates mesoderm and endoderm from embryonic epiblast; soon after,
the neural plate is established within the epiblast-both events require FGF
signaling. We describe a zinc finger transcriptional activator, Churchill (ChCh),
which acts as a switch between different roles of FGF. FGF induces ChCh slowly;
this activates Smad-interacting-protein-1 (Sip1), which blocks further induction 
of the mesoderm markers brachyury and Tbx6L by FGF. ChCh is first expressed as
cells stop migrating through the primitive streak, and we show that it regulates 
cell ingression. We propose a simple mechanism by which FGF sensitizes cells to
BMP signals. These results reveal that neural induction requires cessation of
mesoderm formation at the midline in addition to the decision between epidermis
and neural plate.

PMID: 14651851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mech Dev. 2003 Jul;120(7):837-47.

Critical role for Tbx6 in mesoderm specification in the mouse embryo.

Chapman DL(1), Cooper-Morgan A, Harrelson Z, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, 701 West 168th
Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Tbx6 is a member of the T-box family of transcription factor genes. Two mutant
alleles of this gene establish that Tbx6 is involved in both the specification
and patterning of the somites along the entire length of the embryo. The null
allele, Tbx6(tm1Pa), causes abnormal patterning of the cervical somites and
improper specification of more posterior paraxial mesoderm, such that it forms
ectopic neural tubes. In this study, we use this allele to further investigate
the mechanism of action of the Tbx6 gene and investigate possible genetic
interactions. We have tested the developmental and differentiation potential of
Tbx6(tm1Pa)/Tbx6(tm1Pa) cells in ectopic sites, in vitro, and in chimeras in
vivo. We have also documented cell proliferation and cell death in mutant tail
buds in an attempt to explain the mechanism of tail bud enlargement in the Tbx6
mutant embryos. Our results indicate specific developmental restrictions on the
differentiation of posterior cells lacking Tbx6, once they have traversed the
primitive streak, but no restrictions in differentiation of anterior somites, or 
of Tbx6 null embryonic stem (ES) cells. We further demonstrate that Tbx6 null ES 
cells fail to populate posterior somites in chimeric embryos. To discover whether
different T-box proteins interact on the same down stream targets in areas of
expression overlap, we have explored potential interactions between Tbx6 and T
(Brachyury) in genetic crosses. Our results reveal that the T(Wis) mutation is
epistatic to the Tbx6(tm1Pa) mutation and that there is no apparent genetic
interaction. However, homozygosity for Tbx6(tm1Pa) and heterozygosity for T(Wis) 
mutation shows a combinatorial interaction at the phenotypic level.

PMID: 12915233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Dev Genes Evol. 2003 Oct;213(10):519-22. Epub 2003 Aug 8.

The evolutionary relationships of zebrafish genes tbx6, tbx16/spadetail and mga.

Lardelli M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for the Molecular Genetics of Development and Discipline of Genetics,
School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide,
SA 5005, Australia. michael.lardelli@adelaide.edu.au

The T-box (Tbx) genes encode a family of transcription factors required for
development of vertebrate embryos. In an attempt to discover human orthologues of
the zebrafish (Danio rerio) tbx6 and tbx16/spadetail genes, we found that the
most similar human (Homo sapiens) gene is the orthologue of mouse (Mus musculus) 
Mga (MAX gene associated). We have identified the zebrafish orthologue of Mga
using analyses of sequence similarity and the orthologies of syntenic genes.
Zebrafish mga maps close to dtk (developmental receptor tyrosine kinase), the
orthologue of human TYRO3 (TYRO3 protein tyrosine kinase). Like its human and
mouse orthologues, zebrafish mga lacks the three conserved introns within the
T-box coding sequences that are characteristic of the vertebrate T-box gene
family. This suggests that these genes are derived from an ancient reverse
transcription event. The human genome does not appear to possess orthologues of
zebrafish tbx6 or tbx16/spadetail.

PMID: 12908107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Aug 5;100(16):9410-5. Epub 2003 Jul 25.

An interacting network of T-box genes directs gene expression and fate in the
zebrafish mesoderm.

Goering LM(1), Hoshijima K, Hug B, Bisgrove B, Kispert A, Grunwald DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, UT 84112, USA.

T-box genes encode transcription factors that play critical roles in generating
the vertebrate body plan. In many developmental fields, multiple T-box genes are 
expressed in overlapping domains, establishing broad regions in which different
combinations of T-box genes are coexpressed. Here we demonstrate that three T-box
genes expressed in the zebrafish mesoderm, no tail, spadetail, and tbx6, operate 
as a network of interacting genes to regulate region-specific gene expression and
developmental fate. Loss-of-function and gain-of-function genetic analyses reveal
three kinds of interactions among the T-box genes: combinatorial interactions
that generate new regulatory functions, additive contributions to common
developmental pathways, and competitive antagonism governing downstream gene
expression. We propose that T-box genes, like Hox genes, often function within
gene networks comprised of related family members.

PMCID: PMC170932
PMID: 12883008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Development. 2003 Apr;130(8):1681-90.

Defective somite patterning in mouse embryos with reduced levels of Tbx6.

White PH(1), Farkas DR, McFadden EE, Chapman DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15260, USA.

During vertebrate embryogenesis, paraxial mesoderm gives rise to somites, which
subsequently develop into the dermis, skeletal muscle, ribs and vertebrae of the 
adult. Mutations that disrupt the patterning of individual somites have dramatic 
effects on these tissues, including fusions of the ribs and vertebrae. The T-box 
transcription factor, Tbx6, is expressed in the paraxial mesoderm but is
downregulated as somites develop. It is essential for the formation of posterior 
somites, which are replaced with ectopic neural tubes in Tbx6-null mutant
embryos. We show that partial restoration of Tbx6 expression in null mutants
rescues somite development, but that rostrocaudal patterning within them is
defective, ultimately resulting in rib and vertebral fusions, demonstrating that 
Tbx6 activity in the paraxial mesoderm is required not simply for somite
specification but also for their normal patterning. Somite patterning is
dependent upon Notch signaling and we show that Tbx6 genetically interacts with
the Notch ligand, delta-like 1 (Dll1). Dll1 expression, which is absent in the
Tbx6-null mutant, is restored at reduced levels in the partially rescued mutants,
suggesting that Dll1 is a target of Tbx6. We also identify the spontaneous
mutation rib-vertebrae as a hypomorphic mutation in Tbx6. The similarity in the
phenotypes we describe here and that of some human birth defects, such as
spondylocostal dysostosis, raises the possibility that mutations in Tbx6 or
components of this pathway may be responsible for these defects.

PMID: 12620991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mech Dev. 2002 Dec;119(2):251-6.

The mouse rib-vertebrae mutation is a hypomorphic Tbx6 allele.

Watabe-Rudolph M(1), Schlautmann N, Papaioannou VE, Gossler A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 
1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

Rib-vertebrae (rv) is an autosomal recessive mutation in mouse that affects
somite formation, morphology, and patterning. Expression of Notch pathway
components is affected in the paraxial mesoderm of rv mutant embryos, and rv and 
a null allele of the Notch ligand delta1 show non-allelic non-complementation. By
fine genetic mapping and complementation testing we have identified Tbx6, a gene 
essential for paraxial mesoderm formation, as the gene mutated in rv. Compound
heterozygotes carrying a Tbx6 null allele and rv show a phenotype that is milder 
than in homozygous Tbx6 null but more severe than in homozygous rv mutants. Tbx6 
expression is down-regulated in rv mutant embryos. An insertion in the promoter
region upstream of the transcriptional start is present in the genome of rv
mutants but not in different strains of mice wild type for Tbx6. Our results
indicate that rv is a regulatory mutation of Tbx6 causing a hypomorphic
phenotype.

PMID: 12464437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Dev Genes Evol. 2002 Aug;212(7):354-6.

Expression of Tbx6, a muscle lineage T-box gene, in the tailless embryo of the
ascidian Molgula tectiformis.

Takada N(1), Satoh N, Swalla BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Japan.
TakadaN@moffitt.usf.edu

PMID: 12418495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Dev Growth Differ. 2001 Dec;43(6):657-69.

Cloning and characterization of the T-box gene Tbx6 in Xenopus laevis.

Uchiyama H(1), Kobayashi T, Yamashita A, Ohno S, Yabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Science, Yokohama City University, 22-2 Seto,
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0027, Japan. hideho@yokohama-cu.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Dev Growth Differ 2002 Feb;44(1):95-6.

Tbx6 is a member of the T-box gene family. Studies of knockout mice indicate that
Tbx6 is involved in somite differentiation. In the present study, we cloned Tbx6 
from another vertebrate species, namely Xenopus laevis, and studied its roles in 
development. The expression of Tbx6 in Xenopus started from the early gastrula
stage, reached a peak during the late gastrula to neurula stages and then
declined. Initial expression of Tbx6 was observed in the paraxial mesoderm during
the gastrula stage. The Tbx6-expressing region spread anteriorly and ventrally in
the neurula stage. In the tailbud stage, the area of expression shrank caudally
and was finally restricted to the tip of the tailbud. Overexpression of Tbx6 mRNA
in dorsal blastomeres caused atrophy of the neural tube and inhibited
differentiation of the notochord. Animal cap explants overexpressing Tbx6 or
Tbx6VP16 mRNA, but not Tbx6EnR mRNA, differentiated mainly into ventral
mesodermal tissues. This suggests that Tbx6 is a transcriptional activator.
Higher doses of Tbx6 or Tbx6VP16 mRNA caused hardly any muscular differentiation.
However, coinjection of Tbx6 mRNA with noggin mRNA elicited marked muscle
differentiation. These results suggest that Tbx6 is implicated in ventral
mesoderm specification but is involved in muscle differentiation when acting
together with the dorsalizing factor noggin.

PMID: 11737146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Dev Cell. 2001 Jul;1(1):37-49.

FGF signaling regulates mesoderm cell fate specification and morphogenetic
movement at the primitive streak.

Ciruna B(1), Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

Although FGF signaling plays an integral role in the migration and patterning of 
mesoderm at gastrulation, the mechanism and downstream targets of FGF activity
have remained elusive. Here, we demonstrate that FGFR1 orchestrates the
epithelial to mesenchymal transition and morphogenesis of mesoderm at the
primitive streak by controlling Snail and E-cadherin expression. Furthermore, we 
show that FGFR1 functions in mesoderm cell fate specification by positively
regulating Brachyury and Tbx6 expression. Finally, we provide evidence that the
attenuation of Wnt3a signaling observed in Fgfr1 -/- embryos can be rescued by
lowering E-cadherin levels. We propose that modulation of cytoplasmic
beta-catenin levels, associated with FGF-induced downregulation of E-cadherin,
provides a molecular link between FGF and Wnt signaling pathways at the streak.

PMID: 11703922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Development. 2001 Oct;128(19):3717-28.

Regulation of the muscle-specific expression and function of an ascidian T-box
gene, As-T2.

Mitani Y(1), Takahashi H, Satoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

The Tbx6 T-box genes are expressed in somite precursor cells of vertebrate
embryos and are essential for the differentiation of paraxial mesoderm. However, 
it is unclear how spatial regulation of the gene expression is controlled and how
the genes function to promote muscle differentiation. The Tbx6-related gene As-T2
of the ascidian Halocynthia roretzi is first expressed very transiently in
endodermal cells around the 32- approximately 44-cell stage, is then expressed
distinctly and continuously in muscle precursor cells, and later in epidermal
cells situated in the distal tip region of the elongating tail. We now show that 
inhibition of As-T2-mediated transcriptional activation by microinjection of
As-T2/En(R) into one-cell embryos resulted in suppression of the expression of
the muscle-specific actin gene (HrMA4) and myosin heavy chain gene (HrMHC), but
the injection did not affect the differentiation of endodermal cells or tail tip 
cells, suggesting that the primary function of As-T2 is associated with muscle
cell differentiation. The 5' flanking region of As-T2 contains two promoter
modules that regulate its specific expression: a distal module that responsible
for its specific expression in the tail, and a proximal module required for its
muscle-specific expression. Around the proximal module, there are two putative T 
protein-binding motifs (TTCACACTT). Co-injection of an As-T2/lacZ construct with 
or without the T-binding motifs together with As-T2 mRNA revealed that these
motifs are essential for autoregulatory activation of the gene itself. In
addition, we found that the minimal promoter regions of HrMA4 and HrMHC contain
T-binding motifs. Co-injection of HrMA4/lacZ or HrMHC/lacZ containing the
T-binding motifs along with As-T2 mRNA revealed that As-T2 protein binds to these
motifs to upregulate the gene activity. Taking into account the recent finding of
maternal molecules for muscle differentiation, we propose a model for a genetic
cascade that includes As-T2 as a regulator of muscle cell differentiation in the 
ascidian embryo.

PMID: 11585798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Int J Dev Biol. 2001;45(1):299-310.

The role of the homeodomain protein Bozozok in zebrafish axis formation.

Solnica-Krezel L(1), Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
37235, USA. lilianna.solnica-krezel@vanderbilt.edu

The zebrafish bozozok (boz) gene encoding a homeodomain protein (also named
Dharma/Nieuwkoid) is required during blastula stages for the formation of a
complete Spemann-Mangold gastrula organizer and subsequent development of axial
mesoderm and anterior neural structures. Expression of bozin the dorsal yolk
syncytial layer (YSL) and overlying marginal blastomeres is activated by
beta-catenin. Bozozok itself acts as a transcriptional repressor, and promotes
organizer formation by directly inhibiting expression of the bmp2b (swirl) gene
and by negatively regulating Wnt signaling by an unknown mechanism. boz
cooperates with the Nodal-related secreted factors, Cyclops and Squint, in
organizer formation. The incomplete organizer in boz mutants is deficient in
expression of a number of factors such as Chordin that antagonize Bone
morphogenetic proteins (Bmps), and Dickkopf 1, a Wnt antagonist. Conversely, the 
dorsal blastoderm of boz mutants exhibits ectopic expression of genes normally
excluded from the dorsal midline such as wnt8 or tbx6. boz specifies the
formation of anterior neuroectoderm by regulating Bmp and Wnt pathways in a
fashion consistent with Nieuwkoop's two-step neural patterning model. boz
promotes neural induction by limiting the anti-neuralizing activity of Bmp
morphogens. In addition, by negative regulation of Wnt signaling, boz limits
posteriorization of neuroectoderm. bozozok chordino double mutants exhibit a
synergistic loss of head and trunk. This synthetic phenotype is due to
dramatically increased Bmp signaling and consequent massive accumulation of cells
in the tailbud at the expense of dorso-anterior structures. Therefore, boz and
din act in overlapping pathways that provide the main mechanism to limit Bmp
signaling in the zebrafish gastrula and allow for head and trunk development.
Notably, Bozozok appears to function by repressing transcription of target genes 
such as swr (bmp2b) gene, and as such is the earliest acting repressor that the
nascent dorsal axis is using to antagonize ventral influences.

PMID: 11291860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dev Biol. 2000 Aug 1;224(1):20-8.

Too much interference: injection of double-stranded RNA has nonspecific effects
in the zebrafish embryo.

Oates AC(1), Bruce AE, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08544, USA.

We have investigated the ability of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) to inhibit gene
expression in a vertebrate, the zebrafish, Danio rerio. Injection of dsRNA
corresponding to the T-box gene tbx16/spadetail (spt) into early wild-type
embryos caused a rapid and dramatic loss of tbx16/spt mRNA in the blastula. mRNAs
from the papc, tbx6, and gata1 genes, which depend on tbx16/spt function for
their expression, were reduced, apparently mimicking the spt mutant phenotype.
However, mRNAs from a number of genes that are unaffected by the spt mutation,
such as beta catenin, stat3, and no tail, were also lost, indicating that the
"interference" effect of tbx16/spt dsRNA was not restricted to the endogenous
tbx16/spt mRNA. We compared the effects of injecting dsRNA from the zebrafish
tbx16/spadetail, nieuwkoid/bozozok, and Brachyury/no tail genes with dsRNA from
the bacterial lacZ gene. In each case the embryos displayed a variable syndrome
of abnormalities at 12 and 24 h postfertilization. In blind studies, we could not
distinguish between the effects of the various dsRNAs. Consistent with a common
effect of dsRNA, regardless of sequence, injection of dsRNA from the lacZ gene
was likewise effective in strongly reducing tbx16/spt and beta catenin mRNA in
the blastula. These findings indicate that, despite published reports, the
current methodology of double-stranded RNA interference is not a practical
technique for investigating zygotic gene function during early zebrafish
development.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10898958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Genes Dev. 1999 Dec 15;13(24):3185-90.

T (Brachyury) is a direct target of Wnt3a during paraxial mesoderm specification.

Yamaguchi TP(1), Takada S, Yoshikawa Y, Wu N, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Biological Laboratories, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138 USA.

Wnt3a encodes a signal that is expressed in the primitive streak of the
gastrulating mouse embryo and is required for paraxial mesoderm development. In
its absence cells adopt ectopic neural fates. Embryos lacking the
T-box-containing transcription factors, Brachyury or Tbx6, also lack paraxial
mesoderm. Here we show that Brachyury is specifically down-regulated in Wnt3a
mutants in cells fated to form paraxial mesoderm. Transgenic analysis of the T
promoter identifies T (Brachyury) as a direct transcriptional target of the Wnt
signaling pathway. Our results suggest that Wnt3a, signaling via Brachyury,
modulates a balance between mesodermal and neural cell fates during gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC317203
PMID: 10617567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Neurobiol. 1999 Sep 5;40(3):271-87.

BMP-4 inhibits neural differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells.

Finley MF(1), Devata S, Huettner JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology and Program in Neuroscience,
Washington University Medical School, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

Members of the transforming growth factor-beta superfamily, including bone
morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP-4), have been implicated as regulators of neuronal
and glial differentiation. To test for a possible role of BMP-4 in early
mammalian neural specification, we examined its effect on neurogenesis in
aggregate cultures of mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. Compared to control
aggregates, in which up to 20% of the cells acquired immunoreactivity for the
neuron-specific antibody TuJ1, aggregates maintained for 8 days in serum-free
medium containing BMP-4 generated 5- to 10-fold fewer neurons. The action of
BMP-4 was dose dependent and restricted to the fifth through eighth day in
suspension. In addition to the reduction in neurons, we observed that ES cell
cultures exposed to BMP-4 contained fewer cells that were immunoreactive for
glial fibrillary acidic protein or the HNK-1 neural antigen. Furthermore, under
phase contrast, cultures prepared from BMP-4-treated aggregates contained a
significant proportion of nonneuronal cells with a characteristic flat, elongated
morphology. These cells were immunoreactive for antibodies to the intermediate
filament protein vimentin; they were rare or absent in control cultures.
Treatment with BMP-4 enhanced the expression of the early mesodermal genes
brachyury and tbx6 but had relatively little effect on total cell number or cell 
death. Coapplication of the BMP-4 antagonist noggin counteracted the effect of
exogenous BMP-4, but noggin alone had no effect on neuralization in either the
absence or presence of retinoids. Collectively, our results suggest that BMP-4
can overcome the neuralizing action of retinoic acid to enhance mesodermal
differentiation of murine ES cells.

Copyright 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 10440729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Dev Dyn. 1999 May;215(1):62-8.

An ascidian T-box gene As-T2 is related to the Tbx6 subfamily and is associated
with embryonic muscle cell differentiation.

Mitani Y(1), Takahashi H, Satoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Japan.

The T-box genes, including Brachyury, encode a novel family of transcription
factors that play critical roles in various processes of development, in
particular, mesoderm formation in chordate embryos. In the case of the ascidian
Halocynthia roretzi, the Brachyury (As-T) is expressed exclusively in notochord
cells, whereas another T-box gene (As-T2) is expressed in the muscle cells and in
the tip of the tail of tailbud embryos. In a previous study, we suggested that
the combined pattern of the spatial expressions of As-T and As-T2 appears to
correspond to that of a single vertebrate Brachyury gene (Yasuo et al., Dev Biol 
1996;180:773-779). The present molecular phylogenetic analysis suggested that
As-T2 is a divergent member of the T-box family with a similarity to the Tbx6
subfamily. Vertebrate members of this subfamily are expressed in the posterior
paraxial mesoderm, and the mouse Tbx6 is essential for the specification of
posterior somite. To investigate the function of As-T2, we examined an ectopic-
and/or overexpression of this gene by injecting synthetic mRNA into fertilized
eggs. The results showed that the injection of As-T2 mRNA induced an ectopic
expression of muscle-specific myosin heavy-chain gene and actin gene, especially 
in presumptive epidermal cells. This ectopic muscle-specific expression was
accompanied by the partial suppression of an epidermis-specific gene expression. 
The overexpression of As-T2, however, rarely affected the expression of As-T
(Brachyury) and genes that are expressed in the tailbud.

PMID: 10340757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Genomics. 1999 Jan 15;55(2):238-41.

The human TBX6 gene: cloning and assignment to chromosome 16p11.2.

Papapetrou C(1), Putt W, Fox M, Edwards YH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Biochemical Genetics Unit, University College London, Wolfson House,
4 Stephenson Way, London, NW1 2HE, United Kingdom.

Tbx6 is a member of the T-box family of proteins, which share a region of
homology corresponding to the DNA-binding domain of the transcription factor T.
Previous expression studies and knockout experiments in mice indicate that Tbx6
is important for specification of paraxial mesoderm structures. We have isolated 
and characterized the human orthologue, TBX6. Sequence comparisons show that
overall the nucleotide homology between human and mouse TBX6/Tbx6 is 84%; within 
the T-box there is 89% nucleotide homology and 96% amino acid identity. TBX6 maps
to chromosome 16 p11.2, a region syntenic with mouse chromosome 7, at 61 cM, the 
map position of mouse Tbx6. RT-PCR studies of RNA distribution indicate that this
gene is expressed not only during gastrulation but has a second phase of
expression in some adult tissues including testis. DNA/protein-binding studies
demonstrate that Tbx6 binds to the same target DNA as T protein and can form a
dimeric complex with DNA. We could find no evidence that Tbx6 forms a heterodimer
with T.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9933572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Genomics. 1999 Jan 1;55(1):10-20.

Identification, mapping, and phylogenomic analysis of four new human members of
the T-box gene family: EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19.

Yi CH(1), Terrett JA, Li QY, Ellington K, Packham EA, Armstrong-Buisseret L,
McClure P, Slingsby T, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Nottingham, Queen's
Medical Centre, Nottingham, NG7 2UH.

Brachyury(T) is a mouse mutation, first described over 70 years ago, that causes 
defects in mesoderm formation. Recently several related genes, the T-box gene
family, that encode a similar N-terminal DNA binding domain, the T-box, and that 
play critical roles in human embryonic development have been identified. It has
been shown that human TBX5 and TBX3, if mutated, cause developmental disorders,
Holt-Oram syndrome (OMIM 142900) and ulnar-mammary syndrome (OMIM 181450),
respectively. We have identified four new human members of the T-box gene family,
EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19, and these genes have been mapped to different
chromosomal regions by radiation hybrid mapping. The four T-box genes were
classified into four different subfamilies and have also been subjected to
phylogenomic analysis. Human EOMES maps at 3p21.3-p21.2. This Tbr1-subfamily gene
is likely to play a significant role in early embryogenesis similar to that
described for Xenopus eomesodermin. Human TBX6 maps at 16p12-q12. This
Tbx6-subfamily gene is likely to participate in paraxial mesoderm formation and
somitogenesis in human embryo. TBX18 is a novel member of the Tbx1 subfamily that
maps at 6q14-q15. Two subgroups, TBX1/10 and TBX15/18 subgroups, could be
distinguished within the Tbx1 subfamily. TBX19 is an orthologue of chick TbxT and
maps at 1q23-q24. The genomic organization of TBX19 is highly similar to that of 
human T(Brachyury), another human member of the same subfamily.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9888994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Development. 1998 Sep;125(17):3379-88.

Molecular identification of spadetail: regulation of zebrafish trunk and tail
mesoderm formation by T-box genes.

Griffin KJ(1), Amacher SL, Kimmel CB, Kimelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Box 357350, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195-7350, USA.

Inhibition of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling prevents trunk and tail
formation in Xenopus and zebrafish embryos. While the T-box transcription factor 
Brachyury (called No Tail in zebrafish) is a key mediator of FGF signaling in the
notochord and tail, the pathways activated by FGF in non-notochordal trunk
mesoderm have been uncertain. Previous studies have shown that the spadetail gene
is required for non-notochordal trunk mesoderm formation; spadetail mutant
embryos have major trunk mesoderm deficiencies, but relatively normal tail and
notochord development. We demonstrate here that spadetail encodes a T-box
transcription factor with homologues in Xenopus and chick. Spadetail is likely to
be a key mediator of FGF signaling in trunk non-notochordal mesoderm, since
spadetail expression is regulated by FGF signaling. Trunk and tail development
are therefore dependent upon the complementary actions of two T-box genes,
spadetail and no tail. We show that the regulatory hierarchy among spadetail, no 
tail and a third T-box gene, tbx6, are substantially different during trunk and
tail mesoderm formation, and propose a genetic model that accounts for the
regional phenotypes of spadetail and no tail mutants.

PMID: 9693141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Dev Genes Evol. 1998 Apr;208(2):94-9.

Characterization of the zebrafish tbx16 gene and evolution of the vertebrate
T-box family.

Ruvinsky I(1), Silver LM, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08544, USA.

We report on a new zebrafish T-box-containing gene, tbx16. It encodes a message
that is first detected throughout the blastoderm soon after the initiation of
zygotic gene expression. Following gastrulation, expression becomes restricted to
paraxial mesoderm and later primarily to the developing tail bud. To gain an
evolutionary prospective on the potential function of this gene, we have analyzed
its phylogenetic relationships to known T-box genes from other species. Zebrafish
tbx16 is likely orthologous to the chicken Tbx6L and Xenopus
Xombi/Antipodean/Brat/VegT genes. Our analysis also shows that zebrafish tbx6 and
mouse Tbx6 genes are paralogous to zebrafish tbx16. We present evidence which
argues, that despite the same name and similar expression, zebrafish tbx6 and
mouse Tbx6 genes are not orthologous to each other but instead represent
relatively distant paralogs. The expression patterns of all genes are discussed
in the light of their evolutionary relationships.

PMID: 9569350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nature. 1998 Feb 12;391(6668):695-7.

Three neural tubes in mouse embryos with mutations in the T-box gene Tbx6.

Chapman DL(1), Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Somites, segmented mesodermal units of the vertebrate embryo, are the precursors 
of adult skeletal muscle, bone and cartilage. During embryogenesis, somite
progenitor cells ingress through the primitive streak, move laterally to a
paraxial position (alongside the body axis) and segment into epithelial somites. 
Little is known about how this paraxial mesoderm tissue is specified. We have
previously described a mouse T-box gene, Tbx6, which codes for a putative
DNA-binding protein. The embryonic pattern of expression of Tbx6 in somite
precursor cells suggests that this gene may be involved in the specification of
paraxial mesoderm. We now report the creation of a mutation in Tbx6 that
profoundly affects the differentiation of paraxial mesoderm. Irregular somites
form in the neck region of mutant embryos, whereas more posterior paraxial tissue
does not form somites but instead differentiates along a neural pathway, forming 
neural-tube-like structures that flank the axial neural tube. These paraxial
tubes show dorsal/ventral patterning that is characteristic of the neural tube,
and have differentiated motor neurons. These results indicate that Tbx6 is needed
for cells to choose between a mesodermal and a neuronal differentiation pathway
during gastrulation; Tbx6 is essential for the specification of posterior
paraxial mesoderm, and in its absence cells destined to form posterior somites
differentiate along a neuronal pathway.

PMID: 9490412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Dev Biol. 1997 Mar 1;183(1):61-73.

tbx6, a Brachyury-related gene expressed by ventral mesendodermal precursors in
the zebrafish embryo.

Hug B(1), Walter V, Grunwald DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Classical embryology experiments have indicated the existence of dorsal-type and 
ventral-type mesoderms that arise as a consequence of mesoderm induction during
vertebrate development. Here we report that the zebrafish tbx6 gene, a member of 
the Brachyury-related T-box family of genes, is exclusively expressed by ventral 
mesendoderm. Three observations link the expression of tbx6 to ventral mesoderm
specification. First, the gene is initially expressed at the onset of
gastrulation within a ventrolateral subpopulation of cells that express the
pan-mesodermal gene, no tail (Brachyury). Second, the mesoderm-inducing factors
activin and bFGF activate tbx6 expression in animal caps. Third, dorsalization of
the mesendodermal precursor population following exposure of embryos to lithium
ions causes down-regulation of tbx6 transcription. tbx6 is expressed transiently 
in the involuting derivatives of the ventral mesendoderm, which give rise to
nonaxial mesodermal tissues; its expression is extinguished as tissue
differentiation progresses. Transcription of tbx6 commences about an hour after
initiation of expression of the pan-mesendodermal gene no tail and the organizer 
gene goosecoid. The dependence of tbx6 expression on no tail activity was
examined in no tail mutant embryos. The activation of tbx6 transcription in
ventral mesoderm does not depend on no tail gene activity. However, no tail
appears to contribute to the maintenance of normal levels of tbx6 transcription
and may be required for tbx6 transcription in the developing tail.

PMID: 9119115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Dev Biol. 1996 Dec 15;180(2):534-42.

Tbx6, a mouse T-Box gene implicated in paraxial mesoderm formation at
gastrulation.

Chapman DL(1), Agulnik I, Hancock S, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, 701 West 168th Street, New York, New York, 10032, USA.

The T-box genes constitute an evolutionarily conserved family of putative
transcription factors which are expressed in discrete domains during
embryogenesis, suggesting that they may play roles in inductive interactions.
Members have been identified by virtue of their homology to the prototypical
T-box gene, T or Brachyury, which is required for mesoderm formation and axial
elongation during embryogenesis. We have previously reported the discovery of six
new mouse T-box genes, Tbx1-Tbx6, and described the expression patterns of
Tbx1-Tbx5 (Bollag et al., 1994; Agulnik et al., 1996; Chapman et al., 1996;
Gibson-Brown et al., 1996). We have obtained cDNA clones encoding the full-length
Tbx6 protein from screens of gastrulation-stage mouse cDNA libraries and
determined the spatial and temporal distribution of Tbx6 transcripts during
embryogenesis. The gene codes for a 1.9-kb transcript with an open reading frame 
coding for a 540-amino acid protein, with a predicted molecular weight of 59 kDa.
Tbx6 maps to chromosome 7 and does not appear to be linked to any known mutation.
Unlike other members of the mouse T-box gene family which are expressed in a wide
variety of tissues derived from all germ layers, Tbx6 expression is quite
restricted. Tbx6 transcripts are first detected in the gastrulation stage embryo 
in the primitive streak and newly recruited paraxial mesoderm. Later in
development, Tbx6 expression is restricted to presomitic, paraxial mesoderm and
to the tail bud, which replaces the streak as the source of mesoderm. Expression 
in the tail bud persists until 12. 5 days postcoitus. Tbx6 expression thus
overlaps that of Brachyury in the primitive streak and tail bud, although
Brachyury is expressed earlier in the primitive streak. Brachyury is also
expressed in a second domain, the node and notochord, that is not shared with
Tbx6. The onset of Tbx6 expression is not affected in homozygous null Brachyury
mutant embryos at 7.5 days postcoitus. However, Tbx6 expression is extinguished
in mutant embryos as soon as the Brachyury phenotype becomes evident at 8.5 days 
postcoitus, indicating that the continued expression of Tbx6 is directly or
indirectly dependent upon Brachyury expression.

PMID: 8954725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Genetics. 1996 Sep;144(1):249-54.

Evolution of mouse T-box genes by tandem duplication and cluster dispersion.

Agulnik SI(1), Garvey N, Hancock S, Ruvinsky I, Chapman DL, Agulnik I, Bollag R, 
Papaioannou V, Silver LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, New Jersey 08544-1014, 
USA.

The T-box genes comprise an ancient family of putative transcription factors
conserved across species as divergent as Mus musculus and Caenorhabditis elegans.
All T-box gene products are characterized by a novel 174-186-amino acid DNA
binding domain called the T-box that was first discovered in the polypeptide
products of the mouse T locus and the Drosophila melanogaster optomotor-blind
gene. Earlier studies allowed the identification of five mouse T-box genes, T,
Tbx1-3, and Tbr1, that all map to different chromosomal locations and are
expressed in unique temporal and spatial patterns during embryogenesis. Here, we 
report the discovery of three new members of the mouse T-box gene family, named
Tbx4, Tbx5, and Tbx6. Two of these newly discovered genes, Tbx4 and Tbx5, were
found to be tightly linked to previously identified T-box genes. Combined results
from phylogenetic, linkage, and physical mapping studies provide a picture for
the evolution of a T-box subfamily by unequal crossing over to form a two-gene
cluster that was duplicated and dispersed to two chromosomal locations. This
analysis suggests that Tbx4 and Tbx5 are cognate genes that diverged apart from a
common ancestral gene during early vertebrate evolution.

PMCID: PMC1207498
PMID: 8878690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Dev Dyn. 1996 Aug;206(4):379-90.

Expression of the T-box family genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, during early mouse development.

Chapman DL(1), Garvey N, Hancock S, Alexiou M, Agulnik SI, Gibson-Brown JJ,
Cebra-Thomas J, Bollag RJ, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicans and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

A novel family of genes, characterized by the presence of a region of homology to
the DNA-binding domain of the Brachyury (T) locus product, has recently been
identified. The region of homology has been named the T-box, and the new mouse
genes that contain the T-box domain have been named T-box 1-6 (Tbx1 through
Tbx6). As the basis for further study of the function and evolution of these
genes, we have examined the expression of 5 of these genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, across a
wide range of embryonic stages from blastocyst through gastrulation and early
organogenesis by in situ hybridization of wholemounts and tissue sections. Tbx3
is expressed earliest, in the inner cell mass of the blastocyst. Four of the
genes are expressed in different components of the mesoderm or mesoderm/endoderm 
during gastrulation (Tbx1 and Tbx3-5). All of these genes have highly specific
patterns of expression during later embryogenesis, notably in areas undergoing
inductive tissue interactions. In several cases there is complementary expression
of different genes in 2 interacting tissues, as in the lung epithelium (Tbx1) and
lung mesenchyme (Tbx2-5), and in mammary buds (Tbx3) and mammary stroma (Tbx2).
Tbx1 shows very little overlap in the sites of expression with the other 4 genes,
in contrast to a striking similarity in expression between members of the 2
cognate gene sets, Tbx2/Tbx3 and Tbx4/Tbx5. This is a clear reflection of the
evolutionary relationship between the 5 genes since the divergence of Tbx1
occurred long before the relatively recent divergence of Tbx2 and 3 and Tbx4 and 
5 from common ancestral genes. These studies are a good indication that the T-box
family of genes has important roles in inductive interactions in many stages of
mammalian embryogenesis.

PMID: 8853987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


