
1. Mol Cancer. 2015 Dec 16;14:211. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0484-0.

t(15;21) translocations leading to the concurrent downregulation of RUNX1 and its
transcription factor partner genes SIN3A and TCF12 in myeloid disorders.

L'Abbate A(1), Tolomeo D(1), De Astis F(1), Lonoce A(1), Lo Cunsolo C(2),
Mühlematter D(3), Schoumans J(3), Vandenberghe P(4), Van Hoof A(5), Palumbo O(6),
Carella M(6), Mazza T(7), Storlazzi CT(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy. (2)UO Anatomia
Patologica, Ospedale S. Martino, Belluno, Italy. (3)Unité de génétique du cancer,
Service de génétique médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois CHUV,
Lausanne, Switzerland. (4)Center for Human Genetics and Department of Hematology,
University Hospital Leuven and KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (5)Department of
Haematology, AZ Sint-Jan AV, Brugge, Belgium. (6)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS
Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. (7)IRCCS
Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, Mendel Institute, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(8)Department of Biology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
cleliatiziana.storlazzi@uniba.it.

Through a combined approach integrating RNA-Seq, SNP-array, FISH and PCR
techniques, we identified two novel t(15;21) translocations leading to the
inactivation of RUNX1 and its partners SIN3A and TCF12. One is a complex
t(15;21)(q24;q22), with both breakpoints mapped at the nucleotide level, joining 
RUNX1 to SIN3A and UBL7-AS1 in a patient with myelodysplasia. The other is a
recurrent t(15;21)(q21;q22), juxtaposing RUNX1 and TCF12, with an opposite
transcriptional orientation, in three myeloid leukemia cases. Since our
transcriptome analysis indicated a significant number of differentially expressed
genes associated with both translocations, we speculate an important pathogenetic
role for these alterations involving RUNX1.

PMCID: PMC4681058
PMID: 26671595  [PubMed - in process]


2. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 22;6(41):43653-66. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6189.

Genomic dynamics associated with malignant transformation in IDH1 mutated
gliomas.

Park CK(1), Park I(2), Lee S(3), Sun CH(3), Koh Y(4), Park SH(5), Kim JE(1), Yun 
H(3), Lee SH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea. 
(2)SD Genomics, Seoul, Korea. (3)Samsung SDS, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of
Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

The genomic mechanism responsible for malignant transformation remains an open
question for glioma researchers, where differing conclusions have been drawn
based on diverse study conditions. Therefore, it is essential to secure direct
evidence using longitudinal samples from the same patient. Moreover, malignant
transformation of IDH1-mutated gliomas is of potential interest, as its genomic
mechanism under influence of oncometabolite remains unclear, and even higher rate
of malignant transformation was reported in IDH1-mutated low grade gliomas than
in wild-type IDH1 tumors. We have analyzed genomic data using next-generation
sequencing technology for longitudinal samples from 3 patients with IDH1-mutated 
gliomas whose disease had progressed from a low grade to a high grade phenotype. 
Comprehensive analysis included chromosomal aberrations as well as whole exome
and transcriptome sequencing, and the candidate driver genes for malignant
transformation were validated with public database. Integrated analysis of
genomic dynamics in clonal evolution during the malignant transformation revealed
alterations in the machinery regulating gene expression, including the
spliceosome complex (U2AF2), transcription factors (TCF12), and chromatin
remodelers (ARID1A). Moreover, consequential expression changes implied the
activation of genes associated with the restoration of the stemness of cancer
cells. The alterations in genetic regulatory mechanisms may be the key factor for
the major phenotypic changes in IDH1 mutated gliomas. Despite being limited to a 
small number of cases, this analysis provides a direct example of the genomic
changes responsible for malignant transformation in gliomas.

PMCID: PMC4791257
PMID: 26524630  [PubMed - in process]


3. Cell Death Differ. 2016 Jan;23(1):132-45. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2015.78. Epub 2015 Jun
12.

Stromal miR-200s contribute to breast cancer cell invasion through CAF activation
and ECM remodeling.

Tang X(1), Hou Y(2), Yang G(3), Wang X(4), Tang S(1), Du YE(1), Yang L(1), Yu
T(3), Zhang H(1), Zhou M(1), Wen S(1), Xu L(1), Liu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medical Diagnostics, Chinese Ministry of
Education, Chongqing Medical University, #1 Yi-Xue-Yuan Road, Yu-zhong District, 
Chongqing 400016, China. (2)Experimental Teaching Center of Basic Medicine
Science, #1 Yi-Xue-Yuan Road, Yu-zhong District, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing 400016, China. (3)Department of Endocrine and Breast Surgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, No. 1 You-Yi Road, Yu-zhong 
District, Chongqing 400016, China. (4)Department of Orthopaedics, The Second
Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, No. 76 Linjiang Road, Yu-zhong
District, Chongqing 400010, China.

The activation of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) is a key event in tumor
progression, and alternative extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins derived from
CAFs induce ECM remodeling and cancer cell invasion. Here we found that
miR-200<U+2009>s, which are generally downregulated in activated CAFs in breast cancer
tissues and in normal fibroblasts (NFs) activated by breast cancer cells, are
direct mediators of NF reprogramming into CAFs and of ECM remodeling. NFs with
downregulated miR-200<U+2009>s displayed the traits of activated CAFs, including
accelerated migration and invasion. Ectopic expression of miR-200<U+2009>s in CAFs at
least partially restored the phenotypes of NFs. CAF activation may be governed by
the targets of miR-200<U+2009>s, Fli-1 and TCF12, which are responsible for cell
development and differentiation; Fli-1 and TCF12 were obviously elevated in CAFs.
Furthermore, miR-200<U+2009>s and their targets influenced collagen contraction by CAFs.
The upregulation of fibronectin and lysyl oxidase directly by miR-200 or
indirectly through Fli-1 or TCF12 contributed to ECM remodeling, triggering the
invasion and metastasis of breast cancer cells both in vitro and vivo. Thus,
these data provide important and novel insights into breast CAF activation and
ECM remodeling, which trigger tumor cell invasion.

PMID: 26068592  [PubMed - in process]


4. Nat Commun. 2015 Jun 12;6:7207. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8207.

TCF12 is mutated in anaplastic oligodendroglioma.

Labreche K(1), Simeonova I(2), Kamoun A(3), Gleize V(2), Chubb D(4), Letouzé
E(3), Riazalhosseini Y(5), Dobbins SE(4), Elarouci N(3), Ducray F(6), de Reyniès 
A(3), Zelenika D(7), Wardell CP(8), Frampton M(4), Saulnier O(2), Pastinen T(5), 
Hallout S(9), Figarella-Branger D(10), Dehais C(11), Idbaih A(12), Mokhtari
K(13), Delattre JY(12), Huillard E(2), Mark Lathrop G(5), Sanson M(12), Houlston 
RS(4); POLA Network.

Collaborators: Adam C, Andraud M, Aubriot-Lorton MH, Bauchet L, Beauchesne P,
Blechet C, Campone M, Carpentier A, Carpentier C, Carpiuc I, Chenard MP,
Chiforeanu D, Chinot O, Cohen-Moyal E, Colin P, Dam-Hieu P, Desenclos C, Desse N,
Dhermain F, Diebold MD, Eimer S, Faillot T, Fesneau M, Fontaine D, Gaillard S,
Gauchotte G, Gaultier C, Ghiringhelli F, Godard J, Marcel Gueye E, Sebastien
Guillamo J, Hamdi-Elouadhani S, Honnorat J, Louis Kemeny J, Khallil T, Jouvet A, 
Labrousse F, Langlois O, Laquerriere A, Lechapt-Zalcman E, Le Guérinel C,
Levillain PM, Loiseau H, Loussouarn D, Maurage CA, Menei P, Janette Motsuo Fotso 
M, Noel G, Parker F, Peoc'h M, Polivka M, Quintin-Roué I, Ramirez C, Ricard D,
Richard P, Rigau V, Rousseau A, Runavot G, Sevestre H, Christine Tortel M,
Uro-Coste E, Burel-Vandenbos F, Vauleon E, Viennet G, Villa C, Wager M.

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Genetics and Epidemiology, The Institute of Cancer Research,
Sutton, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK [2] Inserm, U 1127, ICM, F-75013 Paris, France [3]
CNRS, UMR 7225, ICM, F-75013 Paris, France [4] Institut du Cerveau et de la
Moelle épinière ICM, Paris 75013, France [5] Sorbonne Universités, UPMC
Université Paris 06, UMR S 1127, F-75013 Paris, France. (2)1] Inserm, U 1127,
ICM, F-75013 Paris, France [2] CNRS, UMR 7225, ICM, F-75013 Paris, France [3]
Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière ICM, Paris 75013, France [4]
Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, UMR S 1127, F-75013 Paris,
France. (3)Programme Cartes d'Identité des Tumeurs (CIT), Ligue Nationale Contre 
Le Cancer, 75013 Paris, France. (4)Division of Genetics and Epidemiology, The
Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK. (5)1] Department of
Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 0G1 [2] McGill
University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 0G1.
(6)INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR5292, Service de Neuro-oncologie, Hopital neurologique, 
Hospices civils de Lyon, Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, Neuro-Oncology and
Neuro-Inflammation Team, 69677 Lyon, France. (7)Centre National de Génotypage,
IG/CEA, 2 rue Gaston Crémieux, CP 5721, Evry 91057, France. (8)Division of
Molecular Pathology, The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5NG,
UK. (9)1] Inserm, U 1127, ICM, F-75013 Paris, France [2] CNRS, UMR 7225, ICM,
F-75013 Paris, France [3] Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière ICM, Paris
75013, France. (10)1] AP-HM, Hôpital de la Timone, Service d'anatomie
pathologique et de neuropathologie, 13385 Marseille, France [2] Université de la 
Méditerranée, Aix-Marseille, Faculté de Médecine La Timone, CRO2, UMR 911
Marseille, France. (11)AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Service de
neurologie 2-Mazarin, 75013 Paris, France. (12)1] Inserm, U 1127, ICM, F-75013
Paris, France [2] CNRS, UMR 7225, ICM, F-75013 Paris, France [3] Institut du
Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière ICM, Paris 75013, France [4] Sorbonne
Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, UMR S 1127, F-75013 Paris, France [5]
AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Service de neurologie 2-Mazarin,
75013 Paris, France. (13)1] Inserm, U 1127, ICM, F-75013 Paris, France [2] CNRS, 
UMR 7225, ICM, F-75013 Paris, France [3] Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle
épinière ICM, Paris 75013, France [4] AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Laboratoire de Neuropathologie R. Escourolle, 75013 Paris,
France.

Anaplastic oligodendroglioma (AO) are rare primary brain tumours that are
generally incurable, with heterogeneous prognosis and few treatment targets
identified. Most oligodendrogliomas have chromosomes 1p/19q co-deletion and an
IDH mutation. Here we analysed 51 AO by whole-exome sequencing, identifying
previously reported frequent somatic mutations in CIC and FUBP1. We also
identified recurrent mutations in TCF12 and in an additional series of 83 AO.
Overall, 7.5% of AO are mutated for TCF12, which encodes an
oligodendrocyte-related transcription factor. Eighty percent of TCF12 mutations
identified were in either the bHLH domain, which is important for TCF12 function 
as a transcription factor, or were frameshift mutations leading to TCF12
truncated for this domain. We show that these mutations compromise TCF12
transcriptional activity and are associated with a more aggressive tumour type.
Our analysis provides further insights into the unique and shared pathways
driving AO.

PMCID: PMC4490400
PMID: 26068201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Aug;167A(8):1897-901. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37083. Epub 2015
Apr 13.

TCF12 microdeletion in a 72-year-old woman with intellectual disability.

Piard J(1), Rozé V(2), Czorny A(3), Lenoir M(4), Valduga M(5), Fenwick AL(6),
Wilkie AO(6), Maldergem LV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de génétique humaine, Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France.
(2)Laboratoire de génétique, histologie et biologie de la reproduction,
Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France. (3)Service de neurochirurgie,
Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France. (4)Service de radiologie
pédiatrique, Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France. (5)Laboratoire de
génétique, Université de Nancy, Nancy, France. (6)Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington,
Oxford, UK.

Heterozygous mutations in TCF12 were recently identified as an important cause of
craniosynostosis. In the original series, 14% of patients with a mutation in
TCF12 had significant developmental delay or learning disability. We report on
the first case of TCF12 microdeletion, detected by array-comparative genomic
hybridization, in a 72-year-old patient presenting with intellectual deficiency
and dysmorphism. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis
indicated that exon 19, encoding the functionally important basic
helix-loop-helix domain, was included in the deleted segment in addition to exon 
20. We postulate that the TCF12 microdeletion is responsible for this patient's
intellectual deficiency and facial phenotype.

© 2015 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A Published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4654244
PMID: 25871887  [PubMed - in process]


6. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 16;6:6546. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7546.

HEB associates with PRC2 and SMAD2/3 to regulate developmental fates.

Yoon SJ(1), Foley JW(2), Baker JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA. 
(2)1] Ludmer Centre for Neuroinformatics and Mental Health, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec H4H 1R3, Canada [2] Douglas Mental Health University Institute, 
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H4H 1R3, Canada.

In embryonic stem cells, extracellular signals are required to derepress
developmental promoters to drive lineage specification, but the proteins involved
in connecting extrinsic cues to relaxation of chromatin remain unknown. We
demonstrate that the helix-loop-helix (HLH) protein, HEB, directly associates
with the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) at a subset of developmental
promoters, including at genes involved in mesoderm and endoderm specification and
at the Hox and Fox gene families. While we show that depletion of HEB does not
affect mouse ESCs, it does cause premature differentiation after exposure to
Activin. Further, we find that HEB deposition at developmental promoters is
dependent upon PRC2 and independent of Nodal, whereas HEB association with
SMAD2/3 elements is dependent of Nodal, but independent of PRC2. We suggest that 
HEB is a fundamental link between Nodal signalling, the derepression of a
specific class of poised promoters during differentiation, and lineage
specification in mouse ESCs.

PMID: 25775035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. RNA Biol. 2014;11(11):1447-56. doi: 10.4161/15476286.2014.992286.

Positive correlation between ADAR expression and its targets suggests a complex
regulation mediated by RNA editing in the human brain.

Liscovitch N(1), Bazak L, Levanon EY, Chechik G.

Author information: 
(1)a Gonda Multidisiplinary Brain Research Center ; Bar-Ilan University ; Ramat
Gan , Israel.

A-to-I RNA editing by adenosine deaminases acting on RNA is a
post-transcriptional modification that is crucial for normal life and development
in vertebrates. RNA editing has been shown to be very abundant in the human
transcriptome, specifically at the primate-specific Alu elements. The functional 
role of this wide-spread effect is still not clear; it is believed that editing
of transcripts is a mechanism for their down-regulation via processes such as
nuclear retention or RNA degradation. Here we combine 2 neural gene expression
datasets with genome-level editing information to examine the relation between
the expression of ADAR genes with the expression of their target genes.
Specifically, we computed the spatial correlation across structures of
post-mortem human brains between ADAR and a large set of targets that were found 
to be edited in their Alu repeats. Surprisingly, we found that a large fraction
of the edited genes are positively correlated with ADAR, opposing the assumption 
that editing would reduce expression. When considering the correlations between
ADAR and its targets over development, 2 gene subsets emerge, positively
correlated and negatively correlated with ADAR expression. Specifically, in
embryonic time points, ADAR is positively correlated with many genes related to
RNA processing and regulation of gene expression. These findings imply that the
suggested mechanism of regulation of expression by editing is probably not a
global one; ADAR expression does not have a genome wide effect reducing the
expression of editing targets. It is possible, however, that RNA editing by ADAR 
in non-coding regions of the gene might be a part of a more complex expression
regulation mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4615195
PMID: 25692240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Leuk Res. 2015 Jan;39(1):100-9. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2014.11.016. Epub 2014 Nov
29.

Enforced expression of E47 has differential effects on Lmo2-induced T-cell
leukemias.

Goodings C(1), Tripathi R(1), Cleveland SM(1), Elliott N(1), Guo Y(2), Shyr Y(2),
Davé UP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cancer Biology and Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN, USA. (2)Department of Biostatistics and Center for
Quantitative Sciences, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA. 
(3)Departments of Cancer Biology and Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN, USA. Electronic address: utpal.dave@vanderbilt.edu.

LIM domain only-2 (LMO2) overexpression in T cells induces leukemia but the
molecular mechanism remains to be elucidated. In hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells, Lmo2 is part of a protein complex comprised of class II basic
helix loop helix proteins, Tal1and Lyl1. The latter transcription factors
heterodimerize with E2A proteins like E47 and Heb to bind E boxes. LMO2 and TAL1 
or LYL1 cooperate to induce T-ALL in mouse models, and are concordantly expressed
in human T-ALL. Furthermore, LMO2 cooperates with the loss of E2A suggesting that
LMO2 functions by creating a deficiency of E2A. In this study, we tested this
hypothesis in Lmo2-induced T-ALL cell lines. We transduced these lines with an
E47/estrogen receptor fusion construct that could be forced to homodimerize with 
4-hydroxytamoxifen. We discovered that forced homodimerization induced growth
arrest in 2 of the 4 lines tested. The lines sensitive to E47 homodimerization
accumulated in G1 and had reduced S phase entry. We analyzed the transcriptome of
a resistant and a sensitive line to discern the E47 targets responsible for the
cellular effects. Our results suggest that E47 has diverse effects in T-ALL but
that functional deficiency of E47 is not a universal feature of Lmo2-induced
T-ALL.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4277943
PMID: 25499232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Jul;23(7):907-14. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.205. Epub 2014 Oct
1.

Expanding the mutation spectrum in 182 Spanish probands with craniosynostosis:
identification and characterization of novel TCF12 variants.

Paumard-Hernández B(1), Berges-Soria J(1), Barroso E(2), Rivera-Pedroza CI(1),
Pérez-Carrizosa V(1), Benito-Sanz S(2), López-Messa E(1), Santos F(2),
García-Recuero II(3), Romance A(3), Ballesta-Martínez JM(4), López-González V(4),
Campos-Barros Á(2), Cruz J(5), Guillén-Navarro E(6), Sánchez Del Pozo J(5),
Lapunzina P(2), García-Miñaur S(2), Heath KE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario
La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain. (2)1] Institute of
Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain [2] Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Maxilofacial Surgery Unit, Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain. (4)1] Centro
de Investigación Biomédica en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain [2] Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Hospital
Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Madrid, Spain. (5)Dysmorphology
Unit, Hospital Universitario Doce de Octubre, Madrid, Spain. (6)1] Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain [2] Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Hospital
Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Madrid, Spain [3] Cátedra de
Genética Médica. UCAM-Universidad Católica San Antonio de Murcia, Madrid, Spain.

Craniosynostosis, caused by the premature fusion of one or more of the cranial
sutures, can be classified into non-syndromic or syndromic and by which sutures
are affected. Clinical assignment is a difficult challenge due to the high
phenotypic variability observed between syndromes. During routine diagnostics, we
screened 182 Spanish craniosynostosis probands, implementing a four-tiered
cascade screening of FGFR2, FGFR3, FGFR1, TWIST1 and EFNB1. A total of 43
variants, eight novel, were identified in 113 (62%) patients: 104 (92%) detected 
in level 1; eight (7%) in level 2 and one (1%) in level 3. We subsequently
screened additional genes in the probands with no detected mutation: one
duplication of the IHH regulatory region was identified in a patient with
craniosynostosis Philadelphia type and five variants, four novel, were identified
in the recently described TCF12, in probands with coronal or multisuture
affectation. In the 19 Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS) individuals in whom a
variant was detected, 15 (79%) carried a TWIST1 variant, whereas four (21%) had a
TCF12 variant. Thus, we propose that TCF12 screening should be included for
TWIST1 negative SCS patients and in patients where the coronal suture is
affected. In summary, a molecular diagnosis was obtained in a total of 119/182
patients (65%), allowing the correct craniosynostosis syndrome classification,
aiding genetic counselling and in some cases provided a better planning on how
and when surgical intervention should take place and, subsequently the
appropriate clinical follow up.

PMCID: PMC4463497 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25271085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:153-87. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00004-X.

E proteins in lymphocyte development and lymphoid diseases.

Belle I(1), Zhuang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham North
Carolina, USA. Electronic address: ilb2@duke.edu. (2)Department of Immunology,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham North Carolina, USA.

As members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription factors, 
E proteins function in the immune system by directing and maintaining a vast
transcriptional network that regulates cell survival, proliferation,
differentiation, and function. Proper activity of this network is essential to
the functionality of the immune system. Aberrations in E protein expression or
function can cause numerous defects, ranging from impaired lymphocyte development
and immunodeficiency to aberrant function, cancer, and autoimmunity.
Additionally, disruption of inhibitor of DNA-binding (Id) proteins, natural
inhibitors of E proteins, can induce additional defects in development and
function. Although E proteins have been investigated for several decades, their
study continues to yield novel and exciting insights into the workings of the
immune system. The goal of this chapter is to discuss the various classical roles
of E proteins in lymphocyte development and highlight new and ongoing research
into how these roles, if compromised, can lead to disease.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cancer Genet. 2014 Jun;207(6):276-80. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2014.06.024. Epub 
2014 Jun 26.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma with a t(9;16)(q22;p11.2) resulting in a
NR4A3-FUS fusion.

Broehm CJ(1), Wu J(2), Gullapalli RR(2), Bocklage T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico School of Medicine,
Albuquerque, NM, USA. Electronic address: cbroehm@salud.unm.edu. (2)Department of
Pathology, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, USA.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC) is a rare neoplasm characterized by
rearrangement of NR4A3. A t(9;22)(q22;q12), creating a fusion protein of EWSR1
and NR4A3, has been reported as a unique, recurring translocation in most cases. 
Reported variant translocations have resulted in fusion of NR4A3 with three other
genes: TAF15, TCF12, and TFG. We report a case of EMC in a 59-year-old man who
presented with a 6-month history of an enlarging mass in the proximal right
thigh. The karyotype of fresh tissue from tumor taken at incisional biopsy
revealed a t(9;16)(q22;p11.2). There was no evidence of an EWSR1 rearrangement by
dual-color break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Dual-color FISH
probes revealed fusion of NR4A3 and FUS, a member of the TET family of genes,
which includes EWSR1 and TAF15. Break-apart FISH probe results confirmed
rearrangement of FUS. These findings show that a fusion product of FUS and NR4A3 
may be an additional pathway to development of EMC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25130955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Hum Pathol. 2014 May;45(5):1084-91. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.01.007. Epub 2014
Jan 28.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma with non-EWSR1-NR4A3 variant fusions
correlate with rhabdoid phenotype and high-grade morphology.

Agaram NP(1), Zhang L(2), Sung YS(2), Singer S(3), Antonescu CR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10065. Electronic address: agaramn@mskcc.org. (2)Department of Pathology,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065. (3)Department of
Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065.
(4)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10065. Electronic address: antonesc@mskcc.org.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas (EMC) are rare soft tissue sarcomas with
distinctive histology and uncertain histogenesis, characterized by Ewing sarcoma 
breakpoint region 1-nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group A, member 3 (EWSR1-NR4A3)
fusion in 75% of the cases. A smaller proportion of cases show NR4A3 fused to
other gene partners including TATA binding protein-associated factor 15 (TAF15), 
transcription factor 12 (TCF12), and TRK-fused gene (TFG). The impact of various 
gene fusions on morphology and outcome has not been previously evaluated. We
investigated 26 consecutive EMCs and correlated the genetic findings with
morphology and clinical outcome. There were 5 females and 21 males (median age,
49.5 years). Mean size of the tumors was 11 cm. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis showed EWSR1-NR4A3 gene fusion in 16 cases (62%),
TAF15-NR4A3 gene fusion in 7 cases (27%), and TCF12-NR4A3 gene fusion in 1 case
(4%). Two cases showed only NR4A3 gene rearrangements. Morphologically, most
EWSR1-rearranged tumors (10/16) showed low cellularity, minimal cytologic atypia,
and low mitotic counts. In contrast, 80% of EMCs with variant (non-EWSR1) NR4A3
gene fusions (TAF15, TCF12) had high-grade morphology with increased cellularity,
proliferation, and cytologic atypia, showing a plasmacytoid/rhabdoid morphology
in half the cases. Follow-up showed that only 1 of 16 patients with
EWSR1-rearranged tumors died of disease, in contrast to 3 (43%) of 7
TAF15-rearranged tumors. In conclusion, EMCs with variant NR4A3 gene fusions show
a higher incidence of rhabdoid phenotype, high-grade morphology, and a more
aggressive outcome compared with the EWSR1-NR4A3 positive tumors. Furthermore,
fluorescence in situ hybridization assay for NR4A3, along with EWSR1, may be an
additional ancillary test to confirm diagnosis of EMCs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4015728
PMID: 24746215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Dec;22(12):1413-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.57. Epub 2014 Apr
16.

Clinical spectrum and outcomes in families with coronal synostosis and TCF12
mutations.

di Rocco F(1), Baujat G(2), Arnaud E(1), Rénier D(1), Laplanche JL(3), Daire
VC(2), Collet C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Chirurgie Craniofaciale, Service de Neurochirurgie, Centre de
Référence National Dysostoses Crâniofaciales, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France.
(2)Génétique Clinique, INSERM U781, Université Paris-Descartes-Sorbonne Paris
cité, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France. (3)Unité Fonctionnelle de 
Génétique Moléculaire, Service de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Pôle B2P,
Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France.

TCF12 mutations have been reported very recently in coronal synostosis. We report
several cases of familial coronal synostosis among four families harbouring novel
TCF12 mutations. We observed a broad interfamilial phenotypic spectrum with
features overlapping with the Saethre-Chotzen syndrome. TCF12 molecular testing
should be considered in patients with unilateral- or bilateral-coronal synostosis
associated or not with syndactyly, after having excluded mutations in the TWIST1 
gene and the p.Pro250Arg mutation in FGFR3.

PMCID: PMC4231413
PMID: 24736737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jun;164A(6):1530-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36467. Epub 2014
Mar 19.

Maternal complex chromosomal rearrangement leads to TCF12 microdeletion in a
patient presenting with coronal craniosynostosis and intellectual disability.

Le Tanno P(1), Poreau B, Devillard F, Vieville G, Amblard F, Jouk PS, Satre V,
Coutton C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Chromosomique, Département de Génétique et
Procréation, Hôpital Couple Enfant, CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France.

We report on a young child with intellectual disability and unilateral coronal
craniosynostosis leading to craniofacial malformations. Standard karyotype showed
an apparently balanced translocation between chromosomes 2 and 15
[t(2;15)(q21;q21.3)], inherited from his mother. Interestingly, array-CGH 180K
showed a 3.64 Mb de novo deletion on chromosome 15 in the region 15q21.3q22.2,
close to the chromosome 15 translocation breakpoints. This deletion leads to
haploinsufficiency of TCF12 gene that can explain the coronal craniosynostosis
described in the patient. Additional FISH analyses showed a complex balanced
maternal chromosomal rearrangement combining the reciprocal translocation
t(2;15)(q21;q21.3), and an insertion of the 15q22.1 segment into the telomeric
region of the translocated 15q fragment. The genomic imbalance in the patient is 
likely caused by a crossing-over that occurs in the recombination loop formed
during the maternal meiosis resulting in the deletion of the inserted fragment.
This original case of a genomic microdeletion of TCF12 exemplifies the importance
of array-CGH in the clinical investigation of apparently balanced rearrangements 
but also the importance of FISH analysis to identify the chromosomal mechanism
causing the genomic imbalance.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24648389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2014 May 15;159(1-2):74-82. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2014.02.003. Epub 2014 Feb 8.

Modulation of microRNAs in two genetically disparate chicken lines showing
different necrotic enteritis disease susceptibility.

Dinh H(1), Hong YH(2), Lillehoj HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Technology, Chung-Ang University, Anseong
456-756, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Animal Science and Technology,
Chung-Ang University, Anseong 456-756, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
yhong@cau.ac.kr. (3)Animal Biosciences and Biotechnology Laboratory, Agricultural
Research Services, United States Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, MD 20705,
USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNA) play a critical role in post-transcriptional regulation by
influencing the 3'-UTR of target genes. Using two inbred White Leghorn chicken
lines, line 6.3 and line 7.2 showing Marek's disease-resistant and -susceptible
phenotypes, respectively, we used small RNA high-throughput sequencing (HTS) to
investigate whether miRNAs are differently expressed in these two chicken lines
after inducing necrotic enteritis (NE). The 12 miRNAs, selected from the most
down-regulated or up-regulated miRNAs following NE induction, were confirmed by
their expressions in real-time PCR. Among these miRNAs, miR-215, miR-217,
miR-194, miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-216a, miR-216b, and miR-429 were highly
expressed in intestine derived from line 7.2, whereas, miR-1782 and miR-499 were 
down-regulated. In spleen, miR-34b and miR-1684 were the most up-regulated miRNAs
in line 6.3. Notably, five out of six target genes, CXCR5, BCL2, GJA1, TCF12, and
TAB3 were differentially expressed between line 6.3 and line 7.2, and showed
suppression in the MD-susceptible chicken line. Their expression levels were
conversely correlated with those of miRNA obtained from both HTS and quantitative
real-time PCR. These results suggest that some miRNAs are differentially altered 
in response to NE and they modulate the expression of their target genes in the
two inbred lines. Collectively, HTS analysis of intestinal miRNAs from
NE-afflicted inbred chickens showing different disease phenotypes led to the
identification of host immunity genes regulated by miRNA. Future studies of the
function of these miRNAs and their target genes in the host will lead to enhanced
understanding of molecular mechanisms controlling host-pathogen interaction in
NE.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24629767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Mol Diagn. 2014 May;16(3):314-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2013.12.002. Epub 2014 
Feb 7.

Diagnostic utility of molecular investigation in extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma.

Benini S(1), Cocchi S(2), Gamberi G(2), Magagnoli G(3), Vogel D(2), Ghinelli
C(3), Righi A(2), Picci P(3), Alberghini M(2), Gambarotti M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Rizzoli Institute, Bologna, Italy. Electronic
address: stefania.benini@ior.it. (2)Department of Pathology, Rizzoli Institute,
Bologna, Italy. (3)Department of Experimental Oncology, Rizzoli Institute,
Bologna, Italy.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma is characterized by the reciprocal
chromosomal translocation t(9;22) and the resultant fused gene EWS RNA-binding
protein 1 and nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group A, member 3 (EWSR1-NR4A3). A
second cytogenetic rearrangement t(9;17) involves the genes NR4A3 and TAF 15 RNA 
polymerase II, TATA box binding protein (TBP)-associated factor (TAF15). Less
frequent fusion transcript variants of the NR4A3 gene, transcription factor 12
(TCF12)-NR4A3 and TRK-fused gene (TFG)-NR4A3, are associated with t(9;15) and
t(9;3) respectively. The samples from 42 patients with extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma were examined for the presence of EWSR1-NR4A3, TAF15-NR4A3,
TCF12-NR4A3, and TFG-NR4A3 fusion transcripts by using RT-PCR. Fluorescence in
situ hybridization was performed to analyze the status of EWSR1 and NR4A3 genes. 
The fusion transcripts were detected in 34 of 42 samples (81%); the presence of
an EWSR1 or NR4A3 gene rearrangements were detected in 8 of 42 samples (19%)
which had tested negative for all fusion transcripts detected by RT-PCR. Of the
34 samples evaluable for fusion transcripts, 23 yielded positive results for
EWSR1-NR4A3, 10 for TAF15-NR4A3, and 1 for TCF12-NR4A3. The combination of RT-PCR
and fluorescence in situ hybridization on frozen and paraffin-embedded tissue is 
a sensitive and specific method for molecular detection of recurrent
translocations and is an important ancillary method to establish the diagnosis of
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24508382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 1;192(3):1055-63. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302694. Epub 2013
Dec 30.

Id3 and Id2 act as a dual safety mechanism in regulating the development and
population size of innate-like <U+03B3>d T cells.

Zhang B(1), Lin YY, Dai M, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.

The innate-like T cells expressing V<U+03B3>1.1 and Vd6.3 represent a unique T cell
lineage sharing features with both the <U+03B3>d T and the invariant NKT cells. The
population size of V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) T cells is tightly controlled and usually
contributes to a very small proportion of thymic output, but the underlying
mechanism remains enigmatic. Deletion of Id3, an inhibitor of E protein
transcription factors, can induce an expansion of the V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) T cell
population. This phenotype is much stronger on the C57BL/6 background than on the
129/sv background. Using quantitative trait linkage analysis, we identified Id2, 
a homolog of Id3, to be the major modifier of Id3 in limiting V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) T 
cell expansion. The V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) phenotype is attributed to an intrinsic
weakness of Id2 transcription from Id2 C57BL/6 allele, leading to an overall
reduced dosage of Id proteins. However, complete removal of both Id2 and Id3
genes in developing T cells suppressed the expansion of V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) T cells 
because of decreased proliferation and increased cell death. We showed that
conditional knockout of Id2 alone is sufficient to promote a moderate expansion
of <U+03B3>d T cells. These regulatory effects of Id2 and Id3 on V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) T
cells are mediated by titration of E protein activity, because removing one or
more copies of E protein genes can restore V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) T cell expansion in
Id2 and Id3 double conditional knockout mice. Our data indicated that Id2 and Id3
collaboratively control survival and expansion of the <U+03B3>d lineage through
modulating a proper threshold of E proteins.

PMCID: PMC3899720
PMID: 24379125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):421-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1321704111. 
Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3C binds to BATF/IRF4 or SPI1/IRF4 composite
sites and recruits Sin3A to repress CDKN2A.

Jiang S(1), Willox B, Zhou H, Holthaus AM, Wang A, Shi TT, Maruo S, Kharchenko
PV, Johannsen EC, Kieff E, Zhao B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Program in Virology,
Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, and Center for Biomedical
Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA3C) repression of CDKN2A p14(ARF) and 
p16(INK4A) is essential for immortal human B-lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL)
growth. EBNA3C ChIP-sequencing identified >13,000 EBNA3C sites in LCL DNA. Most
EBNA3C sites were associated with active transcription; 64% were strong H3K4me1- 
and H3K27ac-marked enhancers and 16% were active promoters marked by H3K4me3 and 
H3K9ac. Using ENCODE LCL transcription factor ChIP-sequencing data, EBNA3C sites 
coincided (±250 bp) with RUNX3 (64%), BATF (55%), ATF2 (51%), IRF4 (41%), MEF2A
(35%), PAX5 (34%), SPI1 (29%), BCL11a (28%), SP1 (26%), TCF12 (23%), NF-<U+03BA>B (23%),
POU2F2 (23%), and RBPJ (16%). EBNA3C sites separated into five distinct clusters:
(i) Sin3A, (ii) EBNA2/RBPJ, (iii) SPI1, and (iv) strong or (v) weak BATF/IRF4.
EBNA3C signals were positively affected by RUNX3, BATF/IRF4 (AICE) and SPI1/IRF4 
(EICE) cooccupancy. Gene set enrichment analyses correlated EBNA3C/Sin3A promoter
sites with transcription down-regulation (P < 1.6 × 10(-4)). EBNA3C signals were 
strongest at BATF/IRF4 and SPI1/IRF4 composite sites. EBNA3C bound strongly to
the p14(ARF) promoter through SPI1/IRF4/BATF/RUNX3, establishing RBPJ-, Sin3A-,
and REST-mediated repression. EBNA3C immune precipitated with Sin3A and
conditional EBNA3C inactivation significantly decreased Sin3A binding at the
p14(ARF) promoter (P < 0.05). These data support a model in which EBNA3C binds
strongly to BATF/IRF4/SPI1/RUNX3 sites to enhance transcription and recruits
RBPJ/Sin3A- and REST/NRSF-repressive complexes to repress p14(ARF) and p16(INK4A)
expression.

PMCID: PMC3890834
PMID: 24344258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Leukemia. 2014 May;28(5):1052-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.302. Epub 2013 Oct 22.

Targeted cancer exome sequencing reveals recurrent mutations in
myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Tenedini E(1), Bernardis I(2), Artusi V(2), Artuso L(2), Roncaglia E(2),
Guglielmelli P(3), Pieri L(3), Bogani C(3), Biamonte F(3), Rotunno G(3),
Mannarelli C(3), Bianchi E(4), Pancrazzi A(3), Fanelli T(3), Malagoli
Tagliazucchi G(2), Ferrari S(2), Manfredini R(4), Vannucchi AM(3), Tagliafico
E(2); AGIMM investigators.

Author information: 
(1)1] Center for Genome Research, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
Italy [2] Life Sciences Department, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,
Modena, Italy [3] Center for Regenerative Medicine 'Stefano Ferrari', University 
of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. (2)1] Center for Genome Research,
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy [2] Life Sciences
Department, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. (3)Department 
of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(4)1] Life Sciences Department, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
Italy [2] Center for Regenerative Medicine 'Stefano Ferrari', University of
Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.

With the intent of dissecting the molecular complexity of Philadelphia-negative
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), we designed a target enrichment panel to
explore, using next-generation sequencing (NGS), the mutational status of an
extensive list of 2000 cancer-associated genes and microRNAs. The genomic DNA of 
granulocytes and in vitro-expanded CD3+T-lymphocytes, as a germline control, was 
target-enriched and sequenced in a learning cohort of 20 MPN patients using Roche
454 technology. We identified 141 genuine somatic mutations, most of which were
not previously described. To test the frequency of the identified variants, a
larger validation cohort of 189 MPN patients was additionally screened for these 
mutations using Ion Torrent AmpliSeq NGS. Excluding the genes already described
in MPN, for 8 genes (SCRIB, MIR662, BARD1, TCF12, FAT4, DAP3, POLG and NRAS), we 
demonstrated a mutation frequency between 3 and 8%. We also found that mutations 
at codon 12 of NRAS (NRASG12V and NRASG12D) were significantly associated, for
primary myelofibrosis (PMF), with highest dynamic international prognostic
scoring system (DIPSS)-plus score categories. This association was then confirmed
in 66 additional PMF patients composing a final dataset of 168 PMF showing a NRAS
mutation frequency of 4.7%, which was associated with a worse outcome, as defined
by the DIPSS plus score.

PMCID: PMC4017260
PMID: 24150215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mucosal Immunol. 2014 May;7(3):521-32. doi: 10.1038/mi.2013.69. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Transcription of ROR<U+03B3>t in developing Th17 cells is regulated by E-proteins.

Zhang F(1), Fuss IJ(1), Yang Z(1), Strober W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Host Defenses, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

In the present study we investigated the molecular mechanisms regulating the
expression of RAR-related orphan receptor gamma t (ROR<U+03B3>t), the central factor
controlling interleukin (IL)-17 transcription and Th17 differentiation. In key
studies, we found that cells from mice with major deletions of E-protein
transcription factors, E2A and HEB, display greatly reduced ROR<U+03B3>t/IL-17
expression and that E-protein-deficient mice exhibit greatly diminished
IL-17-dependent inflammation in experimental allergic encephalitis models. In
additional studies, we unexpectedly found that cells from mice with deletion of
Id3, a protein that inhibits E-protein binding to DNA, display diminished
ROR<U+03B3>t/IL-17 expression and mice deficient in this protein exhibit decreased
Th17-mediated inflammation in a cell-transfer colitis model. The explanation of
these initially paradoxical findings came from studies showing that Id3
deficiency leads to increased IL-4-induced GATA-3 expression, the latter a
negative regulator of ROR<U+03B3>t transcription; thus, increased Id3 expression likely 
has a net positive effect on ROR<U+03B3>t expression via its inhibition of IL-4
production. Finally, we found that both E-proteins and Id3 are upregulated in
tandem by the cytokines that induce Th17 differentiation, transforming growth
factor-ß, and IL-6, implying that these transcription factors are critical
regulators of Th17 induction.

PMCID: PMC4381430
PMID: 24064669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Aug;140(3-4):189-94. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2013.05.013. Epub 2013 Jun 2.

Associations of TCF12, CTNNAL1 and WNT10B gene polymorphisms with litter size in 
pigs.

Tao H(1), Mei S, Sun X, Peng X, Zhang X, Ma C, Wang L, Hua L, Li F.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Pig Genetics and Breeding of Ministry of Agriculture & Key
Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry
of Education, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, PR China.

In previous research, several WNT signaling pathway genes including transcription
factor 12 (TCF12), catenin alpha-like protein 1 (CTNNAL1) and wingless-type MMTV 
integration site family, member 10B (WNT10B) were differentially expressed in
PMSG-hCG stimulated preovulatory ovarian follicles of Large White and Chinese
Taihu sows. In the present research, these three genes were selected as the
candidate genes for litter size traits in pigs. Four mutations (TCF12 c.-201+65
G>A, TCF12 c.-200-300 G>A, CTNNAL1 c.1878 G>C and WNT10B c.*12 C>T) were detected
in eleven pig populations, and results indicated CTNNAL1 c.1878 G and WNT10B
c.*12 C were the major alleles in all tested pig populations, while TCF12
c.-201+65 A and TCF12 c.-200-300 A were the major alleles in several Chinese
native pig breeds. Association analysis of four mutations with litter size in
Large White and DIV pigs showed that both the signficant differences of total
number born (TNB) and number born alive (NBA) among three genotypes and the
significance of additive effects appeared at TCF12 c.-200-300 G>A and CTNNAL1
c.1878 G>C loci, suggesting these two mutations might be reliable markers for pig
selection and breeding.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23820070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Zygote. 2014 Nov;22(4):455-61. doi: 10.1017/S0967199413000117. Epub 2013 Apr 26.

Differential expression of microRNAs in 2-cell and 4-cell mouse embryos.

Wang P(1), Cui J(1), Zhao C(1), Zhou L(1), Guo X(1), Shen R(1), Zhang J(2), Ling 
X(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine,Department of
Reproduction,Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to
Nanjing Medical University,Nanjing 210004,China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Medicine,Department of Reproduction,Nanjing Maternity and Child
Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University,Nanjing Medical
University,Nanjing,Jiangsu Province,China.

In vitro fertilized (IVF) human embryos have a high incidence of developmental
arrest before the blastocyst stage, therefore characterization of the molecular
mechanisms that regulate embryo development is urgently required.
Post-transcriptional control by microRNAs (miRNAs) is one of the most
investigated RNA control mechanisms, and is hypothesized to be involved actively 
in developmental arrest in preimplantation embryos. In this study, we extracted
total RNA from mouse 2-cell and 4-cell embryos. Using a miRNA microarray, 192
miRNAs were found to be differentially expressed in 4-cell embryos and 2-cell
embryos; 122 miRNAs were upregulated and 70 were downregulated in 4-cell embryos.
The microarray results were confirmed by real-time quantitative RT-PCR for six
miRNAs (mmu-miR-467h, mmu-miR-466d-3p, mmu-miR-292-5p, mmu-miR-154, mmu-miR-2145,
and mmu-miR-706). Cdca4 and Tcf12 were identified as miR-154 target genes by
target prediction analysis. This study provides a developmental map for a large
number of miRNAs in 2-cell and 4-cell embryos. The function of these miRNAs and
the mechanisms by which they modulate embryonic developmental arrest require
further study. The results of this study have potential applications in the field
of reproductive medicine.

PMID: 23731853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Anim Genet. 2013 Aug;44(5):493-501. doi: 10.1111/age.12044. Epub 2013 Apr 23.

Genes involved in muscle lipid composition in 15 European Bos taurus breeds.

Dunner S(1), Sevane N, Garcia D, Levéziel H, Williams JL, Mangin B, Valentini A; 
GeMQual Consortium.

Collaborators: Amarger V, Delourme D, Levéziel H, Boitard S, Mangin B, Cañón J,
Checa ML, Dunner S, García D, Miranda M, Pérez R, Christensen M, Ertbjerg P,
Crisá A, Marchitelli C, Valentini A, Failla S, Gigli S, Hocquette JF, Nute G,
Olleta JL, Panea B, Sañudo C, Razzaq N, Renand G, Williams JL.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Producción Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad
Complutense, Madrid, Spain. dunner@vet.ucm.es

Consumers demand healthy and palatable meat, both factors being affected by fat
composition. However, red meat has relatively high concentration of saturated
fatty acids and low concentration of the beneficial polyunsaturated fatty acids. 
To select animals prone to produce particular fat types, it is necessary to
identify the genes influencing muscle lipid composition. This paper describes an 
association study in which a large panel of candidate genes involved in
adipogenesis, lipid metabolism and energy homoeostasis was tested for effects on 
fat composition in 15 European cattle breeds. Sixteen genes were found to have
significant effects on different lipid traits, and among these, CFL1 and MYOZ1
were found to have large effects on the ratio of 18:2/18:3, CRI1 on the amount of
neutral adrenic acid (22:4 n-6), MMP1 on docosahexaenoic acid (22:6 n-3) and
conjugated linoleic acid, PLTP on the ratio of n-6:n-3 and IGF2R on flavour.
Several genes - ALDH2, CHRNE, CRHR2, DGAT1, IGFBP3, NEB, SOCS2, SUSP1, TCF12 and 
FOXO1 - also were found to be associated with both lipid and organoleptic traits 
although with smaller effect. The results presented here help in understanding
the genetic and biochemical background underlying variations in fatty acid
composition and flavour in beef.

© 2013 The Authors, Animal Genetics © 2013 Stichting International Foundation for
Animal Genetics.

PMID: 23611291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nat Genet. 2013 Mar;45(3):231-2. doi: 10.1038/ng.2557.

Filling in the gaps in cranial suture biology.

Fitzpatrick DR.

PMID: 23438589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 29;288(13):9001-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.437897. Epub 2013
Feb 5.

Secreted heat shock protein 90a (HSP90a) induces nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B-mediated TCF12
protein expression to down-regulate E-cadherin and to enhance colorectal cancer
cell migration and invasion.

Chen WS(1), Chen CC, Chen LL, Lee CC, Huang TS.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Experimental Surgery and Colorectal Surgery, Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, and Department of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei 112, Taiwan.

Secreted levels of HSP90a and overexpression of TCF12 have been associated with
the enhancement of colorectal cancer (CRC) cell migration and invasion. In this
study, we observed that CRC patients with tumor TCF12 overexpression exhibited
both a higher rate of metastatic occurrence and a higher average serum HSP90a
level compared with patients without TCF12 overexpression. Therefore, we studied 
the relationship between the actions of secreted HSP90a and TCF12. Like
overexpressed TCF12, secreted HSP90a or recombinant HSP90a (rHSP90a) induced
fibronectin expression and repressed E-cadherin, connexin-26, connexin-43, and
gap junction levels in CRC cells. Consistently, rHSP90a stimulated invasive
outgrowths of CRC cells from spherical structures during three-dimensional
culture. rHSP90a also induced TCF12 expression in CRC cells. Its effects on CRC
cell epithelial-mesenchymal transition, migration, and invasion were drastically 
prevented when TCF12 was knocked down. This suggests that TCF12 expression is
required for secreted HSP90a to enhance CRC cell spreading. Through the cellular 
receptor CD91, rHSP90a facilitated the complex formation of CD91 with I<U+03BA>B kinases
(IKKs) a and ß and increased the levels of phosphorylated (active) IKKa/ß and
NF-<U+03BA>B. Use of an IKKa/ß inhibitor or ectopic overexpression of dominant-negative 
I<U+03BA>Ba efficiently repressed rHSP90a-induced TCF12 expression. Moreover, <U+03BA>B motifs 
were recognized in the gene sequence of the TCF12 promoter, and a physical
association between NF-<U+03BA>B and the TCF12 promoter was detected in rHSP90a-treated 
CRC cells. Together, these results suggest that the CD91/IKK/NF-<U+03BA>B signaling
cascade is involved in secreted HSP90a-induced TCF12 expression, leading to
E-cadherin down-regulation and enhanced CRC cell migration/invasion.

PMCID: PMC3610972
PMID: 23386606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Nat Genet. 2013 Mar;45(3):304-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.2531. Epub 2013 Jan 27.

Mutations in TCF12, encoding a basic helix-loop-helix partner of TWIST1, are a
frequent cause of coronal craniosynostosis.

Sharma VP(1), Fenwick AL, Brockop MS, McGowan SJ, Goos JA, Hoogeboom AJ, Brady
AF, Jeelani NO, Lynch SA, Mulliken JB, Murray DJ, Phipps JM, Sweeney E, Tomkins
SE, Wilson LC, Bennett S, Cornall RJ, Broxholme J, Kanapin A; 500 Whole-Genome
Sequences (WGS500) Consortium, Johnson D, Wall SA, van der Spek PJ, Mathijssen
IM, Maxson RE, Twigg SR, Wilkie AO.

Collaborators: Donnelly P, Bell J, Bentley D, McVean G, Ratcliffe P, Taylor J,
Wilkie A, Donnelly P, Broxholme J, Buck D, Cazier JB, Cornall R, Gregory L,
Knight J, Lunter G, McVean G, Taylor J, Tomlinson I, Wilkie A, Buck D, Allan C,
Attar M, Green A, Gregory L, Humphray S, Kingsbury Z, Lamble S, Lonie L,
Pagnamenta A, Piazza P, Polanco G, Trebes A, McVean G, Donnelly P, Cazier JB,
Broxholme J, Copley R, Fiddy S, Grocock R, Hatton E, Holmes C, Hughes L, Humburg 
P, Kanapin A, Lise S, Lunter G, Martin H, Murray L, McCarthy D, Rimmer A, Sahgal 
N, Wright B, Yau C.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Group, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2013 Oct;45(10):1261.

Craniosynostosis, the premature fusion of the cranial sutures, is a heterogeneous
disorder with a prevalence of ~1 in 2,200 (refs. 1,2). A specific genetic
etiology can be identified in ~21% of cases, including mutations of TWIST1, which
encodes a class II basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, and causes
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, typically associated with coronal synostosis. Using
exome sequencing, we identified 38 heterozygous TCF12 mutations in 347 samples
from unrelated individuals with craniosynostosis. The mutations predominantly
occurred in individuals with coronal synostosis and accounted for 32% and 10% of 
subjects with bilateral and unilateral pathology, respectively. TCF12 encodes one
of three class I E proteins that heterodimerize with class II bHLH proteins such 
as TWIST1. We show that TCF12 and TWIST1 act synergistically in a transactivation
assay and that mice doubly heterozygous for loss-of-function mutations in Tcf12
and Twist1 have severe coronal synostosis. Hence, the dosage of TCF12-TWIST1
heterodimers is critical for normal coronal suture development.

PMCID: PMC3647333
PMID: 23354436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Gene. 2013 Dec 10;532(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.009. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

Regulation of the MIR155 host gene in physiological and pathological processes.

Elton TS(1), Selemon H, Elton SM, Parinandi NL.

Author information: 
(1)Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH, USA; College of Pharmacy, Division of Pharmacology, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. Electronic address:
terry.elton@osumc.edu.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a family of small nonprotein-coding RNAs, play a critical
role in posttranscriptional gene regulation by acting as adaptors for the
miRNA-induced silencing complex to inhibit gene expression by targeting mRNAs for
translational repression and/or cleavage. miR-155-5p and miR-155-3p are processed
from the B-cell Integration Cluster (BIC) gene (now designated, MIR155 host gene 
or MIR155HG). MiR-155-5p is highly expressed in both activated B- and T-cells and
in monocytes/macrophages. MiR-155-5p is one of the best characterized miRNAs and 
recent data indicate that miR-155-5p plays a critical role in various
physiological and pathological processes such as hematopoietic lineage
differentiation, immunity, inflammation, viral infections, cancer, cardiovascular
disease, and Down syndrome. In this review we summarize the mechanisms by which
MIR155HG expression can be regulated. Given that the pathologies mediated by
miR-155-5p result from the over-expression of this miRNA it may be possible to
therapeutically attenuate miR-155-5p levels in the treatment of several
pathological processes.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23246696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Blood. 2012 Nov 8;120(19):3968-77. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-02-411397. Epub 2012
Sep 12.

Structural basis of CBP/p300 recruitment in leukemia induction by E2A-PBX1.

Denis CM(1), Chitayat S, Plevin MJ, Wang F, Thompson P, Liu S, Spencer HL, Ikura 
M, LeBrun DP, Smith SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's University, Kingston,
ON, Canada.

E-proteins are critical transcription factors in B-cell lymphopoiesis. E2A, 1 of 
3 E-protein-encoding genes, is implicated in the induction of acute lymphoblastic
leukemia through its involvement in the chromosomal translocation 1;19 and
consequent expression of the E2A-PBX1 oncoprotein. An interaction involving a
region within the N-terminal transcriptional activation domain of E2A-PBX1,
termed the PCET motif, which has previously been implicated in E-protein
silencing, and the KIX domain of the transcriptional coactivator CBP/p300,
critical for leukemogenesis. However, the structural details of this interaction 
remain unknown. Here we report the structure of a 1:1 complex between PCET motif 
peptide and the KIX domain. Residues throughout the helical PCET motif that
contact the KIX domain are important for both binding KIX and bone marrow
immortalization by E2A-PBX1. These results provide molecular insights into
E-protein-driven differentiation of B-cells and the mechanism of E-protein
silencing, and reveal the PCET/KIX interaction as a therapeutic target for
E2A-PBX1-induced leukemia.

PMID: 22972988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Aug;42(8):2031-41. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242497.

Loss of E protein transcription factors E2A and HEB delays memory-precursor
formation during the CD8+ T-cell immune response.

D'Cruz LM(1), Lind KC, Wu BB, Fujimoto JK, Goldrath AW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093,
USA.

The transcription factors E2A and HEB (members of the E protein family) have been
shown to play essential roles in lymphocyte development, while their negative
regulators, the Id proteins, have been implicated in both lymphocyte development 
and in the CD8(+) T-cell immune response. Here, we show that E proteins also
influence CD8(+) T cells responding to infection. E protein expression was
upregulated by CD8(+) T cells during the early stages of infection and increased 
E protein DNA-binding activity could be detected upon TCR stimulation. Deficiency
in the E proteins, E2A and HEB, led to increased frequency of terminally
differentiated effector KLRG1(hi) CD8(+) T cells in mice during infection, and
decreased generation of longer-lived memory-precursor cells during the immune
response. These data suggest a model whereby E protein transcription factor
activity favors rapid memory-precursor T-cell formation while their negative
regulators, Id2 and Id3, are both required for robust effector CD8(+) T-cell
response during infection.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3702188
PMID: 22585759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Clin Dev Immunol. 2012;2012:678705. doi: 10.1155/2012/678705. Epub 2012 Apr 22.

HEB in the spotlight: Transcriptional regulation of T-cell specification,
commitment, and developmental plasticity.

Braunstein M(1), Anderson MK.

Author information: 
(1)Sunnybrook Research Institute, University of Toronto, 2075 Bayview Avenue,
Toronto, ON, Canada M4N 3M5.

The development of T cells from multipotent progenitors in the thymus occurs by
cascades of interactions between signaling molecules and transcription factors,
resulting in the loss of alternative lineage potential and the acquisition of the
T-cell functional identity. These processes require Notch signaling and the
activity of GATA3, TCF1, Bcl11b, and the E-proteins HEB and E2A. We have shown
that HEB factors are required to inhibit the thymic NK cell fate and that HEBAlt 
allows the passage of T-cell precursors from the DN to DP stage but is
insufficient for suppression of the NK cell lineage choice. HEB factors are also 
required to enforce the death of cells that have not rearranged their TCR genes. 
The synergistic interactions between Notch1, HEBAlt, HEBCan, GATA3, and TCF1 are 
presented in a gene network model, and the influence of thymic stromal
architecture on lineage choice in the thymus is discussed.

PMCID: PMC3346973
PMID: 22577461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Apr;14(4):316-20.

[Molecular genetics of functional articulation disorder in children].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao YJ(1), Ma HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, China.

Genetic factors are an important cause of functional articulation disorder in
children. This article reviews some genes and chromosome regions associated with 
a genetic susceptibility to functional articulation disorders. The forkhead box
P2 (FOXP2) gene on chromosome 7 is introduced in details including its structure,
expression and function. The relationship between the FOXP2 gene and
developmental apraxia of speech is discussed. As a transcription factor, FOXP2
gene regulates the expression of many genes. CNTNAP2 as an important target gene 
of FOXP2 is a key gene influencing language development. Functional articulation 
disorder may be developed to dyslexia, therefore some candidate regions and genes
related to dyslexia, such as 3p12-13, 15q11-21, 6p22 and 1p34-36, are also
introduced. ROBO1 gene in 3p12.3, ZNF280D gene, TCF12 gene, EKN1 gene in 15q21,
and KIAA0319 gene in 6p22 have been candidate genes for the study of functional
articulation disorder.

PMID: 22537967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Immunity. 2012 Mar 23;36(3):348-61. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.02.010. Epub 2012 
Mar 15.

E protein transcription factors are required for the development of CD4(+)
lineage T cells.

Jones-Mason ME(1), Zhao X, Kappes D, Lasorella A, Iavarone A, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

The double-positive (DP) to single-positive (SP) transition during T cell
development is initiated by downregulation of the E protein transcription factors
HEB and E2A. Here, we have demonstrated that in addition to regulating the onset 
of this transition, HEB and E2A also play a separate role in CD4(+) lineage
choice. Deletion of HEB and E2A in DP thymocytes specifically blocked the
development of CD4(+) lineage T cells. Furthermore, deletion of the E protein
inhibitors Id2 and Id3 allowed CD4(+) T cell development but blocked CD8(+)
lineage development. Analysis of the CD4(+) lineage transcriptional regulators
ThPOK and Gata3 placed HEB and E2A upstream of CD4(+) lineage specification.
These studies identify an important role for E proteins in the activation of
CD4(+) lineage differentiation as thymocytes undergo the DP to SP transition.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3431168
PMID: 22425249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Dev Dyn. 2012 Mar;241(3):553-62. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23738. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

Drosophila lilliputian is required for proneural gene expression in retinal
development.

Distefano GM(1), Gangemi AJ, Khandelwal PJ, Saunders AJ, Marenda DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Proper neurogenesis in the developing Drosophila retina requires the 
regulated expression of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proneural transcription
factors Atonal (Ato) and Daughterless (Da). Factors that control the timing and
spatial expression of these bHLH proneural genes in the retina are required for
the proper formation and function of the adult eye and nervous system.
RESULTS: Here we report that lilliputian (lilli), the Drosophila homolog of the
FMR2/AF4 family of proteins, regulates the transcription of ato and da in the
developing fly retina. We find that lilli controls ato expression at multiple
enhancer elements. We also find that lilli contributes to ato auto-regulation in 
the morphogenetic furrow by first regulating the expression of da prior to ato.
We show that FMR2 regulates the ato and da homologs MATH5 and TCF12 in human
cells, suggesting a conservation of this regulation from flies to humans.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that lilliputian is part of the genetic program that
regulates the expression of proneural genes in the developing retina.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22275119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cancer Genet. 2011 Oct;204(10):557-62. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.10.001.

A complex MLL rearrangement identified five years after initial MDS diagnosis
results in out-of-frame fusions without progression to acute leukemia.

Meyer C(1), Kowarz E, Yip SF, Wan TS, Chan TK, Dingermann T, Chan LC, Marschalek 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Diagnostic Center of Acute Leukemia, Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology, The 
Center for Drug Research, Development, and Safety (ZAFES), Goethe-University of
Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. claus.meyer@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Chromosomal rearrangements of the MLL gene are uncommon in myelodysplastic
syndromes (MDSs), and few studies of their molecular structures and oncogenic
mechanisms exist. Here, we present a case of de novo MDS with a normal karyotype 
at initial diagnosis and a mild clinical course. Five years after the initial
diagnosis, investigators identified a complex rearrangement of the MLL gene
without progression to acute leukemia. The 5' part of the MLL gene is fused out
of frame with the LOC100131626 gene, and the 3' part of the MLL gene out of frame
with the TCF12 gene. Rapid amplification of complementary DNA 3' ends yielded two
main fusion transcripts, which is in concordance with the two described isoforms 
of the LOC100131626 gene. For both isoform-fusion transcripts, the open reading
frame terminates shortly after the breakpoint that is predicted to form two de
facto truncated MLL proteins and disrupts the open reading frame of the
LOC100131626, TCF12, and UBE4A genes. Neither dimerization nor a transcriptional 
activation domain, each of which is causally linked to MLL protein-mediated
transformation, is present. This and other unusual MLL rearrangements probably
represent a subclass of MLL gene abnormalities that have intrinsically no ability
or only a weak ability to transform hematopoeitic cells and are identified only
in the context of other hematopoetic malignancies.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22137486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 20;287(4):2798-809. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.258947. Epub 2011
Nov 30.

TCF12 protein functions as transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin, and its
overexpression is correlated with metastasis of colorectal cancer.

Lee CC(1), Chen WS, Chen CC, Chen LL, Lin YS, Fan CS, Huang TS.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Miaoli 350, Taiwan.

A correlation of TCF12 mRNA overexpression with colorectal cancer (CRC)
metastasis was suggested by microarray data and validated by the survey of 120
patients. Thirty-three (27.5%) of the 120 patients showed tumor TCF12 mRNA
overexpression and had a higher rate of metastatic occurrence (p = 0.020) and a
poorer survival outcome (p = 0.014). Abundant TCF12 levels were also observed in 
human CRC cell lines such as SW620 and LoVo, but a relatively low level was
detected in SW480 cells. Knockdown of TCF12 expression in SW620 and LoVo cells
drastically reduced their activities of migration, invasion, and metastasis.
Tight cell-cell contact and an increase in E-cadherin but a concomitant decrease 
in fibronectin were observed in TCF12-knockdown cells. Connexin 26, connexin 43, 
and gap-junction activity were also increased upon TCF12-knockdown. In contrast, 
ectopic TCF12 overexpression in SW480 cells facilitated fibronectin expression
and cell migration and invasion activities but diminished cellular levels of
E-cadherin, connexin 26, connexin 43, and gap junction. A physical association of
TCF12 with the E-cadherin promoter was evidenced by chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay. TCF12 was tightly correlated with cellular expression of Bmi1 and EZH2 and
was co-immunoprecipitable with Bmi1 and EZH2, suggesting that TCF12
transcriptionally suppressed E-cadherin expression via polycomb group-repressive 
complexes. Clinically, TCF12 mRNA overexpression was also correlated with
E-cadherin mRNA down-regulation in the tumor tissues of our 120 patients (p =
0.013). These studies suggested that TCF12 functioned as a transcriptional
repressor of E-cadherin and its overexpression was significantly correlated with 
the occurrence of CRC metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3268437
PMID: 22130667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. BMC Genomics. 2011 Oct 14;12:505. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-505.

Tumor-specific usage of alternative transcription start sites in colorectal
cancer identified by genome-wide exon array analysis.

Thorsen K(1), Schepeler T, Øster B, Rasmussen MH, Vang S, Wang K, Hansen KQ, Lamy
P, Pedersen JS, Eller A, Mansilla F, Laurila K, Wiuf C, Laurberg S, Dyrskjøt L,
Ørntoft TF, Andersen CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby, 8200
Aarhus N, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Approximately half of all human genes use alternative transcription
start sites (TSSs) to control mRNA levels and broaden the transcriptional output 
in healthy tissues. Aberrant expression patterns promoting carcinogenesis,
however, may arise from alternative promoter usage.
RESULTS: By profiling 108 colorectal samples using exon arrays, we identified
nine genes (TCF12, OSBPL1A, TRAK1, ANK3, CHEK1, UGP2, LMO7, ACSL5, and SCIN)
showing tumor-specific alternative TSS usage in both adenoma and cancer samples
relative to normal mucosa. Analysis of independent exon array data sets
corroborated these findings. Additionally, we confirmed the observed patterns for
selected mRNAs using quantitative real-time reverse-transcription PCR.
Interestingly, for some of the genes, the tumor-specific TSS usage was not
restricted to colorectal cancer. A comprehensive survey of the nine genes in
lung, bladder, liver, prostate, gastric, and brain cancer revealed significantly 
altered mRNA isoform ratios for CHEK1, OSBPL1A, and TCF12 in a subset of these
cancer types.To identify the mechanism responsible for the shift in alternative
TSS usage, we antagonized the Wnt-signaling pathway in DLD1 and Ls174T colorectal
cancer cell lines, which remarkably led to a shift in the preferred TSS for both 
OSBPL1A and TRAK1. This indicated a regulatory role of the Wnt pathway in
selecting TSS, possibly also involving TP53 and SOX9, as their transcription
binding sites were enriched in the promoters of the tumor preferred isoforms
together with their mRNA levels being increased in tumor samples. Finally, to
evaluate the prognostic impact of the altered TSS usage, immunohistochemistry was
used to show deregulation of the total protein levels of both TCF12 and OSBPL1A, 
corresponding to the mRNA levels observed. Furthermore, the level of nuclear
TCF12 had a significant correlation to progression free survival in a cohort of
248 stage II colorectal cancer samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Alternative TSS usage in colorectal adenoma and cancer samples has
been shown for nine genes, and OSBPL1A and TRAK1 were found to be regulated in
vitro by Wnt signaling. TCF12 protein expression was upregulated in cancer
samples and correlated with progression free survival.

PMCID: PMC3208247
PMID: 21999571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2012 Jan;97(1):69-80. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2011.09.006. Epub
2011 Sep 25.

Enhanced expression of Pctk1, Tcf12 and Ccnd1 in hippocampus of rats: Impact on
cognitive function, synaptic plasticity and pathology.

Wu K(1), Li S, Bodhinathan K, Meyers C, Chen W, Campbell-Thompson M, McIntyre L, 
Foster TC, Muzyczka N, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

We previously identified a set of 50 genes that were differentially transcribed
in the hippocampal CA1 region of aged, learning-impaired rats compared to aged,
superior learning animals during a Morris water maze paradigm. In the current
study, we expressed three of these genes (Pctk1, Tcf12 and Ccnd1), which had
shown increased transcription in aged, learning impaired rats, in the hippocampus
of young rats using viral gene transfer and tested for learning and memory
deficits at age 7-14months. Pctk1 injected animals displayed a modest deficit in 
acquiring latency in both the Morris water maze and the reverse Morris maze. In
the radial arm water maze paradigm, Pctk1, Tcf12 and Ccnd1 expressing animals all
showed significant deficits in spatial working memory compared to controls. Rats 
injected with Ccnd1 and Tcf12, but not Pctk1, also showed a significant deficit
in spatial reference memory in the radial arm water maze. Electrophysiological
experiments revealed no difference in LTP in Ccnd1 and Pctk1 animals. However,
LTD induced by low frequency stimulation was observed in control and Ccnd1
animals, but not in Pctk1 treated animals. In addition, neither Ccnd1 nor Pctk1
expression produced any detectable neuropathology. In contrast Tcf12 expressing
animals displayed significant neurodegeneration in both CA1 and dentate gyrus.
Several Tcf12 animals also developed tumors that appeared to be glioblastomas,
suggesting that aberrant Tcf12 expression in the hippocampus is tumorigenic.
Thus, behavioral experiments suggested that overexpression of Pctk1 and Ccnd1
produce a deficit in learning and memory, but electrophysiological experiments do
not point to a simple mechanism. In contrast, the learning and memory deficits in
Tcf12 animals are likely due to neuropathology associated with Tcf12 gene
expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3694440
PMID: 21982980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 18;108(42):17402-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1111766108. Epub 2011 Oct 4.

The transcription factors E2A and HEB act in concert to induce the expression of 
FOXO1 in the common lymphoid progenitor.

Welinder E(1), Mansson R, Mercer EM, Bryder D, Sigvardsson M, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Recent studies have identified a number of transcriptional regulators, including 
E proteins, EBF1, FOXO1, and PAX5, that act together to orchestrate the B-cell
fate. However, it still remains unclear as to how they are linked at the earliest
stages of B-cell development. Here, we show that lymphocyte development in
HEB-ablated mice exhibits a partial developmental arrest, whereas B-cell
development in E2A(+/-)HEB(-/-) mice is completely blocked at the LY6D(-) common 
lymphoid progenitor stage. We show that the transcription signatures of E2A- and 
HEB-ablated common lymphoid progenitors significantly overlap. Notably, we found 
that Foxo1 expression was substantially reduced in the LY6D(-) HEB- and
E2A-deficient cells. Finally, we show that E2A binds to enhancer elements across 
the FOXO1 locus to activate Foxo1 expression, linking E2A and FOXO1 directly in a
common pathway. In summary, the data indicate that the earliest event in B-cell
specification involves the induction of FOXO1 expression and requires the
combined activities of E2A and HEB.

PMCID: PMC3198373
PMID: 21972416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Genes Dev. 2011 Aug 1;25(15):1654-61. doi: 10.1101/gad.16800511.

HEB and E2A function as SMAD/FOXH1 cofactors.

Yoon SJ(1), Wills AE, Chuong E, Gupta R, Baker JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Nodal signaling, mediated through SMAD transcription factors, is necessary for
pluripotency maintenance and endoderm commitment. We identified a new motif,
termed SMAD complex-associated (SCA), that is bound by SMAD2/3/4 and FOXH1 in
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and derived endoderm. We demonstrate that two 
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins-HEB and E2A-bind the SCA motif at regions 
overlapping SMAD2/3 and FOXH1. Furthermore, we show that HEB and E2A associate
with SMAD2/3 and FOXH1, suggesting they form a complex at critical target
regions. This association is biologically important, as E2A is critical for
mesendoderm specification, gastrulation, and Nodal signal transduction in Xenopus
tropicalis embryos. Taken together, E proteins are novel Nodal signaling
cofactors that associate with SMAD2/3 and FOXH1 and are necessary for mesendoderm
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3182016
PMID: 21828274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Oct;32(10):1467-73. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr138. Epub 2011
Jul 18.

Epigenetic deregulation of TCF21 inhibits metastasis suppressor KISS1 in
metastatic melanoma.

Arab K(1), Smith LT, Gast A, Weichenhan D, Huang JP, Claus R, Hielscher T,
Espinosa AV, Ringel MD, Morrison CD, Schadendorf D, Kumar R, Plass C.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany.

Metastatic melanoma is a fatal disease due to the lack of successful therapies
and biomarkers for early detection and its incidence has been increasing. Genetic
studies have defined recurrent chromosomal aberrations, suggesting the location
of either tumor suppressor genes or oncogenes. Transcription factor 21 (TCF21)
belongs to the class A of the basic helix-loop-helix family with reported
functions in early lung and kidney development as well as tumor suppressor
function in the malignancies of the lung and head and neck. In this study, we
combined quantitative DNA methylation analysis in patient biopsies and in their
derived cell lines to demonstrate that TCF21 expression is downregulated in
metastatic melanoma by promoter hypermethylation and TCF21 promoter DNA
methylation is correlated with decreased survival in metastatic skin melanoma
patients. In addition, the chromosomal location of TCF21 on 6q23-q24 coincides
with the location of a postulated metastasis suppressor in melanoma.
Functionally, TCF21 binds the promoter of the melanoma metastasis-suppressing
gene, KiSS1, and enhances its gene expression through interaction with E12, a
TCF3 isoform and with TCF12. Loss of TCF21 expression results in loss of KISS1
expression through loss of direct interaction of TCF21 at the KISS1 promoter.
Finally, overexpression of TCF21 inhibits motility of C8161 melanoma cells. These
data suggest that epigenetic downregulation of TCF21 is functionally involved in 
melanoma progression and that it may serve as a biomarker for aggressive tumor
behavior.

PMCID: PMC3179423
PMID: 21771727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;31(13):2544-51. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01458-10. Epub 2011 May 
2.

Mtg16/Eto2 contributes to murine T-cell development.

Hunt A(1), Fischer M, Engel ME, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Mtg16/Eto2 is a transcriptional corepressor that is disrupted by t(16;21) in
acute myeloid leukemia. Using mice lacking Mtg16, we found that Mtg16 is a
critical regulator of T-cell development. Deletion of Mtg16 led to reduced
thymocyte development in vivo, and after competitive bone marrow transplantation,
there was a nearly complete failure of Mtg16(-/-) cells to contribute to
thymocyte development. This defect was recapitulated in vitro as Mtg16(-/-)
Lineage(-)/Sca1(+)/c-Kit(+) (LSK) cells of the bone marrow or DN1 cells of the
thymus failed to produce CD4(+)/CD8(+) cells in response to a Notch signal.
Complementation of these defects by reexpressing Mtg16 showed that 3 highly
conserved domains were somewhat dispensable for T-cell development but required
the capacity of Mtg16 to suppress E2A-dependent transcriptional activation and to
bind to the Notch intracellular domain. Thus, Mtg16 integrates the activities of 
signaling pathways and nuclear factors in the establishment of T-cell fate
specification.

PMCID: PMC3133377
PMID: 21536648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Apr 12;134(3):865-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.01.028. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

Tannin-rich fraction from Terminalia catappa inhibits quorum sensing (QS) in
Chromobacterium violaceum and the QS-controlled biofilm maturation and LasA
staphylolytic activity in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Taganna JC(1), Quanico JP, Perono RM, Amor EC, Rivera WL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Applied Microbiology, Institute of Biology, College of Science, 
University of the Philippines, Diliman, Quezon City 1101, Philippines.
Joemar.Taganna@up.edu.ph

AIM OF THE STUDY: The study aimed to test the activity of Terminalia catappa L.
against bacterial quorum sensing (QS) in order to provide a potential scientific 
basis for the traditional use of leaf extracts of this plant as an antiseptic.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The anti-QS activity of the methanolic leaf extract of
Terminalia catappa was detected through the inhibition of the QS-controlled
violacein pigment production in Chromobacterium violaceum. Fractions resulting
from size-exclusion chromatography were assayed. The most active fraction was
characterized through qualitative phytochemical detection methods. The effect of 
this fraction on known QS-controlled phenotypes in test strains was assessed.
RESULTS: The fraction with the highest activity (labeled as TCF12) was
characterized to be tannin-rich. It specifically inhibited QS-controlled
violacein production in Chromobacterium violaceum with 50% reduction achieved at 
62.5 µg mL(-1) without significantly affecting growth up to about 962 µg mL(-1). 
The assessment of its effects on LasA activity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC
10145 found that the production of this virulence determinant is reduced in a
concentration dependent manner with about 50% reduction at 62.5 µg mL(-1).
Furthermore, it was found that TCF12 was able to inhibit the maturation of
biofilms of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a phenotype that has also been known to be
QS-regulated.
CONCLUSION: Therefore, tannin-rich components of Terminalia catappa leaves are
able to inhibit certain phenotypic expression of QS in the test strains used.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21291979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 May 6;52(6):2999-3007. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-6708.

Role of miR-204 in the regulation of apoptosis, endoplasmic reticulum stress
response, and inflammation in human trabecular meshwork cells.

Li G(1), Luna C, Qiu J, Epstein DL, Gonzalez P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

PURPOSE: To investigate the biological functions of miR-204 in human trabecular
meshwork (HTM) cells.
METHODS: Changes in gene expression induced by miR-204 in HTM cells were
evaluated by gene array analysis using arrays and confirmed by quantitative-PCR
(Q-PCR). Direct targeting of miR-204 to 12 potential novel targets was confirmed 
using a luciferase system, and five of them were verified by Western blot
analysis. Effects of miR-204 on apoptosis, cell viability, and accumulation of
carbonylated proteins were evaluated in HTM cells treated with H(2)O(2).
Induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress markers by tunicamycin was
analyzed by Q-PCR, and expression of IL-8 and IL-11 was analyzed by ELISA.
RESULTS: MiR-204 decreased the expression of multiple genes in HTM cells. Twelve 
genes (AP1S2, Bcl2l2, BIRC2, EDEM1, EZR, FZD1, M6PR, RAB22A, RAB40B, SERP1,
TCF12, and TCF4) were validated as direct targets of miR-204. Downregulation of
expressions at protein levels of Bcl2l2, BIRC2, EZR, M6PR, and SERP1 were
confirmed by Western blot analysis. HTM cells transfected with miR-204 showed
increased levels of apoptosis, decreased viability, increased accumulation of
oxidized proteins after H(2)O(2) treatment, decreased induction of ER stress
response markers, and reduced expression of inflammatory mediators IL-8 and
IL-11.
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-204 potentially plays an important role in the regulation of
multiple functions in HTM cells including apoptosis, accumulation of damaged
proteins, ER stress response, and expression of inflammatory mediators.

PMCID: PMC3109013
PMID: 21282569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;31(5):971-82. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01034-10. Epub 2010 Dec
28.

HEB-deficient T-cell precursors lose T-cell potential and adopt an alternative
pathway of differentiation.

Braunstein M(1), Anderson MK.

Author information: 
(1)Sunnybrook Research Institute and Department of Immunology, University of
Toronto, 2075 Bayview Ave., Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Early thymocytes possess multilineage potential, which is progressively
restricted as cells transit through the double-negative stages of T-cell
development. DN1 cells retain the ability to become natural killer cells,
dendritic cells, B cells, and myeloid cells as well as T cells, but these options
are lost by the DN3 stage. The Notch1 signaling pathway is indispensable for
initiation of the T-cell lineage and inhibitory for the B-cell lineage, but the
regulatory mechanisms by which the T-cell fate is locked in are largely
undefined. Previously, we discovered that the E-protein transcription factor
HEBAlt promoted T-cell specification. Here, we report that HEB(-/-) T-cell
precursors have compromised Notch1 function and lose T-cell potential. Moreover, 
reconstituting HEB(-/-) precursors with Notch1 activity enforced fidelity to the 
T-cell fate. However, instead of becoming B cells, HEB(-/-) DN3 cells adopted a
DN1-like phenotype and could be induced to differentiate into thymic NK cells.
HEB(-/-) DN1-like cells retained GATA3 and Id2 expression but had lower levels of
the Bcl11b gene, a Notch target gene. Therefore, our studies have revealed a new 
set of interactions between HEB, Notch1, and GATA3 that regulate the T-cell fate 
choice in developing thymocytes.

PMCID: PMC3067813
PMID: 21189289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Immunol Res. 2011 Apr;49(1-3):202-15. doi: 10.1007/s12026-010-8182-x.

Stage-specific functions of E-proteins at the ß-selection and T-cell receptor
checkpoints during thymocyte development.

Jones ME(1), Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3010, Durham, NC
27710, USA. mj5@duke.edu

The E-protein transcription factors E2A and HEB function in a lineage- and
stage-specific manner to orchestrate many critical events throughout lymphocyte
development. The function of E-proteins in both B- and T-lymphocyte development
has been extensively studied through the use of single-gene knockout animals.
Unlike B cells, which rely primarily on E2A alone, T cells are regulated by the
combinatorial expression of both E2A and HEB. Therefore, many of the roles of
E-proteins during T-cell development may be masked in single-gene knockout
studies due to the compensatory function of E2A and HEB. More recently, our
laboratory has established double-conditional knockout models to eliminate both
E2A and HEB in a stage-specific manner throughout T-cell development. These
models, in combination with other complimentary genetic approaches, have
identified new E-protein functions at each of the two major T-cell developmental 
checkpoints. Here, we will discuss how E-proteins function to regulate the
expression of T-cell receptor components and cell cycle at the ß-selection
checkpoint, and how they control positive selection, survival, and
lineage-specific gene expression at the subsequent T-cell receptor checkpoint.

PMID: 21128008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Int Immunol. 2010 Dec;22(12):963-72. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxq450. Epub 2010 Nov
29.

HEBAlt enhances the T-cell potential of fetal myeloid-biased precursors.

Braunstein M(1), Rajkumar P, Claus CL, Vaccarelli G, Moore AJ, Wang D, Anderson
MK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Sunnybrook Research Institute,
Toronto, Ontario M4N 3M5, Canada.

Hematopoiesis is controlled by the interplay between transcription factors and
environmental signals. One of the primary determinants of the T-lineage choice is
Delta-like (DL)-Notch signaling, which promotes T-cell development and inhibits
B-cell development. We have found that the transcription factor HEBAlt is
up-regulated in early hematopoietic precursors in response to DL-Notch signaling 
and that it can promote early T-cell development. Here, we identified a
population of lineage-negative Sca-1<U+207B>c-kit(+) (LK) cells in the mouse fetal liver
that rapidly gave rise to myeloid cells and B cells but exhibited very little
T-cell potential. However, forced expression of HEBAlt in these precursors
restored their ability to develop into T cells. We also showed that Ikaros and
Notch1 are up-regulated in response to HEBAlt over-expression and that activated 
Notch1 enhances the ability of LK cells to enter the T-cell lineage. Furthermore,
the myeloid transcription factor C/EBPa is down-regulated in response to HEBAlt. 
We therefore propose that HEBAlt plays a role in the network that enforces the
T-lineage fate and limits myeloid fate during hematopoiesis.

PMID: 21115673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Nov;40(11):3173-82. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040360. Epub 2010 Oct
27.

Developmental progression of fetal HEB(-/-) precursors to the pre-T-cell stage is
restored by HEBAlt.

Braunstein M(1), Anderson MK.

Author information: 
(1)Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre and Department of Immunology, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Gene knockout studies have shown that the E-protein transcription factor HEB is
required for normal thymocyte development. We have identified a unique form of
HEB, called HEBAlt, which is expressed only during the early stages of T-cell
development, whereas HEBCan is expressed throughout T-cell development. Here, we 
show that HEB(-/-) precursors are inhibited at the ß-selection checkpoint of
T-cell development due to impaired expression of pTa and function of CD3e, both
of which are necessary for pre-TCR signaling. Transgenic expression of HEBAlt in 
HEB(-/-) precursors, however, upregulated pTa and allowed development to CD4(+)
CD8(+) stage in fetal thymocytes. Moreover, HEBAlt did overcome the CD3e
signaling defect in HEB(-/-) Rag-1(-/-) thymocytes. The HEBAlt transgene did not 
permit Rag-1(-/-) precursors to bypass ß-selection, indicating that it was not
acting as a dominant negative inhibitor of other E-proteins. Therefore, our
results provide the first mechanistic evidence that HEBAlt plays a critical role 
in early T-cell development and show that it can collaborate with fetal thymic
stromal elements to create a regulatory environment that supports T-cell
development past the ß-selection checkpoint.

Copyright © 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21061441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Oncogene. 2011 Mar 10;30(10):1252-60. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.495. Epub 2010 Nov 8.

A DNA-binding mutant of TAL1 cooperates with LMO2 to cause T cell leukemia in
mice.

Draheim KM(1), Hermance N, Yang Y, Arous E, Calvo J, Kelliher MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, UMass Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The most common translocation in childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL) involves the LMO2 locus, resulting in ectopic expression of the LMO2 gene
in human thymocytes. The LMO2 gene was also activated in patients with X-linked
Severe Combined Immune Deficiency treated with gene therapy because of retroviral
insertion in the LMO2 locus. The LMO2 insertions predisposed these children to
T-ALL, yet how LMO2 contributes to T cell transformation remains unclear. The LIM
(Lin 11, Isl-1, Mec-3) domain containing LMO2 protein regulates erythropoiesis as
part of a large transcriptional complex consisting of LMO2, TAL1, E47, GATA1 and 
LDB1 that recognizes bipartite E-box-GATA1 sites on target genes. Similarly, a
TAL1/E47/LMO2/LDB1 complex is observed in human T-ALL and Tal1 and Lmo2
expression in mice results in disease acceleration. To address the mechanism(s)
of Tal1/Lmo2 synergy in leukemia, we generated Lmo2 transgenic mice and mated
them with mice that express wild-type Tal1 or a DNA-binding mutant of TAL1.
Tal1/Lmo2 and MutTAL1/Lmo2 bitransgenic mice exhibit perturbations in thymocyte
development due to reduced E47/HEB transcriptional activity and develop leukemia 
with identical kinetics. These data demonstrate that the DNA-binding activity of 
Tal1 is not required to cooperate with Lmo2 to cause leukemia in mice and suggest
that Lmo2 may cooperate with Tal1 to interfere with E47/HEB function(s).

© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited

PMCID: PMC3691994
PMID: 21057528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Immunol. 2010 Oct 1;185(7):4109-17. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901783. Epub 2010
Sep 8.

Context-dependent regulation of hematopoietic lineage choice by HEBAlt.

Wang D(1), Claus CL, Rajkumar P, Braunstein M, Moore AJ, Sigvardsson M, Anderson 
MK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Sunnybrook Research Institute,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Hematopoietic development is controlled by combinatorial interactions between
E-protein transcription factors and other lineage regulators that operate in the 
context of gene-regulatory networks. The E-proteins HEB and E2A are critical for 
T cell and B cell development, but the mechanisms by which their activities are
directed to different genes in each lineage are unclear. We found that a short
form of HEB, HEBAlt, acts downstream of Delta-like (DL)-Notch signaling to
promote T cell development. In this paper, we show that forced expression of
HEBAlt in mouse hematopoietic progenitors inhibited B cell development, but it
allowed them to adopt a myeloid fate. HEBAlt interfered with the activity of E2A 
homodimers and with the expression of the transcription factor Pax5, both of
which are critical for B cell development. However, when combined with DL-Notch
signaling, HEBAlt enhanced the generation of T cell progenitors at the expense of
myeloid cells. The longer form of HEB, HEBCan, also inhibited E47 activity and
Pax5 expression, but it did not collaborate with DL-Notch signaling to suppress
myeloid potential. Therefore, HEBAlt can suppress B cell or myeloid potential in 
a context-specific manner, which suggests a role for this factor in maintaining T
lineage priming prior to commitment.

PMID: 20826759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Behav Genet. 2011 Jan;41(1):125-33. doi: 10.1007/s10519-010-9389-2. Epub 2010 Aug
27.

A cohort of balanced reciprocal translocations associated with dyslexia:
identification of two putative candidate genes at DYX1.

Buonincontri R(1), Bache I, Silahtaroglu A, Elbro C, Nielsen AM, Ullmann R,
Arkesteijn G, Tommerup N.

Author information: 
(1)Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 2200
Copenhagen N, Denmark. roberta@sund.ku.dk

Dyslexia is one of the most common neurodevelopmental disorders where likely many
genes are involved in the pathogenesis. So far six candidate dyslexia genes have 
been proposed, and two of these were identified by rare chromosomal
translocations in affected individuals. By systematic re-examination of all
translocation carriers in Denmark, we have identified 16 different translocations
associated with dyslexia. In four families, where the translocation co-segregated
with the phenotype, one of the breakpoints concurred (at the cytogenetic level)
with either a known dyslexia linkage region--at 15q21 (DYX1), 2p13 (DYX3) and
1p36 (DYX8)--or an unpublished linkage region at 19q13. As a first exploitation
of this unique cohort, we identify three novel candidate dyslexia genes, ZNF280D 
and TCF12 at 15q21, and PDE7B at 6q23.3, by molecular mapping of the familial
translocation with the 15q21 breakpoint.

PMID: 20798984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Immunol. 2010 Jun 15;184(12):6670-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901508. Epub 2010
May 10.

Synergy between IL-15 and Id2 promotes the expansion of human NK progenitor
cells, which can be counteracted by the E protein HEB required to drive T cell
development.

Schotte R(1), Dontje W, Nagasawa M, Yasuda Y, Bakker AQ, Spits H, Blom B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Academic Medical Center, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The cytokine IL-15 and the inhibitor of DNA binding (Id)2, which negatively
regulates the activity of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, have been
shown to play key roles in NK cell development. Consistent with this, exogenous
IL-15 added to human thymic progenitor cells stimulated their development into NK
cells at the expense of T cells both in fetal thymic organ culture and in
coculture with stromal cells expressing the Notch ligand Delta-like 1.
Overexpression of Id2 in thymic progenitor cells stimulated NK cell development
and blocked T cell development. This, in part, is attributed to inhibition of the
transcriptional activity of the E protein HEB, which we show in this study is the
only E protein that enhanced T cell development. Notably, Id2 increased a pool of
lineage CD1a-CD5+ progenitor cells that in synergy with IL-15 furthered expansion
and differentiation into NK cells. Taken together, our findings point to a
dualistic function of Id2 in controlling T/NK cell lineage decisions; T cell
development is impaired by Id2, most likely by sequestering HEB, whereas NK cell 
development is promoted by increasing a pool of CD1a-CD5+ NK cell progenitors,
which together with IL-15 differentiate into mature NK cells.

PMID: 20483740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Immunol Cell Biol. 2010 Jul;88(5):507-9. doi: 10.1038/icb.2010.55. Epub 2010 May 
18.

Transcriptional regulation of lymphocyte development. Developing NKT cells need
their (E) protein.

Chan AC, Berzins SP, Godfrey DI.

PMID: 20479777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nat Immunol. 2010 Mar;11(3):240-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.1845. Epub 2010 Feb 14.

An essential role for the transcription factor HEB in thymocyte survival, Tcra
rearrangement and the development of natural killer T cells.

D'Cruz LM(1), Knell J, Fujimoto JK, Goldrath AW.

Author information: 
(1)University of California San Diego, Division of Biology, La Jolla, California,
USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2010 Jul;11(7):644.

E proteins are basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that regulate many
key aspects of lymphocyte development. Thymocytes express multiple E proteins
that are thought to provide cooperative and compensatory functions crucial for T 
cell differentiation. Contrary to that, we report here that the E protein HEB was
uniquely required at the CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP) stage of T cell
development. Thymocytes lacking HEB showed impaired survival, failed to make
rearrangements of variable-alpha (V(alpha)) segments to distal joining-alpha
(J(alpha)) segments in the gene encoding the T cell antigen receptor alpha-chain 
(Tcra) and had a profound, intrinsic block in the development of invariant
natural killer T cells (iNKT cells) at their earliest progenitor stage. Thus, our
results show that HEB is a specific and essential factor in T cell development
and in the generation of the iNKT cell lineage, defining a unique role for HEB in
the regulation of lymphocyte maturation.

PMCID: PMC2993240
PMID: 20154672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Blood. 2009 Apr 9;113(15):3558-67. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-161307. Epub 2009
Feb 9.

Structure of the AML1-ETO eTAFH domain-HEB peptide complex and its contribution
to AML1-ETO activity.

Park S(1), Chen W, Cierpicki T, Tonelli M, Cai X, Speck NA, Bushweller JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

AML1-ETO is the chimeric protein product of the t(8;21) in acute myeloid
leukemia. The ETO portion of the fusion protein includes the eTAFH domain, which 
is homologous to several TATA binding protein-associated factors (TAFs) and
interacts with E proteins (E2A and HEB). It has been proposed that
AML1-ETO-mediated silencing of E protein function might be important for t(8;21) 
leukemogenesis. Here, we determined the solution structure of a complex between
the AML1-ETO eTAFH domain and an interacting peptide from HEB. On the basis of
the structure, key residues in AML1-ETO for HEB association were mutated. These
mutations do not impair the ability of AML1-ETO to enhance the clonogenic
capacity of primary mouse bone marrow cells and do not eliminate its ability to
repress proliferation or granulocyte differentiation. Therefore, the eTAFH-E
protein interaction appears to contribute relatively little to the activity of
AML1-ETO.

PMCID: PMC2668852
PMID: 19204326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. PLoS Genet. 2008 Nov;4(11):e1000275. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000275. Epub 2008
Nov 28.

AML1/ETO oncoprotein is directed to AML1 binding regions and co-localizes with
AML1 and HEB on its targets.

Gardini A(1), Cesaroni M, Luzi L, Okumura AJ, Biggs JR, Minardi SP, Venturini E, 
Zhang DE, Pelicci PG, Alcalay M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO-European Institute of Oncology,
Milan, Italy.

A reciprocal translocation involving chromosomes 8 and 21 generates the AML1/ETO 
oncogenic transcription factor that initiates acute myeloid leukemia by
recruiting co-repressor complexes to DNA. AML1/ETO interferes with the function
of its wild-type counterpart, AML1, by directly targeting AML1 binding sites.
However, transcriptional regulation determined by AML1/ETO probably relies on a
more complex network, since the fusion protein has been shown to interact with a 
number of other transcription factors, in particular E-proteins, and may
therefore target other sites on DNA. Genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation
and expression profiling were exploited to identify AML1/ETO-dependent
transcriptional regulation. AML1/ETO was found to co-localize with AML1,
demonstrating that the fusion protein follows the binding pattern of the
wild-type protein but does not function primarily by displacing it. The DNA
binding profile of the E-protein HEB was grossly rearranged upon expression of
AML1/ETO, and the fusion protein was found to co-localize with both AML1 and HEB 
on many of its regulated targets. Furthermore, the level of HEB protein was
increased in both primary cells and cell lines expressing AML1/ETO. Our results
suggest a major role for the functional interaction of AML1/ETO with AML1 and HEB
in transcriptional regulation determined by the fusion protein.

PMCID: PMC2577924
PMID: 19043539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Oct;38(10):2806-20. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838144.

E proteins are required to activate germline transcription of the TCR Vbeta8.2
gene.

Jia J(1), Dai M, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

Each TCR Vbeta gene is regulated by an individual Vbeta promoter, which becomes
active prior to V(D) J recombination and drives germline transcription. It has
been shown that Vbeta gene locus activation and recombination are dependent on
the Vbeta promoter. However, transcription factors that regulate Vbeta germline
transcription remain largely undefined. A major challenge in studying Vbeta gene 
germline transcription is the quantitative assessment of relatively low-level
transcripts in T-cell progenitors. Here we used the established Vbeta8.2(CD2)
knock-in mouse model to assess functions of E-protein transcription factors in
Vbeta8.2 germline transcription. We show that E proteins are required for the
activation but not the maintenance of the Vbeta8.2 germline transcription during 
thymocyte development. The activation of Vbeta8.2 germline transcription depends 
more on the E proteins encoded by the E2A gene than by the HEB gene. We further
show that IL-7 receptor (IL-7R)-mediated signals are essential for Vbeta8.2
germline transcription. We provide evidence that IL-7R expression is only
partially controlled by E2A, suggesting a role for E2A in driving Vbeta8.2
germline transcription independent of IL-7R activation.

PMCID: PMC2688731
PMID: 18958875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 4;283(27):19026-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709136200. Epub 2008 
May 2.

CBFA2T3-ZNF652 corepressor complex regulates transcription of the E-box gene HEB.

Kumar R(1), Cheney KM, McKirdy R, Neilsen PM, Schulz RB, Lee J, Cohen J, Booker
GW, Callen DF.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Genetics Group, Dame Roma Mitchell Cancer Research Laboratories,
Discipline of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5000,
Australia. ramam.sharma@imvs.sa.gov.au

Transcriptional repression plays a critical role in development and homeostasis. 
The ETO family represents a group of highly conserved and ubiquitously expressed 
transcriptional regulatory proteins that are components of a diverse range of
multiprotein repressor complexes. ETO proteins function as transcriptional
repressors by interacting with a number of transcription factors that bind to
their cognate consensus DNA binding sequences within the promoters of target
genes. We previously reported that the classical C(2)H(2) zinc finger DNA-binding
protein, ZNF652, specifically and functionally interacts with the ETO protein
CBFA2T3 and has a role in the suppression of breast oncogenesis. Here we report
the identification and validation of the ZNF652 consensus DNA binding sequence.
Our results show that the E-box gene HEB is a direct target of
CBFA2T3-ZNF652-mediated transcriptional repression. The CBFA2T3-ZNF652 complex
regulates HEB expression by binding to a single ZNF652 response element located
within the promoter sequence of HEB. This study also shows that the NHR3 and NHR4
domains of CBFA2T3 interact with a conserved proline-rich region located within
the C terminus of ZNF652. Our results, together with previous reports, indicate
that HEB has a complex relationship with CBFA2T3; CBFA2T3 interacts with ZNF652
to repress HEB expression, and in addition CBFA2T3 interacts with the HEB protein
to inhibit its activator function. These findings suggest that
CBFA2T3-ZNF652-mediated HEB regulation may play an important role in
hematopoiesis and myogenesis.

PMID: 18456661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Immunol. 2008 Jun;45(11):3302-11. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.02.012. Epub
2008 Apr 1.

A role for E2-2 at the DN3 stage of early thymopoiesis.

Wikström I(1), Forssell J, Penha-Goncalves MN, Bergqvist I, Holmberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biosciences, Medical and Clinical Genetics, Umeå
University, 901 85 Umeå, Sweden.

Roles for the E-proteins E2A and HEB during T lymphocyte development have been
well established. Based on our previous observations of counter selection against
T cells lacking E2-2, it seemed reasonable to assume that there would be a
function also for E2-2 in thymocyte development. Aiming at assigning such a role 
for E2-2, we analyzed the expression of E2-2, E2A, HEB as well as Id mRNA during 
T cell development. Interestingly, whereas all three E-proteins were expressed
during early thymocyte development, significant expression beyond the DP stage
was detected only for E2A. Among the Id proteins, Id2 displayed a prominent
expression exclusively in DN1, whereas Id3 showed some expression in DN1,
followed by a down regulation and then a prominent induction, peaking in the DP
stage. E2-2 was expressed during the DN stages, as well as in the DP stage,
suggesting that E2-2 operates in concert with the other E-proteins during early
thymocyte development. We found that E2-2 null thymocytes displayed a partial
block at the DN3 stage of development, as well as a reduced expression of pre-T
alpha, known to be regulated also by E2A and HEB. The fact that E2-2 deficient
thymocytes develop without gross abnormalities is likely to stem from redundancy 
due to the co-expression of E2A and HEB.

PMID: 18384878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Neurosci Res. 2008 May 15;86(7):1472-81. doi: 10.1002/jnr.21615.

E protein dosage influences brain development more than family member identity.

Ravanpay AC(1), Olson JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Research, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington 98109, USA.

Loss-of-function studies have revealed the role of many basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factors at specific points during development; however, the 
role of E proteins in the development of the nervous system has not been
experimentally addressed. E proteins have been speculated to interact selectively
with class II bHLH factors to form different neurogenic complexes. In this study,
using coimmunoprecipitation in a culture model of neurogenesis (P19 cells), we
show that E proteins E12, HEB, and E2-2 interact with neuroD2. Using
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and P19 cell culture, we show that these
heterodimers bind a neuroD2 preferred E box and induce neurogenesis equally well.
We examine the mRNA levels of the three E proteins at 10 time points during brain
development and show that E protein gene expression is regulated such that at
certain times during development selective interaction between neuroD2 and a
single E protein (HEB) is a possibility. This led us to study the brains of HEB
and E2A knockout mice, which manifest no gross neuroanatomical, cellular, or
behavioral deficits. These findings, together with homology in the primary
peptide sequence of E proteins, suggest functional compensation among E proteins 
during development of the nervous system.

PMID: 18214987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Immunity. 2007 Dec;27(6):871-84.

Regulation of T cell receptor beta gene rearrangements and allelic exclusion by
the helix-loop-helix protein, E47.

Agata Y(1), Tamaki N, Sakamoto S, Ikawa T, Masuda K, Kawamoto H, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Horizontal Medical Research Organization, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. yagata@mch.pref.osaka.jp

Comment in
    Immunity. 2007 Dec;27(6):827-9.

Allelic exclusion of antigen-receptor genes is ensured primarily by monoallelic
locus activation upon rearrangement and subsequently by feedback inhibition of
continued rearrangement. Here, we demonstrated that the basic helix-loop-helix
protein, E47, promoted T cell receptor beta (TCRbeta) gene rearrangement by
directly binding to target gene segments to increase chromatin accessibility in a
dosage-sensitive manner. Feedback signaling abrogated E47 binding, leading to a
decline in accessibility. Conversely, enforced expression of E47 induced TCRbeta 
gene rearrangement by antagonizing feedback inhibition. Thus, the abundance of
E47 is rate limiting in locus activation, and feedback signaling downregulates
E47 activity to ensure allelic exclusion.

PMID: 18093539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Immunity. 2007 Dec;27(6):860-70.

Acquisition of a functional T cell receptor during T lymphocyte development is
enforced by HEB and E2A transcription factors.

Jones ME(1), Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3010, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

The T cell receptor (TCR) is required for positive selection and the subsequent
transition from the CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP) to the CD4(+) or CD8(+)
single-positive (SP) stage of alphabeta T cell development. The molecular
mechanism that maintains DP fate prior to the acquisition of a functional TCR is 
not clear. We have shown here that the structurally and functionally related
transcription factors HEB and E2A work together to maintain DP fate and to
control the DP to SP transition. Simultaneous deletion of HEB and E2A in DP
thymocytes was sufficient for DP to SP transition independent of TCR. Loss of HEB
and E2A allowed DP cells to bypass the requirement for TCR-mediated positive
selection, downregulate DP-associated genes, and upregulate SP-specific genes.
These results identify HEB and E2A as the gatekeepers that maintain cells at the 
DP stage of development until a functional alphabetaTCR is produced.

PMCID: PMC2190753
PMID: 18093538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Immunity. 2007 Dec;27(6):827-9.

E proteins enforce security checkpoints in the thymus.

Kersh GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, 7311
Woodruff Memorial Building, 101 Woodruff Circle, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
gkersh@emory.edu

Comment on
    Immunity. 2007 Dec;27(6):871-84.

In this issue of Immunity, two studies define new roles for E proteins in
thymocyte development. Agata et al. (2007) show a new role in beta selection;
Jones and Zhuang (2007) demonstrate a role in positive selection.

PMID: 18093534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Oncogene. 2007 Oct 18;26(48):6937-47. Epub 2007 May 7.

Overexpression of a transcription factor LYL1 induces T- and B-cell lymphoma in
mice.

Zhong Y(1), Jiang L, Hiai H, Toyokuni S, Yamada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Biology of Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

LYL1, a member of the class II basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, is
aberrantly expressed in a fraction of human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. 
Here, we generated transgenic mice ubiquitously overexpressing LYL1 using a
construct expressing full-length cDNA driven by a human elongation factor 1alpha 
promoter. Four independent lines exhibiting high LYL1 expression were
established. Of these transgenic mice, 96% displayed loss of hair with a short
kinked tail. Furthermore, 30% of them developed malignant lymphoma, with an
average latent period of 352 days. In these mice, histological examination
revealed tumor cell infiltration in multiple organs and immunohistochemical
analysis showed that the infiltrated tumor cells were either CD3 or
CD45R/B220-positive; fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis indicated that
each tumor consisted either of mainly CD4, CD8 double-positive T cells or mature 
B cells; the clonality of LYL1-induced lymphoma was confirmed by T-cell receptor 
rearrangement and immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene rearrangement analyses.
Mammalian two-hybrid analysis and luciferase assay suggested that excess LYL1
blocked the dimerization of E2A and thus inhibited the regulatory activity of E2A
on the CD4 promoter. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction results
showed that the expression of certain E2A/HEB target genes was downregulated.
Taken together, our results provide direct evidence that aberrant expression of
LYL1 plays a role in lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 17486074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Immunol. 2007 May 1;178(9):5717-26.

E2A and HEB are required to block thymocyte proliferation prior to pre-TCR
expression.

Wojciechowski J(1), Lai A, Kondo M, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

Thymocytes undergoing TCRbeta gene rearrangements are maintained in a low or
nonproliferating state during early T cell development. This block in cell cycle 
progression is not released until the expression of a functional pre-TCR, which
is composed of a successfully rearranged TCRbeta-chain and the Pre-Talpha-chain. 
The regulatory molecules responsible for the coordination of these
differentiation and proliferation events are currently unknown. E2A and HEB are
structurally and functionally related basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factors involved in T cell development. To reveal the function of E2A and HEB
through the stage of pre-TCR expression and alleviate functional compensation
between E2A and HEB, we use a double-conditional knockout model. The simultaneous
deletion of E2A and HEB in developing thymocytes leads to a severe developmental 
block before pre-TCR expression and a dramatic reduction of Pre-Talpha
expression. These developmentally arrested thymocytes exhibit increased
proliferation in vivo and dramatic expansion ex vivo in response to IL-7
signaling. These results suggest that E2A and HEB are not only critical for T
cell differentiation but also necessary to retain developing thymocytes in cell
cycle arrest before pre-TCR expression.

PMCID: PMC2265380
PMID: 17442955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Gene Expr Patterns. 2007 Jun;7(6):709-13. Epub 2007 Feb 28.

The bHLH transcription factor Tcf12 (ME1) mRNA is abundantly expressed in Paneth 
cells of mouse intestine.

Tanigawa Y(1), Yakura R, Komiya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Function, Graduate School of Science, Osaka City
University, Sumiyoshi, Osaka, Japan.

Using a large-scale in situ hybridization screening system, we found that mRNA
coding for ME1, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, was
abundantly expressed in Paneth cells of adult small intestinal crypts. Other
functionally related E-protein mRNAs, ME2, and E2A, however, could not be
detected in the cells. ME1 mRNA was first detected in the jejunum and ileum two
weeks after birth when the number of Paneth cells starts to increase. ME1 is the 
first identified bHLH transcription factor expressed in the Paneth cells and may 
be used as a molecular marker and a key molecule for analyzing transcriptional
regulation in the Paneth cell.

PMID: 17405739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Methods Mol Biol. 2006;338:21-9.

Identification and mapping of paralogous genes on a known genomic DNA sequence.

Bina M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.

The completion of whole genome sequencing projects offers the opportunity to
examine the organization of genes and the discovery of evolutionarily related
genes in a given species. For the beginners in the field, through a specific
example, this chapter provides a step-by-step procedure for identifying
paralogous genes, using the genome browser at UCSC (http://genome.ucsc.edu/). The
example describes identification and mapping in the human genome, the paralogs of
TCF12/HTF4. The example identifies TCF3 and TCF4 as paralogs of the TCF12/HTF4
gene. The example also identifies a related sequence, corresponding to a
pseudogene, in one of the introns of the JAK2 gene. The procedure described
should be applicable to the discovery and creation of maps of paralogous genes in
the genomic DNA sequences that are available at the genome browser at UCSC.

PMID: 16888348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Immunol. 2006 Aug 15;177(4):2495-504.

E2A promotes the survival of precursor and mature B lymphocytes.

Lazorchak AS(1), Wojciechowski J, Dai M, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Research Drive,
Durham, NC 27710, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor E2A is an essential regulator of 
B lymphocyte lineage commitment and is required to activate the expression of
numerous B lineage-specific genes. Studies involving ectopic expression of Id
proteins, which inhibit E2A as well as other basic helix-loop-helix proteins such
as HEB, suggest additional roles of E2A at later stages of B cell development. We
use E2A-deficient and E2A and HEB double-deficient pre-B cell lines to directly
assess the function of E2A and HEB in B cell development after lineage
commitment. We show that, in contrast to the established role of E2A in lineage
commitment, elimination of E2A and HEB in pre-B cell lines has only a modest
negative impact on B lineage gene expression. However, E2A single and E2A and HEB
double-deficient but not HEB single-deficient cell lines show dramatically
enhanced apoptosis upon growth arrest. To address the possible role of E2A in the
regulation of B cell survival in vivo, we crossed IFN-inducible Cre-transgenic
mice to E2A conditional mice. Cre-mediated E2A deletion resulted in a block in
bone marrow B cell development and a significant reduction in the proportion and 
total number of splenic B cells in these mice. We show that Cre-mediated deletion
of E2A in adoptively transferred mature B cells results in the rapid depletion of
the transferred population within 24 h of Cre induction. These results reveal
that E2A is not required to maintain B cell fate but is essential in promoting
pre-B and B cell survival.

PMCID: PMC2228329
PMID: 16888011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Aug;26(15):5771-83.

MyoD synergizes with the E-protein HEB beta to induce myogenic differentiation.

Parker MH(1), Perry RL, Fauteux MC, Berkes CA, Rudnicki MA.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute, Molecular Medicine Program, 501 Smyth Road, 
Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;33(21):4357.

The MyoD family of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors function as
heterodimers with members of the E-protein family to induce myogenic gene
activation. The E-protein HEB is alternatively spliced to generate alpha and beta
isoforms. While the function of these molecules has been studied in other cell
types, questions persist regarding the molecular functions of HEB proteins in
skeletal muscle. Our data demonstrate that HEB alpha expression remains unchanged
in both myoblasts and myotubes, whereas HEB beta is upregulated during the early 
phases of terminal differentiation. Upon induction of differentiation, a MyoD-HEB
beta complex bound the E1 E-box of the myogenin promoter leading to
transcriptional activation. Importantly, forced expression of HEB beta with MyoD 
synergistically lead to precocious myogenin expression in proliferating
myoblasts. However, after differentiation, HEB alpha and HEB beta synergized with
myogenin, but not MyoD, to activate the myogenin promoter. Specific knockdown of 
HEB beta by small interfering RNA in myoblasts blocked differentiation and
inhibited induction of myogenin transcription. Therefore, HEB alpha and HEB beta 
play novel and central roles in orchestrating the regulation of myogenic factor
activity through myogenic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1592768
PMID: 16847330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Immunol. 2006 Jul 1;177(1):109-19.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor HEBAlt is expressed in pro-T
cells and enhances the generation of T cell precursors.

Wang D(1), Claus CL, Vaccarelli G, Braunstein M, Schmitt TM, Zúñiga-Pflücker JC, 
Rothenberg EV, Anderson MK.

Author information: 
(1)Sunnybrook Research Institute, and Department of Immunology, University of
Toronto, 2075 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors HEB and E2A are critical 
mediators of gene regulation during lymphocyte development. We have cloned a new 
transcription factor, called HEBAlt, from a pro-T cell cDNA library. HEBAlt is
generated by alternative transcriptional initiation and splicing from the HEB
gene locus, which also encodes the previously characterized E box protein HEBCan.
HEBAlt contains a unique N-terminal coding exon (the Alt domain) that replaces
the first transactivation domain of HEBCan. Downstream of the Alt domain, HEBAlt 
is identical to HEBCan, including the DNA binding domain. HEBAlt is induced in
early thymocyte precursors and down-regulated permanently at the double negative 
to double positive (DP) transition, whereas HEBCan mRNA expression peaks at the
DP stage of thymocyte development. HEBAlt mRNA is up-regulated synergistically by
a combination of HEBCan activity and Delta-Notch signaling. Retroviral
transduction of HEBAlt or HEBCan into hemopoietic stem cells followed by OP9-DL1 
coculture revealed that HEBAlt-transduced precursors generated more early T
lineage precursors and more DP pre-T cells than control transduced cells. By
contrast, HEBCan-transduced cells that maintained high level expression of the
HEBCan transgene were inhibited in expansion and progression through T cell
development. HEB(-/-) fetal liver precursors transduced with HEBAlt were rescued 
from delayed T cell specification, but HEBCan-transduced HEB(-/-) precursors were
not. Therefore, HEBAlt and HEBCan are functionally distinct transcription
factors, and HEBAlt is specifically required for the efficient generation of
early T cell precursors.

PMID: 16785505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Blood. 2006 Aug 1;108(3):986-92. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Transcriptional regulatory networks downstream of TAL1/SCL in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Palomero T(1), Odom DT, O'Neil J, Ferrando AA, Margolin A, Neuberg DS, Winter SS,
Larson RS, Li W, Liu XS, Young RA, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, 1150 St Nicholas Ave, New 
York, NY 10032, USA.

Aberrant expression of 1 or more transcription factor oncogenes is a critical
component of the molecular pathogenesis of human T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL); however, oncogenic transcriptional programs downstream of T-ALL
oncogenes are mostly unknown. TAL1/SCL is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factor oncogene aberrantly expressed in 60% of human T-ALLs. We
used chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) on chip to identify 71 direct
transcriptional targets of TAL1/SCL. Promoters occupied by TAL1 were also
frequently bound by the class I bHLH proteins E2A and HEB, suggesting that
TAL1/E2A as well as TAL1/HEB heterodimers play a role in transformation of T-cell
precursors. Using RNA interference, we demonstrated that TAL1 is required for the
maintenance of the leukemic phenotype in Jurkat cells and showed that TAL1
binding can be associated with either repression or activation of genes whose
promoters occupied by TAL1, E2A, and HEB. In addition, oligonucleotide microarray
analysis of RNA from 47 primary T-ALL samples showed specific expression
signatures involving TAL1 targets in TAL1-expressing compared with -nonexpressing
human T-ALLs. Our results indicate that TAL1 may act as a bifunctional
transcriptional regulator (activator and repressor) at the top of a complex
regulatory network that disrupts normal T-cell homeostasis and contributes to
leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1895859
PMID: 16621969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Apr 18;103(16):6368-73. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

Toward understanding the genetics of alcohol drinking through transcriptome
meta-analysis.

Mulligan MK(1), Ponomarev I, Hitzemann RJ, Belknap JK, Tabakoff B, Harris RA,
Crabbe JC, Blednov YA, Grahame NJ, Phillips TJ, Finn DA, Hoffman PL, Iyer VR,
Koob GF, Bergeson SE.

Author information: 
(1)Waggoner Center for Alcohol and Addiction Research and Sections of
Neurobiology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Much evidence from studies in humans and animals supports the hypothesis that
alcohol addiction is a complex disease with both hereditary and environmental
influences. Molecular determinants of excessive alcohol consumption are difficult
to study in humans. However, several rodent models show a high or low degree of
alcohol preference, which provides a unique opportunity to approach the molecular
complexities underlying the genetic predisposition to drink alcohol. Microarray
analyses of brain gene expression in three selected lines, and six isogenic
strains of mice known to differ markedly in voluntary alcohol consumption
provided >4.5 million data points for a meta-analysis. A total of 107 arrays were
obtained and arranged into six experimental data sets, allowing the
identification of 3,800 unique genes significantly and consistently changed
between all models of high or low amounts of alcohol consumption. Several
functional groups, including mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling and
transcription regulation pathways, were found to be significantly overrepresented
and may play an important role in establishing a high level of voluntary alcohol 
drinking in these mouse models. Data from the general meta-analysis was further
filtered by a congenic strain microarray set, from which cis-regulated candidate 
genes for an alcohol preference quantitative trait locus on chromosome 9 were
identified: Arhgef12, Carm1, Cryab, Cox5a, Dlat, Fxyd6, Limd1, Nicn1, Nmnat3,
Pknox2, Rbp1, Sc5d, Scn4b, Tcf12, Vps11, and Zfp291 and four ESTs. The present
study demonstrates the use of (i) a microarray meta-analysis to analyze a
behavioral phenotype (in this case, alcohol preference) and (ii) a congenic
strain for identification of cis regulation.

PMCID: PMC1458884
PMID: 16618939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Sep;13(9):1495-505. Epub 2005 Dec 9.

Notch1 confers thymocytes a resistance to GC-induced apoptosis through Deltex1 by
blocking the recruitment of p300 to the SRG3 promoter.

Jang J(1), Choi YI, Choi J, Lee KY, Chung H, Jeon SH, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute of Molecular Biology of Genetics,
and Center for Functional Cellulomics, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, 
Korea.

One notable phenotypic change during the differentiation of immature thymocytes
into either mature CD4 or CD8 single-positive lineages is the acquisition of a
resistance to glucocorticoid (GC)-induced apoptosis. We have previously reported 
that SRG3 is critical in determining the sensitivity for the GC-induced apoptosis
in developing thymocytes. We report here that Notch signaling downregulates the
transcriptional activation of SRG3 through N-box and/or E-box elements on its
promoter. RBP-J represses SRG3 transcription through the N-box motif. On the
other hand, Deltex1 competitively inhibits the binding of p300 to E2A/HEB protein
bound to the E-box elements and represses the SRG3 promoter activity. Moreover,
enforced expression of Deltex1 restored double-positive (DP) thymocyte survival
from the GC-induced apoptosis. Our results suggest that Notch signaling confers
differentiating DP thymocytes resistance to GCs by regulating the SRG3 expression
through Deltex1, and that Deltex1 and SRG3 may play a significant role during DP 
thymocyte maturation.

PMID: 16341126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Pharmacol Sci. 2005 Jul;98(3):219-24. Epub 2005 Jul 12.

Transcriptional regulation of neuronal genes and its effect on neural functions: 
gene expression in response to static magnetism in cultured rat hippocampal
neurons.

Hirai T(1), Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kanazawa University Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Ishikawa, 
Japan.

We have previously shown a marked but transient increase in DNA binding of the
nuclear transcription factor activator protein-1 after brief exposure to static
magnetic fields in cultured rat hippocampal neurons, suggesting that exposure to 
static magnetism would lead to long-term consolidation as well as amplification
of different functional alterations through modulation of de novo protein
synthesis at the level of gene transcription in the hippocampus. Hippocampal
neurons were cultured under sustained exposure to static magnetic fields at 100
mT, followed by extraction of total RNA for differential display (DD) analysis
using random primers. The first and the second DD polymerase chain reaction
similarly showed the downregulation of particular genes in response to sustained 
magnetism. Nucleotide sequence analysis followed by BLASTN homology searching
revealed high homology of these 2 DD-PCR products to the 3' non-coding regions of
the mouse basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor ALF1 and that of histone
H3.3A, respectively. On Northern blot analysis using the 2 cloned differentially 
expressed fragments labeled with [alpha-(32)P]dCTP by the random primer method, a
marked decrease was seen in expression of mRNA for ALF1 and histone H3.3A in
hippocampal neurons cultured under sustained exposure to static magnetic fields
at 100 mT. It thus appears that static magnetism may modulate cellular integrity 
and functionality through expression of a variety of responsive genes required
for gene transcription and translation, proliferation, differentiation,
maturation, survival, and so on in cultured rat hippocampal neurons.

PMID: 16020920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Physiol Genomics. 2005 Apr 14;21(2):144-51. Epub 2005 Feb 15.

Evolution of vertebrate E protein transcription factors: comparative analysis of 
the E protein gene family in Takifugu rubripes and humans.

Hikima J(1), Lennard ML, Wilson MR, Miller NW, Clem LW, Warr GW.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biomedicine and Environmental Sciences Center, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina, USA.

E proteins are essential for B lymphocyte development and function, including
immunoglobulin (Ig) gene rearrangement and expression. Previous studies of B
cells in the channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) identified E protein homologs 
that are capable of binding the muE5 motif and driving a strong transcriptional
response. There are three E protein genes in mammals, HEB (TCF12), E2A (TCF3),
and E2-2 (TCF4). The major expressed E proteins found in catfish B cells are
homologs of HEB and of E2A. Here we sought to define the complete family of E
protein genes in a teleost fish, Takifugu rubripes, taking advantage of the
completed genome sequence. The catfish CFEB (HEB homolog) sequence identified
homologous E-protein-encoding sequences in five scaffolds in the Takifugu genome 
database. Detailed comparative analysis with the human genome revealed the
presence of five E protein homologs in Takifugu. Single genes orthologous to HEB 
and to E2-2 were identified. In contrast, two members of the E2A gene family were
identified in Takifugu; one of these shows the alternative processing of
transcripts that identifies it as the ortholog of the E12/E47-encoding mammalian 
E2A gene, whereas the second Takifugu E2A gene has no predicted alternative
splice products. A novel fifth E protein gene (EX) was identified in Takifugu.
Phylogenetic analysis revealed four E protein branches among vertebrates: EX,
E2A, HEB, and E2-2.

PMID: 15713784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Immunol. 2004 Nov 1;173(9):5476-84.

Evolution of transcriptional control of the IgH locus: characterization,
expression, and function of TF12/HEB homologs of the catfish.

Hikima J(1), Cioffi CC, Middleton DL, Wilson MR, Miller NW, Clem LW, Warr GW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Marine Biomedicine and Environmental Sciences, and Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, SC 29407, USA.

The transcriptional enhancer (Emu3') of the IgH locus of the channel catfish,
Ictalurus punctatus, differs from enhancers of the mammalian IgH locus in terms
of its position, structure, and function. Transcription factors binding to
multiple octamer motifs and a single muE5 motif (an E-box site, consensus CANNTG)
interact for its function. E-box binding transcription factors of the class I
basic helix-loop-helix family were cloned from a catfish B cell cDNA library in
this study, and homologs of TF12/HEB were identified as the most highly
represented E-proteins. Two alternatively spliced forms of catfish TF12 (termed
CFEB1 and -2) were identified and contained regions homologous to the basic
helix-loop-helix and activation domains of other vertebrate E-proteins. CFEB
message is widely expressed, with CFEB1 message predominating over that of CFEB2.
Both CFEB1 and -2 strongly activated transcription from a muE5-dependent
artificial promoter. In catfish B cells, CFEB1 and -2 also activated
transcription from the core region of the catfish IgH enhancer (Emu3') in a
manner dependent on the presence of the muE5 site. Both CFEB1 and -2 bound the
muE5 motif, and formed both homo- and heterodimers. CFEB1 and -2 were weakly
active or inactive (in a promoter-dependent fashion) in mammalian B-lineage
cells. Although E-proteins have been highly conserved in vertebrate evolution,
the present results indicate that, at the phylogenetic level of a teleost fish,
the TF12/HEB homolog differs from that of mammals in terms of 1) its high level
of expression and 2) the presence of isoforms generated by alternative RNA
processing.

PMID: 15494495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Oct 8;323(1):168-74.

Differential cooperation between dHAND and three different E-proteins.

Murakami M(1), Kataoka K, Tominaga J, Nakagawa O, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrative Cell Biology, Department of Embryogenesis, Institute
of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto,
Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

dHAND is a transcription factor belonging to the class B basic helix-loop-helix
protein family and is expressed during embryogenesis in the heart, branchial
arches, limb buds, and neural crest derivatives. Despite much study, the
molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of dHAND activity are not well
understood. We therefore carried out yeast two-hybrid screening using full-length
dHAND as bait, which led to identification of several dHAND-binding proteins,
including three E-proteins: E2A, ME2, and ALF1. Subsequent analysis revealed that
although their heterodimerization and transcriptional activities were similar,
dHAND/E-protein heterodimers bind to an E-box element with differing affinities, 
suggesting they have distinct DNA binding specificities. Moreover, in situ
hybridization showed that E-protein genes are expressed fairly ubiquitously among
embryonic tissues, including the branchial arches and limb buds. By contrast,
little signal was detected in the heart, suggesting that dHAND complexes with
partners other than E-proteins in cardiac tissue.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 15351717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Science. 2004 Aug 27;305(5688):1286-9.

E protein silencing by the leukemogenic AML1-ETO fusion protein.

Zhang J(1), Kalkum M, Yamamura S, Chait BT, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, 1230
York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The AML1-ETO fusion protein, generated by the t(8;21) chromosomal translocation, 
is causally involved in nearly 15% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cases. This
study shows that AML1-ETO, as well as ETO, inhibits transcriptional activation by
E proteins through stable interactions that preclude recruitment of
p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP) coactivators. These interactions are mediated by 
a conserved ETO TAF4 homology domain and a 17-amino acid p300/CBP and ETO target 
motif within AD1 activation domains of E proteins. In t(8;21) leukemic cells,
very stable interactions between AML1-ETO and E proteins underlie a t(8;21)
translocation-specific silencing of E protein function through an aberrant
cofactor exchange mechanism. These studies identify E proteins as AML1-ETO
targets whose dysregulation may be important for t(8;21) leukemogenesis, as well 
as an E protein silencing mechanism that is distinct from that associated with
differentiation-inhibitory proteins.

PMID: 15333839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;24(17):7313-23.

Hyperresponse to T-cell receptor signaling and apoptosis of Id1 transgenic
thymocytes.

Qi Z(1), Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City 73104, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, E2A and HEB, play important
roles in T-cell development at multiple checkpoints. Expression of their
inhibitor, Id1, abolishes the function of both transcription factors in a
dose-dependent manner. The Id1 transgenic thymus is characterized by an
accumulation of CD4- CD8- CD44+ CD25- thymocytes, a dramatic reduction of CD4+
CD8+ thymocytes, and an abundance of apoptotic cells. Here we show that these
apoptotic cells carry functional T-cell receptors (TCRs), suggesting that
apoptosis occurs during T-cell maturation. In contrast, viable Id1 transgenic CD4
single positive T cells exhibit costimulation-independent proliferation upon
treatment with anti-CD3 antibody, probably due to a hyperresponse to TCR
signaling. Furthermore, Id1 expression causes apoptosis of CD4 and CD8 double- or
single-positive thymocytes in HY- or AND-TCR transgenic mice under conditions
that normally support positive selection. Collectively, these results suggest
that E2A and HEB proteins are crucial for controlling the threshold for TCR
signaling, and Id1 expression lowers the threshold, resulting in apoptosis of
developing thymocytes.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Microbiology

PMCID: PMC506975
PMID: 15314144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cancer Cell. 2004 Jun;5(6):587-96.

TAL1/SCL induces leukemia by inhibiting the transcriptional activity of E47/HEB.

O'Neil J(1), Shank J, Cusson N, Murre C, Kelliher M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Activation of the basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) gene TAL1 (or SCL) is a frequent 
gain-of-function mutation in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). To
provide genetic evidence that tal1/scl induces leukemia by interfering with E47
and HEB, we expressed tal1/scl in an E2A or HEB heterozygous background. These
mice exhibit disease acceleration and perturbed thymocyte development due to
repression of E47/HEB target genes. In tal1/scl thymocytes, we find the
corepressor mSin3A bound to the CD4 enhancer, whereas an E47/HEB/p300 complex is 
detected in wild-type thymocytes. Furthermore, tal1/scl tumors are sensitive to
pharmacologic inhibition of HDAC and undergo apoptosis. These data demonstrate
that tal1/scl induces leukemia by repressing E47/HEB and suggest that HDAC
inhibitors may prove efficacious in T-ALL patients who express TAL1/SCL.

PMID: 15193261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Immunity. 2004 Jun;20(6):719-33.

The chromatin remodeler Mi-2beta is required for CD4 expression and T cell
development.

Williams CJ(1), Naito T, Arco PG, Seavitt JR, Cashman SM, De Souza B, Qi X,
Keables P, Von Andrian UH, Georgopoulos K.

Author information: 
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Changes in chromatin structure underlie the activation or silencing of genes
during development. The chromatin remodeler Mi-2beta is highly expressed in
thymocytes and is presumed to be a transcriptional repressor because of its
presence in the nucleosome remodeling deacetylase (NuRD) complex. Using
conditional inactivation, we show that Mi-2beta is required at several steps
during T cell development: for differentiation of beta selected immature
thymocytes, for developmental expression of CD4, and for cell divisions in mature
T cells. We further show that Mi-2beta plays a direct role in promoting CD4 gene 
expression. Mi-2beta associates with the CD4 enhancer as well as the E box
binding protein HEB and the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) p300, enabling their 
recruitment to the CD4 enhancer and causing histone H3-hyperacetylation to this
regulatory region. These findings provide important insights into the regulation 
of CD4 expression during T cell development and define a role for Mi-2beta in
gene activation.

PMID: 15189737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Curr Opin Oncol. 2004 Jul;16(4):342-54.

Genetics of chondrosarcoma and related tumors.

Sandberg AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of DNA Diagnostics, St. Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center,
Phoenix, Arizona 85013, USA. jvaugha@chw.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The burgeoning body of information on the genetic changes
present in and underlying the development and biology of human cancers has
carried implications regarding the possible genetic events that are responsible
for not only the genesis of these cancers but also the hope of the cure for these
cancers. Chondrosarcomas are a group of tumors that fall into this category. The 
purpose of this review is to summarize the genetic findings in these tumors.
RECENT FINDINGS: The histopathologic variability of chondrosarcomas is reflected 
in the complexity and lack of specificity of their cytogenetic and molecular
genetic findings, except for extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas. These are
characterized in the preponderant number of cases by a translocation,
t(9;22)(q22;q12), and in a small number of cases by variant translocations
t(9;17)(q22;q11) and t(9;15)(q22;q21). These translocations lead to the formation
of abnormal fusion genes and gene products (proteins). In each of these
translocations, the CHN gene is involved, resulting in the chimeric fusion genes 
EWS/CHN, RBP56/CHN, and TCF12/CHN, respectively. The specific translocations and 
their associated molecular genetic changes are diagnostic of extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcomas. The abnormal proteins resulting from these fusion genes
aberrantly affect gene transcription and cellular signaling pathways thought to
be responsible for initiating sarcoma formation. In skeletal (central)
chondrosarcomas of varying histopathologic types, the cytogenetic and molecular
genetic findings are variable, complex, and apparently lacking in specificity.
These changes may reflect a stepwise process (or processes) of oncogenesis
involving an array of genes.
SUMMARY: Although some cartilaginous tumors are characterized by specific or
recurrent chromosome alterations and molecular genetic changes, much is yet to be
learned about the nature and sequence of these genetics events and about their
unique role in the stepwise process involved in the development and biology of
each tumor type, both malignant and nonmalignant. Until such time, some of the
genetic changes, particularly the presence of specific translocations, can be of 
definite diagnostic value.

PMID: 15187889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Brain Res Gene Expr Patterns. 2002 Jan;1(2):115-21.

Expression of the bHLH transcription factor Tcf12 (ME1) gene is linked to the
expansion of precursor cell populations during neurogenesis.

Uittenbogaard M(1), Chiaramello A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Program of Neuroscience, George
Washington University Medical Center, 2300 I Street N.W., Washington, DC 20037,
USA.

In this study, we focused on the potential function of the murine gene Tcf12
(also known as ME1 or HEB) encoding the bHLH E-protein ME1 during brain
development. An exencephaly phenotype of low penetrance has consistently been
observed in both Tcf12 null mice and Tcf12(dm) homozygous mice. Thus, to address 
the possible underlying mechanism of the Tcf12 gene during the early steps of
brain development, we performed a detailed analysis of its spatio-temporal
expression pattern at distinct steps of gastrulation and neurogenesis. We found
that Tcf12 transcripts are detected in the embryonic ectoderm prior to neural
induction during gastrulation. During neurulation, Tcf12 transcripts are evident 
at high levels in the proliferating neuroepithelium of the neural folds and the
cephalic mesenchyme. Thus, Tcf12 gene expression coincides with the massive
proliferation occurring in the forming neuroepithelium and cephalic mesenchyme
during neural tube formation, which is consistent with the exencephaly phenotype 
of Tcf12 null mice. In the developing cortex and spinal cord, Tcf12 expression is
restricted to the proliferative ventricular zones, indicating that Tcf12
expression is down regulated when these neuronal cells undergo their final
differentiation. Interestingly, we found that the postnatal Tcf12 expression
parallels the ongoing adult neurogenesis in the mitotically active subventricular
zone. Thus, the timing and location of Tcf12 expression combined with this severe
neurulation defect support our hypothesis that the Tcf12 gene may be involved in 
the control of proliferating neural stem cells and progenitor cells and that it
may be critical to sustain their undifferentiated state during embryonic and
adult neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2757747
PMID: 15018808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Dev Dyn. 2004 Feb;229(2):380-92.

Embryonic myogenesis pathways in muscle regeneration.

Zhao P(1), Hoffman EP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genetic Medicine, Children's National Medical Center, Washington,
DC, USA.

Embryonic myogenesis involves the staged induction of myogenic regulatory factors
and positional cues that dictate cell determination, proliferation, and
differentiation into adult muscle. Muscle is able to regenerate after damage, and
muscle regeneration is generally thought to recapitulate myogenesis during
embryogenesis. There has been considerable progress in the delineation of
myogenesis pathways during embryogenesis, but it is not known whether the same
signaling pathways are relevant to muscle regeneration in adults. Here, we
defined the subset of embryogenesis pathways induced in muscle regeneration using
a 27 time-point in vivo muscle regeneration series. The embryonic Wnt (Wnt1, 3a, 
7a, 11), Shh pathway, and the BMP (BMP2, 4, 7) pathway were not induced during
muscle regeneration. Moreover, antagonists of Wnt signaling, sFRP1, sFRP2, and
sFRP4 (secreted frizzled-related proteins) were significantly up-regulated,
suggesting active inhibition of the Wnt pathway. The pro-differentiation FGFR4
pathway was transiently expressed at day 3, commensurate with expression of MyoD,
Myogenin, Myf5, and Pax7. Protein verification studies showed fibroblast growth
factor receptor 4 (FGFR4) protein to be strongly expressed in differentiating
myoblasts and newly formed myotubes. We present evidence that FGF6 is likely the 
key ligand for FGFR4 during muscle regeneration, and further suggest that FGF6 is
released from necrotic myofibers where it is then sequestered by basal laminae.
We also confirmed activation of Notch1 in the regenerating muscle. Finally, known
MyoD coactivators (MEF2A, p/CIP, TCF12) and repressors (Twist, Id2) were strongly
induced at appropriate time points. Taken together, our results suggest that
embryonic positional signals (Wnt, Shh, and BMP) are not induced in postnatal
muscle regeneration, whereas cell-autonomous factors (Pax7, MRFs, FGFR4)
involving muscle precursor proliferation and differentiation are recapitulated by
muscle regeneration.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14745964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Acta Neuropathol. 2004 Mar;107(3):277-82. Epub 2004 Jan 17.

Expression of oligodendrocyte lineage genes in oligodendroglial and astrocytic
gliomas.

Riemenschneider MJ(1), Koy TH, Reifenberger G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Moorenstrasse 5,
40225 Duesseldorf, Germany.

The oligodendrocyte lineage genes OLIG1 and OLIG2 have been reported as potential
diagnostic markers for oligodendrogliomas [Lu et al. (2001) Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 98:10851-10856; Marie et al. (2001) Lancet 358:298-300]. We investigated the 
mRNA expression of OLIG1 and OLIG2, as well as four other genes involved in
oligodendrocyte development ( E2A, HEB, NKX2.2, and PDGFRA) in a panel of 70
gliomas, including 9 oligodendrogliomas, 11 anaplastic oligodendrogliomas, 5
oligoastrocytomas, 10 anaplastic oligoastrocytomas, 10 diffuse astrocytomas, 10
anaplastic astrocytomas, and 15 glioblastomas. Most tumors demonstrated higher
transcript levels of these genes as compared to non-neoplastic adult brain
tissue. Four glioblastomas showed markedly increased PDGFRA mRNA expression due
to PDGFRA gene amplification. Statistical analyses revealed no significant
expression differences between oligodendroglial and astrocytic tumors. In
oligodendroglial tumors, expression of the six genes was not significantly
correlated to loss of heterozygosity on chromosome arms 1p and 19q. Thus,
expression of the investigated oligodendrocyte lineage genes is up-regulated
relative to non-neoplastic brain tissue in the majority of oligodendroglial and
astrocytic tumors, suggesting that glioma cells are arrested in or recapitulate
molecular phenotypes corresponding to early stages of glial development. However,
the determination of mRNA expression of these genes by means of reverse
transcription-PCR does not appear to be diagnostically useful as a marker for
oligodendrogliomas.

PMID: 14730454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2002;98(4):245-8.

Genomic organization of human TCF12 gene and spliced mRNA variants producing
isoforms of transcription factor HTF4.

Gan TI(1), Rowen L, Nesbitt R, Roe BA, Wu H, Hu P, Yao Z, Kim UJ, O'Sickey T,
Bina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, Brown Laboratories, West
Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

The human TCF12 gene, mapping to 15q21, encodes the helix-loop-helix
transcription factor 4 (HTF4). A detailed analysis of this genomic region
established the organization of the TCF12 gene. The gene includes 21 exons and is
significantly larger than an average human gene. Preceding the second exon, two
alternative acceptor sites for mRNA splicing yield two distinguishable
transcripts (HTF4a and HTF4b) which differ in their 5' untranslated region but
share identical coding sequences. Differential utilization of exon 15 in the
TCF12 gene may reflect a mechanism producing a cell-type-specific protein
(HTF4c). In addition, intron 5 in the TCF12 gene corresponds to the region
involved in a translocation, t(9;15)(q22;q21), that results in a form of
extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12826747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Am J Pathol. 2003 Mar;162(3):781-92.

Studies on the molecular pathogenesis of extraskeletal myxoid
chondrosarcoma-cytogenetic, molecular genetic, and cDNA microarray analyses.

Sjögren H(1), Meis-Kindblom JM, Orndal C, Bergh P, Ptaszynski K, Aman P, Kindblom
LG, Stenman G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Lundberg Laboratory for Cancer Research, Sahlgrenska 
University Hospital, Göteborg University, Göteborg, Sweden.

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas (EMCs) are characterized by recurrent
chromosome translocations resulting in fusions of the nuclear receptor TEC to
various NH(2)-terminal partners. Here we describe the phenotypic, cytogenetic,
and molecular genetic characteristics of a series of 10 EMCs. Using spectral
karyotyping and fluorescence in situ hybridization, clonal chromosome
abnormalities were detected in all but one tumor. A t(9;22)(q22;q12)
translocation was found in three cases; a del(22)(q12-13)in one case; and variant
translocations, including t(9;17)(q22;q11-12), t(7;9;17)(q32;q22;q11), and
t(9;15)(q22;q21), were detected in one case each. Recurrent, secondary
abnormalities, including trisomy 1q, 7, 8, 12, and 19, were found in seven
tumors. All tumors contained translocation-generated or cryptic gene fusions,
including EWS-TEC (five cases, of which one was a novel fusion), TAF2N-TEC (four 
cases), and TCF12-TEC (one case). cDNA microarray analysis of the gene expression
patterns of two EMCs and a myxoid liposarcoma reference tumor revealed a
remarkably distinct and uniform expression profile in both EMCs despite the fact 
that they had different histologies and expressed different fusion transcripts.
The most differentially expressed gene in both tumors was CHI3L1, which encodes a
secreted glycoprotein (YKL-40) previously implicated in various pathological
conditions of extracellular matrix degradation as well as in cancer. Our findings
suggests that EMC exhibits a tumor-specific gene expression profile, including
overexpression of several cancer-related genes as well as genes implicated in
chondrogenesis and neural-neuroendocrine differentiation, thus distinguishing it 
from other soft tissue sarcomas.

PMCID: PMC1868116
PMID: 12598313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 11;278(15):12680-7. Epub 2003 Feb 3.

Regulation of pT alpha gene expression by a dosage of E2A, HEB, and SCL.

Tremblay M(1), Herblot S, Lecuyer E, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Montréal, Montréal, Québec H2W 1R7, Canada.

The expression of the pT alpha gene is required for effective selection,
proliferation, and survival of beta T-cell receptor (beta TCR)-expressing
immature thymocytes. Here, we have identified two phylogenetically conserved
E-boxes within the pT alpha enhancer sequence that are required for optimal
enhancer activity and for its stage-specific activity in immature T cells. We
have shown that the transcription factors E2A and HEB associate with high
affinity to these E-boxes. Moreover, we have identified pT alpha as a direct
target of E2A-HEB heterodimers in immature thymocytes because they specifically
occupy the enhancer in vivo. In these cells, pT alpha mRNA levels are determined 
by the presence of one or two functional E2A or HEB alleles. Furthermore, E2A/HEB
transcriptional activity is repressed by heterodimerization with SCL, a
transcription factor that is turned off in differentiating thymocytes exactly at 
a stage when pT alpha is up-regulated. Taken together, our observations suggest
that the dosage of E2A, HEB, and SCL determines pT alpha gene expression in
immature T cells.

PMID: 12566462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Neurochem. 2003 Feb;84(4):678-88.

The basic helix-loop-helix differentiation factor Nex1/MATH-2 functions as a key 
activator of the GAP-43 gene.

Uittenbogaard M(1), Martinka DL, Chiaramello A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, George Washington University Medical
Center, 2300 I Street NW, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Nex1/MATH-2 is a neurogenic basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factor
that belongs to the NeuroD subfamily. Its expression parallels that of the GAP-43
gene and peaks during brain development, when neurite outgrowth and
synaptogenesis are highly active. We previously observed a direct correlation
between the levels of expression of Nex1 and GAP-43 proteins, which resulted in
extensive neurite outgrowth and neuronal differentiation of PC12 cells in the
absence of nerve growth factor. Since the GAP-43 gene is a target for bHLH
regulation, we investigated whether Nex1 could regulate the activity of the
GAP-43 promoter. We found that among the members of the NeuroD subfamily, Nex1
promoted maximal activity of the GAP-43 promoter. The Nex1-mediated activity is
restricted to the conserved E1-E2 cluster located near the major transcription
start sites. By electrophoretic mobility shift assay and site-directed
mutagenesis, we showed that Nex1 binds as homodimers and that the E1 E-box is a
high affinity binding site. We further found that Nex1 released the ME1
E-protein-mediated repression in a concentration dependent manner. Thus, the
E1-E2 cluster has a dual function: it can mediate activation or repression
depending on the interacting bHLH proteins. Finally, a series of N-terminal and
C-terminal deletions revealed that Nex1 transcriptional activity is linked to two
distinct transactivation domains, TAD1 and TAD2, with TAD1 being unique to Nex1. 
Together, our results suggest that Nex1 may engage in selective interactions with
components of the core transcriptional machinery whose assembly is dictated by
the architecture of the GAP-43 promoter and cellular environment.

PMCID: PMC1413589
PMID: 12562512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Glia. 2002 Oct;40(1):55-64.

Extracellular and intracellular regulation of oligodendrocyte development: roles 
of Sonic hedgehog and expression of E proteins.

Sussman CR(1), Davies JE, Miller RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4975, USA. crs13@po.cwru.edu

Recent advances in understanding oligodendrocyte development have revealed the
importance of both extra- and intracellular molecules in regulating the
induction, survival, and proliferation of early oligodendrocyte progenitors. The 
signaling molecule Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is critical for normal development of
oligodendrocytes, although the precise influences of Shh on cells of the
oligodendrocyte lineage are unclear. The present study shows that Shh increased
the number of oligodendrocyte precursors in both pure cultures of oligodendrocyte
precursors and mixed cultures from embryonic rat spinal cord. In pure precursor
cultures Shh increased cell survival. In mixed cultures, Shh increased both the
survival and proliferation of oligodendrocyte precursors in a concentration
dependent manner. One intracellular consequence of exposure to Shh is the
activation of transcription factors in oligodendrocyte lineage cells, which are
critical for oligodendrocyte development, helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription
factors, Olig1 and 2. In many cases, HLH proteins such as Olig1 and Olig2
heterodimerize with other HLH proteins, such as members of the E subfamily, which
are critical regulators of cell proliferation and differentiation. Immature
(A2B5(+)) and more mature (O4(+)) rat oligodendrocyte precursors in dissociated
cell culture expressed Olig1 as well as E proteins, HEB and E2A. Similarly, cells
bearing the morphology of oligodendrocyte precursors expressed both Olig1 and HEB
or E2A. We propose that E2A and/or HEB, possibly in combination with Olig1 and 2,
are critical components of oligodendrogenesis and may regulate cell survival,
proliferation, and fate decisions in the oligodendrocyte lineage.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12237843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Oncogene. 2002 Aug 29;21(38):5975-80.

Two novel tumor suppressor gene loci on chromosome 6q and 15q in human
osteosarcoma identified through comparative study of allelic imbalances in mouse 
and man.

Nathrath MH(1), Kuosaite V, Rosemann M, Kremer M, Poremba C, Wakana S, Yanagi M, 
Nathrath WB, Höfler H, Imai K, Atkinson MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, GSF-National Research Center for Environment and
Health, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. nathrath@gsf.de

We have performed a comparative study of allelic imbalances in human and murine
osteosarcomas to identify genetic changes critical for osteosarcomagenesis. Two
adjacent but discrete loci on mouse chromosome 9 were found to show high levels
of allelic imbalance in radiation-induced osteosarcomas arising in
(BALB/cxCBA/CA) F1 hybrid mice. The syntenic human chromosomal regions were
investigated in 42 sporadic human osteosarcomas. For the distal locus (OSS1) on
mouse chromosome 9 the syntenic human locus was identified on chromosome 6q14 and
showed allelic imbalance in 77% of the cases. Comparison between the human and
mouse syntenic regions narrowed the locus down to a 4 Mbp fragment flanked by the
marker genes ME1 and SCL35A1. For the proximal locus (OSS2) on mouse chromosome
9, a candidate human locus was mapped to chromosome 15q21 in a region showing
allelic imbalance in 58% of human osteosarcomas. We have used a combination of
synteny and microsatellite mapping to identify two potential osteosarcoma
suppressor gene loci. This strategy represents a powerful tool for the
identification of new genes important for the formation of human tumors.

PMID: 12185601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int Immunol. 2002 Jul;14(7):813-22.

Molecular characterization of the mouse involuted thymus: aberrations in
expression of transcription regulators in thymocyte and epithelial compartments.

Ortman CL(1), Dittmar KA, Witte PL, Le PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, and the Program in
Immunology and Aging, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

Despite playing a critical role in the development of naive T cells, the thymus
is involuted with age. Whether a single age-associated defect or multiple
aberrations contribute to thymic involution remains controversial. Here, we
determined molecular aberrations in the thymocyte and epithelium compartments of 
the aging thymus. We demonstrated that total thymocyte numbers declined with a
stepwise kinetics; clear demarcations occurred at 1.5, 3, 12 and 22 months of
age. By quantitative PCR, a 2.4-fold reduction in the copies of signal joint
TCR-excised circle (sjTREC)/10(5) thymocytes was first detected at 3 months; no
further reduction observed thereafter. Nevertheless, the combined reductions in
thymocyte numbers and sjTREC/10(5) cells caused a 7-fold decrease in
sjTREC/thymus by 3 months, 21-fold by 18 months and 72-fold by 22 months as
compared to 1 month. We showed aberration in expression of E2A, a transcription
regulator critical for TCR beta rearrangement. While E2A expression declined
3-fold by 3 months and 18-fold by 7 months, expression of LMO2, a negative
regulator of E2A activities, increased 5-fold by 18 months. Interestingly,
expression of pre-T alpha and its transcriptional regulator HEB were not reduced 
with age. Furthermore, keratin-8 expression, specific for cortical thymic
epithelium, declined 3-fold by 7 months and remained stable thereafter. In
contrast, Foxn1 expression was reduced 3-fold by 3 months, 16-fold by 12 months
and 37-fold by 18 months. IL-7 expression was not reduced until 7 months and
reached 15-fold reduction by 22 months. Thus, the data demonstrate that thymic
involution results not from a single defect, but culminates from an array of
molecular aberrations in both the developing thymocytes and thymic epithelials.

PMID: 12096041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Immunol. 2002 Apr 15;168(8):3923-32.

An analysis of T cell intrinsic roles of E2A by conditional gene disruption in
the thymus.

Pan L(1), Hanrahan J, Li J, Hale LP, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Pathology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710, USA.

The importance of E2A transcription factors in T cell development has been
demonstrated in studies of E2A-deficient mice, which display abnormal T cell
development and a high frequency of T cell lymphomas. Because E2A expression is
not restricted to the T cell lineage, the primary cause of the T cell phenotype
in E2A-deficient mice was not fully determined. To further investigate the role
of E2A in T cell lineage, we generated mice with the E2A gene disrupted
exclusively during thymocyte development using the Cre-lox system. We show that
this system allows E2A gene disruption to occur throughout the double-negative
stage of thymocyte development. E2A deletion appears to be completed before
development reaches the double-positive stage. Consistent with the gene
disruption, these mice reveal a T cell intrinsic role for E2A during the
transition from the double-negative stage to the double-positive stage of
thymocyte development. In contrast to germline E2A knockout mice, conditional E2A
knockout mice do not develop T cell lymphoma. This work establishes a new model
for further investigating E2A function in T cell development and leukemiogenesis.

PMID: 11937548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Annu Rev Immunol. 2002;20:301-22. Epub 2001 Oct 4.

E protein function in lymphocyte development.

Quong MW(1), Romanow WJ, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive,
MC 0366, La Jolla, California 92093-0366, USA. quong@biomail.ucsd.edu

Lymphocytes arise from hematopoietic stem cells through the coordinated action of
transcription factors. The E proteins (E12, E47, HEB and E2-2) have emerged as
key regulators of both B and T lymphocyte differentiation. This review summarizes
the current data and examines the various functions of E proteins and their
antagonists, Id2 and Id3, throughout lymphoid maturation. Beyond an established
role in B and T lineage commitment, E proteins continue to be essential at
subsequent stages of development. E protein activity regulates the expression of 
surrogate and antigen receptor genes, promotes Ig and TCR rearrangements, and
coordinates cell survival and proliferation with developmental progression in
response to TCR signaling. Finally, this review also discusses the role of E47 as
a tumor suppressor.

PMID: 11861605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Immunity. 2002 Jan;16(1):9-21.

Helix-loop-helix proteins regulate pre-TCR and TCR signaling through modulation
of Rel/NF-kappaB activities.

Kim D(1), Xu M, Nie L, Peng XC, Jimi E, Voll RE, Nguyen T, Ghosh S, Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 825 NE
13th Street, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

E2A and HEB are basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors essential for T cell
development. Complete inhibition of their activities through transgenic
overexpression of their inhibitors Id1 and Tal1 leads to a dramatic loss of
thymocytes. Here, we suggest that bHLH proteins play important roles in
establishing thresholds for pre-TCR and TCR signaling. Inhibition of their
function allows double-negative cells to differentiate without a functional
pre-TCR, while anti-CD3 stimulation downregulates bHLH activities. We also find
that the transcription factor NF-kappaB becomes activated in transgenic
thymocytes. Further activation of NF-kappaB exacerbates the loss of thymocytes,
whereas inhibition of NF-kappaB leads to the rescue of double-positive
thymocytes. Therefore, we propose that E2A and HEB negatively regulate pre-TCR
and TCR signaling and their removal causes hyperactivation and apoptosis of
thymocytes.

PMID: 11825562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. FEBS Lett. 2002 Jan 2;510(1-2):50-6.

NGF-dependent and tissue-specific transcription of vgf is regulated by a
CREB-p300 and bHLH factor interaction.

Mandolesi G(1), Gargano S, Pennuto M, Illi B, Molfetta R, Soucek L, Mosca L, Levi
A, Jucker R, Nasi S.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Acidi Nucleici CNR, Dipartimento Genetica e Biologia Molecolare,
Università La Sapienza, P. le A. Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.

Neurotrophins support neuronal survival, development, and plasticity through
processes requiring gene expression. We studied how vgf target gene transcription
is mediated by a critical promoter region containing E-box, CCAAT and cAMP
response element (CRE) sites. The p300 acetylase was present in two distinct
protein complexes bound to this region. One complex, containing HEB (ubiquitous
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)), bound the promoter in non-neuronal cells and was 
involved in repressing vgf expression. Neurotrophin-dependent transcription was
mediated by the second complex, specific for neuronal cells, which included CRE
binding protein and MASH1 (neuro-specific bHLH), bound the CCAAT motif, and was
target of neurotrophin signalling. The interaction, mediated by p300, of
different transcription factors may add specificity to the neurotrophin response.

PMID: 11755530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):6469-77. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

Enhancer-specific modulation of E protein activity.

Markus M(1), Du Z, Benezra R.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Homodimeric complexes of members of the E protein family of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are important for tissue-specific
activation of genes in B lymphocytes (Bain, G., Gruenwald, S., and Murre, C.
(1993) Mol. Cell Biol. 13, 3522-3529; Shen, C. P., and Kadesch, T. (1995) Mol.
Cell Biol. 15, 4518-4524; Jacobs, Y., et al. (1994) Mol. Cell Biol. 14,
4087-4096; Wilson, R. B., et al. (1991) Mol. Cell Biol. 11, 6185-6191). These
homodimers, however, have little activity on myogenic enhancers (Weintraub, H.,
Genetta, T., and Kadesch, T. (1994) Genes Dev. 8, 2203-2211). We report here the 
identification of a novel cis-acting transcriptional repression domain in the E
protein family of bHLH transcription factors. This domain, the Rep domain, is
present in each of the known vertebrate E proteins. Extensive mapping analysis
demonstrates that this domain is an acidic region of 30 amino acids with a
predicted loop structure. Fusion studies indicate that the Rep domain can repress
both of the E protein transactivation domains (AD1 and AD2). Physiologically, the
Rep domain plays a key role in maintaining E protein homodimers in an inactive
state on myogenic enhancers. In addition, we demonstrate that Rep domain mediated
repression of AD1 is a necessary for the function of MyoD-E protein heterodimeric
complexes. These studies demonstrate that the Rep domain is important for
modulating the transcriptional activity of E proteins and provide key insights
into both the selectivity and mechanism of action of E protein containing bHLH
protein complexes.

PMID: 11724804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Blood. 2001 Oct 15;98(8):2456-65.

Basic helix-loop-helix proteins E2A and HEB induce immature T-cell receptor
rearrangements in nonlymphoid cells.

Langerak AW(1), Wolvers-Tettero IL, van Gastel-Mol EJ, Oud ME, van Dongen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus University Rotterdam/University Hospital
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. langerak@immu.fgg.eur.nl

T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangements are mediated via V(D)J recombination,
which is strictly regulated during lymphoid differentiation, most probably
through the action of specific transcription factors. Investigated was whether
cotransfection of RAG1 and RAG2 genes in combination with lymphoid transcription 
factors can induce TCR gene rearrangements in nonlymphoid human cells.
Transfection experiments showed that basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors
E2A and HEB induce rearrangements in the TCRD locus (Ddelta2-Ddelta3 and
Vdelta2-Ddelta3) and TCRG locus (psi Vgamma7-Jgamma2.3 and Vgamma8-Jgamma2.3).
Analysis of these rearrangements and their circular excision products revealed
some peculiar characteristics. The Vdelta2-Ddelta3 rearrangements were formed by 
direct coupling without intermediate Ddelta2 gene segment usage, and most
Ddelta2-Ddelta3 recombinations occurred via direct coupling of the respective
upstream and downstream recombination signal sequences (RSSs) with deletion of
the Ddelta2 and Ddelta3 coding sequences. Subsequently, the E2A/HEB-induced TCR
gene recombination patterns were compared with those in early thymocytes and
acute lymphoblastic leukemias of T- and B-lineage origin, and it was found that
the TCR rearrangements in the transfectants were early (immature) and not
necessarily T-lineage specific. Apparently, some parts of the TCRD
(Vdelta2-Ddelta region) and TCRG genes are accessible for recombination not only 
in T cells, but also in early B-cells and even in nonlymphoid cells if the
appropriate transcription factors are present. The transfection system described 
here appeared to be useful for studying the accessibility of immunoglobulin and
TCR genes for V(D)J recombination, but might also be applied to study the
induction of RSS-mediated chromosome aberrations.

PMID: 11588043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Immunol. 2001 Aug 15;167(4):2157-63.

E2A and HEB activate the pre-TCR alpha promoter during immature T cell
development.

Takeuchi A(1), Yamasaki S, Takase K, Nakatsu F, Arase H, Onodera M, Saito T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

The pre-TCRalpha (pTalpha) is exclusively expressed in immature thymocytes and
constitutes the pre-TCR complex with TCRbeta, which regulates early T cell
differentiation. Despite the recent identification of the pTalpha enhancer, the
contribution of the promoter region, the direct DNA-protein interaction, and the 
regulation of such interaction along with T cell development have not been
investigated. We analyzed the pTalpha promoter region and identified the critical
elements for transcription of the pTalpha gene. The pTalpha promoter was found to
contain two consecutive E-box elements that are critical for pTalpha
transcription. The E-box elements in the promoter region formed the specific
DNA-protein complex that was exclusively observed in immature thymocytes, not in 
mature thymocytes and T cells. The E proteins in this complex were identified as 
E2A and HeLa E-box binding protein (HEB), and overexpression of E2A and HEB
resulted in activation of the pTalpha promoter. The binding complex in the
consecutive E-boxes in the pTalpha promoter changed along with T cell
development, as a distinct DNA-binding complex was observed in mature T cells.
Comparing the E-box regions in the enhancer and the promoter, those in the
promoter appear to make a greater contribution to pTalpha gene transcription.

PMID: 11490000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Exp Med. 2001 Mar 19;193(6):769-76.

Induction of a diverse T cell receptor gamma/delta repertoire by the
helix-loop-helix proteins E2A and HEB in nonlymphoid cells.

Ghosh JK(1), Romanow WJ, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093,
USA.

During specific stages of thymocyte development, the T cell receptor (TCR) locus 
is assembled from variable (V), diversity (D), and joining (J) gene segments.
Proper TCR gamma and delta V(D)J rearrangement during thymocyte development
requires the presence of the E2A proteins. Here we show that E2A and a closely
related protein, HEB, in the presence of recombination activating gene (RAG)1 and
RAG2, each have the ability to activate TCR gamma and delta rearrangement in
human kidney cells. The coding joints are diverse, contain nucleotide deletions, 
and occasionally show the presence of P nucleotides. Interestingly, only a subset
of V, D, and J segments are targeted by the E2A and HEB proteins. Thus, E2A and
HEB permit localized accessibility of the TCR gamma and delta loci to the
recombination machinery. These data indicate that a distinct but diverse TCR
repertoire can be induced in nonlymphoid cells by the mere presence of the V(D)J 
recombinase and the transcriptional regulators, E2A and HEB.

PMCID: PMC2193417
PMID: 11257142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Nat Immunol. 2000 Aug;1(2):138-44.

SCL and LMO1 alter thymocyte differentiation: inhibition of E2A-HEB function and 
pre-T alpha chain expression.

Herblot S(1), Steff AM, Hugo P, Aplan PD, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W1R7.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2000 Aug;1(2):97-8.

Cooperation between the stem cell leukemia (SCL) transcription factor and its
nuclear partners LMO1 or LMO2 induces aggressive T cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia when inappropriately expressed in T cells. This study examined the
cellular and molecular targets of the SCL-LMO complex at the preleukemic stage.
We show that SCL and its partners are coexpressed in the most primitive
thymocytes. Maturation to the pre-T cell stage is associated with a
down-regulation of SCL and LMO1 and LMO2, and a concomitant up-regulation of E2A 
and HEB expression. Moreover, enforced expression of SCL-LMO1 inhibits T cell
differentiation and recapitulates a loss of HEB function, causing a deregulation 
of the transition checkpoint from the CD4-CD8- to CD4+CD8+ stages. Finally, we
identify the gene encoding pT alpha as a downstream target of HEB that is
specifically repressed by the SCL-LMO complex.

PMID: 11248806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Nat Immunol. 2000 Aug;1(2):97-8.

Intertwining proteins in thymocyte development and cancer.

Murre C.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2000 Aug;1(2):138-44.

PMID: 11248796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1999;64:45-50.

Controlling lymphopoiesis with a combinatorial E-protein code.

Barndt RJ(1), Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

PMID: 11232321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Res. 2000 Dec 15;60(24):6832-5.

Fusion of the NH2-terminal domain of the basic helix-loop-helix protein TCF12 to 
TEC in extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma with translocation t(9;15)(q22;q21).

Sjögren H(1), Wedell B, Meis-Kindblom JM, Kindblom LG, Stenman G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Göteborg University, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res 2001 Mar 1;61(5):2339. Kindblom JM [corrected to Meis-Kindblom JM].

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas (EMCs) are characterized by recurrent
t(9;22) or t(9;17) translocations resulting in fusions of the NH2-terminal
transactivation domains of EWS or TAF2N to the entire TEC protein. We report here
an EMC with a novel translocation t(9; 15)(q22;q21) and a third type of
TEC-containing fusion gene. The chimeric transcript encodes a protein in which
the first 108 amino acids of the NH2-terminus of the basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) protein TCF12 is linked to the entire TEC protein. The translocation
separates the NH2-terminal domain of TCF12 from the bHLH domain as well as from a
potential leucine zipper domain located immediately downstream of the breakpoint.
These results demonstrate that the NH2-terminal transactivation domains of EWS or
TAF2N are not unique in their ability to convert the TEC protein into an
oncogenically active fusion protein, and that they may be replaced by a domain
from a bHLH protein that presumably endows the fusion protein with similar
functions.

PMID: 11156374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(18):6677-85.

Functions of E2A-HEB heterodimers in T-cell development revealed by a dominant
negative mutation of HEB.

Barndt RJ(1), Dai M, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

Lymphocyte development and differentiation are regulated by the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors encoded by the E2A and HEB genes.
These bHLH proteins bind to E-box enhancers in the form of homodimers or
heterodimers and, consequently, activate transcription of the target genes. E2A
homodimers are the predominant bHLH proteins present in B-lineage cells and are
shown genetically to play critical roles in B-cell development. E2A-HEB
heterodimers, the major bHLH dimers found in thymocyte extracts, are thought to
play a similar role in T-cell development. However, disruption of either the E2A 
or HEB gene led to only partial blocks in T-cell development. The exact role of
E2A-HEB heterodimers and possibly the E2A and HEB homodimers in T-cell
development cannot be distinguished in simple disruption analysis due to a
functional compensation from the residual bHLH homodimers. To further define the 
function of E2A-HEB heterodimers, we generated and analyzed a dominant negative
allele of HEB, which produces a physiological amount of HEB proteins capable of
forming nonfunctional heterodimers with E2A proteins. Mice carrying this mutation
show a stronger and earlier block in T-cell development than HEB complete
knockout mice. The developmental block is specific to the alpha/beta T-cell
lineage at a stage before the completion of V(D)J recombination at the TCRbeta
gene locus. This defect is intrinsic to the T-cell lineage and cannot be rescued 
by expression of a functional T-cell receptor transgene. These results indicate
that E2A-HEB heterodimers play obligatory roles both before and after TCRbeta
gene rearrangement during the alpha/beta lineage T-cell development.

PMCID: PMC86175
PMID: 10958665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Jun 15;257(2):320-31.

Negative regulation of selected bHLH proteins by eHAND.

Bounpheng MA(1), Morrish TA, Dodds SG, Christy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio, Texas, 78245-3207, USA.

The bHLH protein eHAND plays an important role in the development of
extraembryonic, mesodermal, and cardiac cell lineages, presumably through
heterodimerization with other HLH proteins and DNA binding. In this study, we
have identified a novel transcriptional activity of eHAND. In transient
transfection assays, eHAND is a potent inhibitor of activation by some but not
all bHLH proteins. eHAND can prevent E-box DNA binding by these bHLH proteins.
Interestingly, eHAND can also strongly inhibit transactivation activity by a MyoD
approximately E47 tethered dimer, which suggests a distinct mechanism of action. 
eHAND also inhibits MyoD-dependent skeletal muscle cell differentiation and
expression of the muscle-specific myosin heavy chain protein. In addition, we
show that eHAND can repress activity of the natural p75LNGFR promoter, whose
expression overlaps that of eHAND and dHAND. The inhibitory activity of eHAND may
be attributed to multiple mechanisms, such as the ability to act as a
corepressor, the presence of a repression domain, and its ability to sequester E 
proteins in an inactive complex. Based upon its inhibitory effect on bHLH
proteins and cellular differentiation, we propose that eHAND may function by
several mechanisms to promote placental giant cell proliferation by negatively
regulating the activities of the bHLH protein MASH-2.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10837146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(10):3640-54.

Overlapping expression of early B-cell factor and basic helix-loop-helix proteins
as a mechanism to dictate B-lineage-specific activity of the lambda5 promoter.

Sigvardsson M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Group, CMB, Lund University, S-223 62 Lund, Sweden.
mikael.sigvardsson@immuno.lu.se

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are a large group of
proteins suggested to control key events in the development of B lymphocytes as
well as of other cellular lineages. To examine how bHLH proteins activate a
B-lineage-specific promoter, I investigated the ability of E47, E12, Heb, E2-2,
and MyoD to activate the lambda5 surrogate light chain promoter. Comparison of
the functional capacity of the E2A-encoded E47 and E12 proteins indicated that
even though both were able to activate the lambda5 promoter and act in synergy
with early B-cell factor (EBF), E47 displayed a higher functional activity than
E12. An ability to act in synergy with EBF was also observed for Heb, E2-2, and
MyoD, suggesting that these factors were functionally redundant in this regard.
Mapping of functional domains in EBF and E47 revealed that the dimerization and
DNA binding domains mediated the synergistic activity. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay analysis using the 5' part of the lambda5 promoter revealed formation
of template-dependent heteromeric complexes between EBF and E47, suggesting that 
the synergistic mechanism involves cooperative binding to DNA. These findings
propose a unique molecular function for E47 and provide overlapping expression
with EBF as a molecular mechanism to direct B-cell-specific target gene
activation by bHLH proteins.

PMCID: PMC85657
PMID: 10779354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 14;275(2):913-20.

The kappaB and V(D)J recombination signal sequence binding protein KRC regulates 
transcription of the mouse metastasis-associated gene S100A4/mts1.

Hjelmsoe I(1), Allen CE, Cohn MA, Tulchinsky EM, Wu LC.

Author information: 
(1)Danish Cancer Society, Department of Molecular Cancer Biology,
Strandboulevarden 49, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.

A kappaB-like sequence, Sb, is integral to the composite enhancer located in the 
first intron of the metastasis-associated gene, S100A4/mts1. Oligonucleotides
containing this sequence form three specific complexes with nuclear proteins
prepared from S100A4/mts1-expressing CSML100 adenocarcinoma cells. Protein
studies show the Sb-interacting complexes include NF-kappaB/Rel proteins, p50.p50
and p50.p65 dimers. Additionally, the Sb sequence was bound by an unrelated
approximately 200-kDa protein, p200. Site-directed mutagenesis in conjunction
with transient transfections indicate that p200, but not the NF-kappaB/Rel
proteins, transactivates S100A4/mts1. To identify candidate genes for p200,
double-stranded DNA probes containing multiple copies of Sb were used to screen a
randomly primed lambdagt11 cDNA expression library made from CSML100 poly(A)(+)
RNA. Two clones corresponding to the DNA-binding proteins KRC and Alf1 were
identified. KRC encodes a large zinc finger protein that binds to the kappaB
motif and to the signal sequences of V(D)J recombination. In vitro DNA binding
assays using bacterially expressed KRC fusion proteins, demonstrate specific
binding of KRC to the Sb sequence. In addition, introduction of KRC expression
vectors into mammalian cells induces expression of S100A4/mts1 and reporter genes
driven by S100A4/mts1 gene regulatory sequences. These data indicate that KRC
positively regulates transcription of S100A4/mts1.

PMID: 10625627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jan;20(2):530-41.

The HAND1 basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor regulates trophoblast
differentiation via multiple mechanisms.

Scott IC(1), Anson-Cartwright L, Riley P, Reda D, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Development and Fetal Health, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario Canada.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor genes Hand1 and Mash2 are 
essential for placental development in mice. Hand1 promotes differentiation of
trophoblast giant cells, whereas Mash2 is required for the maintenance of giant
cell precursors, and its overexpression prevents giant cell differentiation. We
found that Hand1 expression and Mash2 expression overlap in the ectoplacental
cone and spongiotrophoblast, layers of the placenta that contain the giant cell
precursors, indicating that the antagonistic activities of Hand1 and Mash2 must
be coordinated. MASH2 and HAND1 both heterodimerize with E factors, bHLH proteins
that are the DNA-binding partners for most class B bHLH factors and which are
also expressed in the ectoplacental cone and spongiotrophoblast. In vitro, HAND1 
could antagonize MASH2 function by competing for E-factor binding. However, the
Hand1 mutant phenotype cannot be solely explained by ectopic activity of MASH2,
as the Hand1 mutant phenotype was not altered by further mutation of Mash2.
Interestingly, expression of E-factor genes (ITF2 and ALF1) was down-regulated in
the trophoblast lineage prior to giant cell differentiation. Therefore,
suppression of MASH2 function, required to allow giant cell differentiation, may 
occur in vivo by loss of its E-factor partner due to loss of its expression
and/or competition from HAND1. In giant cells, where E-factor expression was not 
detected, HAND1 presumably associates with a different bHLH partner. This may
account for the distinct functions of HAND1 in giant cells and their precursors. 
We conclude that development of the trophoblast lineage is regulated by the
interacting functions of HAND1, MASH2, and their cofactors.

PMCID: PMC85124
PMID: 10611232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Neurosci Lett. 1999 Oct 29;274(3):191-4.

Expression of the basic Helix-Loop-Helix ME1 E-protein during development and
aging of the murine cerebellum.

Uittenbogaard M(1), Chiaramello A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, George Washington University Medical
Center, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Genesis of cerebellar granule cells is controlled by key transcription factors,
such as the lineage-specific basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factor
MATH-1, whose activity is dependent upon dimerization with bHLH E-proteins. In an
effort to understand the molecular mechanisms of bHLH proteins orchestrating
cerebellar development, we explored the spatio-temporal expression of the ME1
E-protein. Our results reveal that ME1 expression is first detected in the
cerebellar primordium and then in the rhombic lip cells at E12.5. Its expression 
persists in the emerging external germinal layer during embryonic expansion. In
adult cerebellum, prominent ME1 expression is detected in mature granule cells
located in the internal granular layer. However, ME1 expression is not sustained 
in aged cerebellum. A similar declined pattern of expression is also observed in 
the aging hippocampus.

PMID: 10548422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Immunol. 1999 Sep 15;163(6):3331-43.

A novel role for HEB downstream or parallel to the pre-TCR signaling pathway
during alpha beta thymopoiesis.

Barndt R(1), Dai MF, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

TCR gene rearrangement and expression are central to the development of clonal T 
lymphocytes. The pre-TCR complex provides the first signal instructing
differentiation and proliferation events during the transition from CD4-CD8-TCR- 
double negative (DN) stage to CD4+CD8+ double positive (DP) stage. How the
pre-TCR signal leads to downstream gene expression is not known. HeLa E-box
binding protein (HEB), a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is
abundantly detected in thymocytes and is thought to regulate E-box sites present 
in many T cell-specific gene enhancers, including TCR-alpha, TCR-beta, and CD4.
Targeted disruption of HEB results in a 5- to 10-fold reduction in thymic
cellularity that can be accounted for by a developmental block at the DN to DP
stage transition. Specifically, a dramatic increase in the
CD4low/-CD8+CD5lowHSA+TCRlow/- immature single positive population and a
concomitant decrease in the subsequent DP population are observed. Adoptive
transfer test shows that this defect is cell-autonomous and restricted to the
alpha beta T cell lineage. Introduction of an alpha beta TCR transgene into the
HEBko/ko background is not sufficient to rescue the developmental delay. In vivo 
CD3 cross-linking analysis of thymocytes indicates that TCR signaling pathway in 
the HEBko/ko mice appears intact. These findings suggest an essential function of
HEB in early T cell development, downstream or parallel to the pre-TCR signaling 
pathway.

PMID: 10477603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cell. 1999 Jul;4(1):63-73.

A conserved motif present in a class of helix-loop-helix proteins activates
transcription by direct recruitment of the SAGA complex.

Massari ME(1), Grant PA, Pray-Grant MG, Berger SL, Workman JL, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093,
USA.

The class I helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins, which include E2A, HEB, and E2-2,
have been shown to be required for lineage-specific gene expression during T and 
B lymphocyte development. Additionally, the E2A proteins function to regulate
V(D)J recombination, possibly by allowing access of variable region segments to
the recombination machinery. The mechanisms by which E2A regulates transcription 
and recombination, however, are largely unknown. Here, we identify a novel motif,
LDFS, present in the vertebrate class I HLH proteins as well as in a yeast HLH
protein that is essential for transactivation. We provide both genetic and
biochemical evidence that the highly conserved LDFS motif stimulates
transcription by direct recruitment of the SAGA histone acetyltransferase
complex.

PMID: 10445028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Dev Genet. 1999;25(2):146-57.

A repertoire of differentially expressed transcription factors that offers
insight into mechanisms of human cytotrophoblast differentiation.

Janatpour MJ(1), Utset MF, Cross JC, Rossant J, Dong J, Israel MA, Fisher SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biomedical Sciences, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0512, USA.

During human placental development, specialized cells allocated to the
extraembryonic lineage (cytotrophoblasts) invade the uterus, anchoring the
conceptus to the decidua and tapping a supply of maternal blood. This unusual
behavior requires cytotrophoblasts to assume highly specialized characteristics; 
some are commonly associated with tumor cells, while others are typical of
endothelia. Here we investigated the transcriptional mechanisms that control
cytotrophoblast differentiation/invasion. Specifically, we examined the cells'
expression of a number of transcription factors, at the RNA level, as they
differentiated along the invasive pathway in vitro. Since basic helix-loop-helix 
(bHLH) proteins play important roles in murine trophoblast differentiation, we
first examined their expression by cytotrophoblasts. As in murine placental
development, expression of the human homologue of Mash-2 was confined to
progenitor cells. But expression of Hand-1, which promotes differentiation of
murine trophoblast giant cells, was not detected. We also found that
cytotrophoblasts upregulated the expression of bHLH/PAS factors that function in 
adaptive responses to hypoxia, including hEPAS-1, which is expressed primarily in
endothelial cells. Quite unexpectedly, we discovered that cytotrophoblasts
express high levels of mRNA encoding the human homologue of the Drosophila
neuronal fate gene, glial cells missing-1 (gcm-1). We also found evidence of
crosstalk between the bHLH and GCM-1 regulatory networks. Together, these results
offer insights into the transcriptional mechanisms that govern cytotrophoblast
differentiation/invasion. Interestingly, these mechanisms suggest analogies with 
those that govern differentiation of murine stem cells allocated to both the
intra- and extraembryonic lineages.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10440849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Int J Oncol. 1999 Jul;15(1):121-6.

Tumor necrosis factor and gamma-interferon repress transcription from the c-myc
P2 promoter by reducing E2F binding activity.

Carlberg AL(1), Moberg KH, Hall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, 510 Curtis, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Transcription of the c-myc gene in HeLa cells has been shown to be repressed by
the combined action of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and gamma-interferon
(gamma-INF). Shown here, these two cytokines inhibit proliferation of Hela cells 
with a coordinate inhibition of c-myc gene expression. It was found that these
two cytokines exert their effects on the more proximal region of the c-myc P2
promoter. Using c-myc promoter:CAT constructs, it was found that the combined
action of these cytokines significantly repress transcription from P2. This
repression occurred through the E2F site within the promoter and not the ME1a2 or
ME1a1 sites. However, these cytokines had no effect on transcription from the
rous sarcoma virus promoter or the SV40 virus early promoter. Protein binding
assays indicate that TNF and gamma-INF did not effect the ability of the ME1a2
factor to bind to its site but did significantly repress E2F factor binding to
its DNA sequence.

PMID: 10375604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3131-48.

Precise developmental regulation of Ets family transcription factors during
specification and commitment to the T cell lineage.

Anderson MK(1), Hernandez-Hoyos G, Diamond RA, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.
evroth@its.caltech.edu

Ets family transcription factors control the expression of a large number of
genes in hematopoietic cells. Here we show strikingly precise differential
expression of a subset of these genes marking critical, early stages of mouse
lymphocyte cell-type specification. Initially, the Ets family member factor Erg
was identified during an arrayed cDNA library screen for genes encoding
transcription factors expressed specifically during T cell lineage commitment.
Multiparameter fluorescence-activated cell sorting for over a dozen cell surface 
markers was used to isolate 18 distinct primary-cell populations representing
discrete T cell and B cell developmental stages, pluripotent lymphoid precursors,
immature NK-like cells and myeloid hematopoietic cells. These populations were
monitored for mRNA expression of the Erg, Ets-1, Ets-2, Fli-1, Tel, Elf-1,
GABPalpha, PU.1 and Spi-B genes. The earliest stages in T cell differentiation
show particularly dynamic Ets family gene regulation, with sharp transitions in
expression correlating with specification and commitment events. Ets, Spi-B and
PU.1 are expressed in these stages but not by later T-lineage cells. Erg is
induced during T-lineage specification and then silenced permanently, after
commitment, at the beta-selection checkpoint. Spi-B is transiently upregulated
during commitment and then silenced at the same stage as Erg. T-lineage
commitment itself is marked by repression of PU.1, a factor that regulates B-cell
and myeloid genes. These results show that the set of Ets factors mobilized
during T-lineage specification and commitment is different from the set that
maintains T cell gene expression during thymocyte repertoire selection and in all
classes of mature T cells.

PMID: 10375504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Exp Med. 1999 Feb 1;189(3):501-8.

Growth inhibition and apoptosis due to restoration of E2A activity in T cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells.

Park ST(1), Nolan GP, Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University Medical Center, New York
10016, USA.

Two models have been proposed for the molecular mechanism by which the Tal1
oncogene causes T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). The activation model
suggests that Tal1 as heterodimers with the E2A transcription factor activates
the expression of oncogenes. The inhibition model postulates that Tal1 interferes
with the tumor-suppressing function of E2A. In the Jurkat T cell line, originally
derived from a patient with T-ALL, Tal1 is complexed with E2A proteins and the
transcriptional activity of E2A is very low. When E2A activity was restored by
expressing an E2A-Tal1 fusion protein, E-T/2, the Jurkat cells underwent growth
arrest and subsequently apoptosis, thus supporting the inhibition model and
suggesting that E2A loss may contribute to leukemic progression.

PMCID: PMC2192921
PMID: 9927512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. FEBS Lett. 1998 Dec 4;440(3):332-6.

Selective conservation of an E-protein gene promoter during vertebrate evolution.

Shain DH(1), Zuber MX, Norris J, Yoo J, Neuman T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins 80523, USA. shain@uclink4.berkeley.edu

The murine E-protein gene ME1 encodes a non-tissue-specific, helix-loop-helix
transcription factor that is associated with morphological development. ME1 gene 
expression is regulated by a TATA-less promoter that contains multiple Sp1
consensus elements, E-boxes, and a novel transcription initiation site. In this
study, we compared DNA homologous to the ME1 promoter from vertebrate species
ranging from frog to human. A region of striking sequence similarity was
identified in a region corresponding to the ME1 transcription initiation site
(ME1 Inr). Within this region, a poly d(A) tract and a 9-bp inverted repeat
(5'-GTCCGCCTG) were highly conserved in all species that were examined. Protein
complexes that recognized these DNA elements were present among distant
vertebrates (frog, chick, monkey and human), and were able to bend the ME1 Inr to
a similar extent (approximately 60 degrees) as the previously described murine
MBP alpha and MBP beta proteins. Collectively, these results suggest that an ME1 
Inr-like element and its associated proteins functioned in an ancestral
vertebrate more than 350 million years ago.

PMID: 9872397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Int Immunol. 1998 Oct;10(10):1539-49.

Helix-loop-helix (E2-5, HEB, TAL1 and Id1) protein interaction with the
TCRalphadelta enhancers.

Bernard M(1), Delabesse E, Smit L, Millien C, Kirsch IR, Strominger JL, Macintyre
EA.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA1461, CHU Necker-Enfants Malades and Université Paris V, France.

In order to dissect the correlation between aberrant TAL1 basic-helix-loop-helix 
(b-HLH) expression and the exclusive development of T cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemias (T-ALL) of the TCRalphabeta lineage, we have assessed the ability of
class A b-HLH proteins to regulate the TCRalpha and delta enhancers. We
demonstrate that E47S binds to TCRalpha but not to TCRdelta E-boxes in vitro.
Despite this, neither E2-5 nor HEB transactivate the TCRalpha enhancer in NIH
3T3, nor did Id1 modify endogenously driven TCRalpha [alphaE1-4] activity in a
TCRalphabeta cell line. We also demonstrate that TAL1 inhibits both binding of
E47S to aE3 and aE4 and endogenous transactivation of the TCRalpha enhancer.
Comparison of the activity of the minimal [alphaE1-2] fragment, which contains no
E-boxes, with the accessory [aE3-4] fragment, which contains two, suggested some 
contribution from the latter to TCRalpha enhancer activity in HPB-ALL. TCR
[alphaE1-2] activity was partially (40%) inhibited by TAL1 but not at all by Id1.
In contrast, [alphaE3-4] activity was almost completely inhibited by TAL1 (80%)
and slightly reduced by Id1 (15%). These data demonstrate that class A b-HLH
regulation of the TCRalpha enhancer E-boxes differs from their B lymphoid Igmicro
counterparts and suggest a novel mechanism of transcriptional inhibition by TAL1,
which may be, at least partly, independent of E-box-mediated activation, as we
currently recognize it. They also clearly demonstrate that the restriction of
TAL1 deregulation to T-ALL of the TCRalphabeta lineage is not due to induction of
TCRalpha enhancer activity by the TAL1 protein.

PMID: 9796921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3340-9.

Functional replacement of the mouse E2A gene with a human HEB cDNA.

Zhuang Y(1), Barndt RJ, Pan L, Kelley R, Dai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA. yzhuang@acpub.duke.edu

The mammalian E2A, HEB, and E2-2 genes encode a unique class of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors that are evolutionarily conserved
and essential for embryonic and postnatal development. While the structural and
functional similarities among the gene products are well demonstrated, it is not 
clear why deletion of E2A, but not HEB or E2-2, leads to a complete arrest in
B-lymphocyte development. To understand the molecular basis of the functional
specificity between E2A and HEB/E2-2 in mammalian development, we generated and
tested a panel of E2A knockin mutations including subtle mutations in the E12 and
E47 exons and substitution of both E12 and E47 exons with a human HEB cDNA. We
find that the alternatively spliced E12 and E47 bHLH proteins of the E2A gene
play similar and additive roles in supporting B lymphopoiesis. Further, we find
that HEB driven by the endogenous E2A promoter can functionally replace E2A in
supporting B-cell commitment and differentiation toward completion. Finally, the 
postnatal lethality associated with E2A disruption is fully rescued by the
addition of HEB. This study suggests that the functional divergence among E12,
E47, and HEB in different cell types is partially defined by the context of gene 
expression.

PMCID: PMC108915
PMID: 9584174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Semin Immunol. 1998 Apr;10(2):143-53.

The role of E-proteins in B- and T-lymphocyte development.

Bain G(1), Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093,
USA.

Department of lymphocytes from hematopoietic stem cells is controlled, in part,
by the activity of transcriptional regulatory proteins. In particular, one class 
of helix-loop-helix proteins, termed E-proteins, have been implicated in the
regulation of gene expression during B-cell development. Recent analysis of
gene-targeted mice has allowed a direct assessment of the functional roles of
several E-protein family members in hematopoiesis. In this review we describe the
defects in B- and T-lymphocyte development in mice carrying targeted mutations in
the E-protein genes and discuss our current understanding of the role of these
proteins in lymphoid development.

PMID: 9618760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Feb 15;26(4):1019-25.

Transcription initiation from a poly(dA) tract.

Shain DH(1), Zuber MX, Neuman T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA. dshain@mendel.berkeley.edu

The mammalian ME1 gene encodes a non-tissue-specific, helix-loop-helix
transcription factor that is enriched in morphogenetically active regions during 
development. Regulation of mouse ME1 gene expression is controlled by a novel
initiator (ME1 Inr) that promotes transcription from the center of a 13 bp
poly(dA) tract. We show here that the ME1 Inr autonomously directs initiation
from the poly(dA) tract both in vitro and in vivo. This transcription was
dependent upon two protein complexes; MBPalpha, which associated directly with
the poly(dA) tract, and MBPbeta, which introduced an approximately 60 degrees
bend immediately downstream of the poly(dA) tract. The MBPalpha and MBPbeta
binding sites were strikingly conserved in homologous DNA from several mammalian 
species and the frog Xenopus laevis. These results suggest that the ME1 Inr
constitutes a robust nucleation site that promotes transcription initiation in
the absence of conventional promoter elements.

PMCID: PMC147351
PMID: 9461462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 30;273(5):2866-73.

Identification of a highly conserved module in E proteins required for in vivo
helix-loop-helix dimerization.

Goldfarb AN(1), Lewandowska K, Pennell CA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4943, USA. ang@po.cwru.edu

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors often function as
heterodimeric complexes consisting of a tissue-specific factor such as SCL/tal or
MyoD bound to a broadly expressed E protein. bHLH dimerization therefore appears 
to represent a key regulatory step in cell lineage determination and oncogenesis.
Previous functional and structural studies have indicated that the well defined
HLH domain is both necessary and sufficient for dimerization. Most of these
studies, however, have employed in vitro systems for analysis of HLH
dimerization, and their implications for the requirements for in vivo
dimerization remain unclear. Using multiple approaches, we have analyzed bHLH
dimerization in intact, living cells and have identified a novel domain in E
proteins, domain C, which is required for in vivo dimerization. Domain C, which
lies just carboxyl-terminal to helix 2 of the HLH domain, represents the most
highly conserved region within E proteins and appears to influence the in vivo
conformation of the adjacent HLH domain. These results suggest that HLH
dimerization in vivo may represent a complex, regulated process that is distinct 
from HLH dimerization in vitro.

PMID: 9446597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Oct;11(11):1608-17.

Analysis of the role of E2A-encoded proteins in insulin gene transcription.

Sharma A(1), Henderson E, Gamer L, Zhuang Y, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Pancreatic beta-cell type-specific transcription of the insulin gene is mediated,
in part, by factors in the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family that act on a
site within the insulin enhancer, termed the E1-box. Expression from this element
is regulated by a heteromeric protein complex containing ubiquitous (i.e. the
E2A- and HEB-encoded proteins) and islet-enriched members of the bHLH family.
Recent studies indicate that the E2A- and HEB-encoded proteins contain a
transactivation domain, termed AD2, that functions more efficiently in
transfected beta-cell lines. In the present report, we extend this observation by
demonstrating that expression of full-length E2A proteins (E47, E12, and E2/5)
activates insulin E element-directed transcription in a beta-cell line-selective 
manner. Stimulation required functional interactions with other key insulin gene 
transcription factors, including its islet bHLH partner as well as those that act
on the RIPE3b1 and RIPE3a2 elements of the insulin gene enhancer. The conserved
AD2 domain in the E2A proteins was essential in this process. The effect of the
E2A- and HEB-encoded proteins on insulin gene expression was also analyzed in
mice lacking a functional E2A or HEB gene. There was no apparent difference in
insulin production between wild type, heterozygote, and homozygous mutant E2A or 
HEB mice. These results suggest that neither the E2A- or HEB-encoded proteins are
essential for insulin transcription and that one factor can substitute for the
other to impart normal insulin E1 activator function in mutant animals.

PMID: 9328343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 8;272(32):19785-93.

Differential interactions of Id proteins with basic-helix-loop-helix
transcription factors.

Langlands K(1), Yin X, Anand G, Prochownik EV.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, The,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Dimerization of three Id proteins (Id1, Id2, and Id3) with the four class A E
proteins (E12, E47, E2-2, and HEB) and two groups of class B proteins, the
myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs: MyoD, myogenin, Myf-5 and MRF4/Myf-6), and the
hematopoietic factors (Scl/Tal-1, Tal-2, and Lyl-1) were tested in a quantitative
yeast 2-hybrid assay. All three Ids bound with high affinity to E proteins, but a
much broader range of interactions was observed between Ids and the class B
factors. Id1 and Id2 interacted strongly with MyoD and Myf-5 and weakly with
myogenin and MRF4/Myf-6, whereas Id3 interacted weakly with all four MRFs.
Similar specificities were observed in co-immunoprecipitation and mammalian
2-hybrid analyses. No interactions were found between the Ids and any of the
hematopoietic factors. Each Id was able to disrupt the ability of E protein-MyoD 
complexes to transactivate from a muscle creatine kinase reporter construct in
vivo. Finally, mutagenesis experiments showed that the differences between Id1
and Id3 binding map to three amino acids in the first helix and to a small
cluster of upstream residues. The Id proteins thus display a signature range of
interactions with all of their potential dimerization partners and may play a
role in myogenesis which is distinct from that in hematopoiesis.

PMID: 9242638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1244-53.

Interplay of the E box, the cyclic AMP response element, and HTF4/HEB in
transcriptional regulation of the neurospecific, neurotrophin-inducible vgf gene.

Di Rocco G(1), Pennuto M, Illi B, Canu N, Filocamo G, Trani E, Rinaldi AM,
Possenti R, Mandolesi G, Sirinian MI, Jucker R, Levi A, Nasi S.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Acidi Nucleici CNR, Università La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

vgf is a neurotrophin response-specific, developmentally regulated gene that
codes for a neurosecretory polypeptide. Its transcription in neuronal cells is
selectively activated by the neurotrophins nerve growth factor (NGF),
brain-derived neurotrophic factor, and neurotrophin 3, which induce survival and 
differentiation, and not by epidermal growth factor. We studied a short region of
the rat vgf promoter which is essential for its regulated expression. A cyclic
AMP response element (CRE) within this region is necessary for NGF induction of
vgf transcription. Two sites upstream of CRE, an E box and a CCAAT sequence, bind
nuclear protein complexes and are involved in transcriptional control. The E box 
has a dual role. It acts as an inhibitor in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts, together with a 
second E box located downstream, and as a stimulator in the NGF-responsive cell
line PC12. By expression screening, we have isolated the cDNA for a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor, a homolog of the HTF4/HEB E protein, that 
specifically binds the vgf promoter E box. The E protein was present in various
cell lines, including PC12 cells, and was a component of a multiprotein nuclear
complex that binds the promoter in vitro. The E box and CRE cooperate in binding 
to this complex, which may be an important determinant for neural cell-specific
expression.

PMCID: PMC231849
PMID: 9032251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 6;271(49):31463-9.

E-box sequence and context-dependent TAL1/SCL modulation of basic
helix-loop-helix protein-mediated transcriptional activation.

Nielsen AL(1), Norby PL, Pedersen FS, Jorgensen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Aarhus University, C. F. Mollers Allé 130,
DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark. poul@biobase.dk

TAL1/SCL is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) oncoprotein that is expressed in
several cell lines including many hematolymphoid cells, but not in T- and
B-lineage cells. The TAL1 gene was originally discovered as being
transcriptionally activated by chromosomal rearrangements in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Here we have shown that TAL1 and the ubiquitously
expressed murine bHLH transcription factor ALF1 formed heterodimers that,
compared with ALF1 homodimers, had a more restricted E-box specificity and bound 
preferentially to the glucocorticoid-responsive E-box (Egre) motif (AACAGATGGT). 
Overexpression of the dominant inhibitory HLH protein Id1 in NIH3T3 cells reduced
the transcriptional activity mediated by ALF1 homodimers, whereas the
transcriptional activity mediated by TAL1/ALF1 heterodimers was resistant to Id
overexpression. Our results show that ALF1 may serve as a dimerization partner
for the bHLH oncoprotein TAL1 and form a complex with a distinctive DNA binding
property. These findings support the hypothesis that the leukemic characteristics
of the TAL1 oncoprotein could be mediated by activation of a set of target genes 
as heterodimeric complexes with ubiquitously expressed bHLH transcription factors
such as ALF1 and that a principal role of TAL1 might be to neutralize an
Id-mediated inactivation.

PMID: 8940159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 6;271(36):22035-43.

The GAP-43 gene is a direct downstream target of the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors.

Chiaramello A(1), Neuman T, Peavy DR, Zuber MX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, Colorado 80523, USA.

The GAP-43 promoter region contains seven E-boxes (E1 to E7) that are organized
in two clusters, a distal cluster (E3 to E7) and a proximal cluster (E1 and E2). 
Deletion analysis and site-directed mutagenesis of the GAP-43 promoter region
showed that only the most proximal E1 E-box significantly modulates GAP-43
promoter activity. This E-box is conserved between the rat and human GAP-43
promoter sequences in terms of flanking sequence, core sequence (CAGTTG), and
position. We found that endogenous E-box-binding proteins present in neuronal N18
cells recognize the E1 E-box and activate the GAP-43 promoter. The
transcriptional activity of the GAP-43 promoter was repressed not only by the
negative regulator Id2 protein, but also by two class A basic helix-loop-helix
proteins, E12 and ME1a. In vitro analyses showed that both ME1a and E12 bind to
the E1 E-box as homodimers. By Northern analyses, we established an inverse
correlation between the level of E12 and ME1a mRNAs and GAP-43 mRNA in various
neuronal cell lines as well as in ME1a-overexpressing PC12 cells. Therefore, we
have identified a cis-acting element, the E1 E-box, located in the GAP-43
promoter region that modulates either positively or negatively the expression of 
the GAP-43 gene depending on which E-box-binding proteins occupy this site.
Together, these data indicate that basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors
regulate the expression of the GAP-43 gene and that the class A ME1a and E12
proteins act as down-regulators of GAP-43 expression.

PMID: 8703010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Virol. 1996 Sep;70(9):5893-901.

Various modes of basic helix-loop-helix protein-mediated regulation of murine
leukemia virus transcription in lymphoid cell lines.

Nielsen AL(1), Nørby PL, Pedersen FS, Jørgensen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biology, University of Aarhus, Denmark.

The transcriptionally regulatory regions of the lymphomagenic Akv and SL3-3
murine leukemia retroviruses (MLVs) contain two types of E-box consensus motifs, 
CAGATG. One type, EA/S, is located in the upstream promoter region, and the
other, E(gre), is located in a tandem repeat with enhancer properties. We have
examined the requirements of the individual E-boxes in MLV transcriptional
regulation. In lymphoid cell lines only, the E(gre)-binding protein complexes
included ALF1 or HEB and E2A basic helix-loop-helix proteins. Ectopic ALF1 and
E2A proteins required intact E(gre) motifs for mediating transcriptional
activation. ALF1 transactivated transcription of Akv MLV through the two E(gre)
motifs equally, whereas E2A protein required the promoter-proximal E(gre) motif. 
In T- and B-cell lines, the E(gre) motifs were of major importance for Akv MLV
transcriptional activity, while the EA/S motif had some effect. In contrast,
neither E(gre) nor EA/S motifs contributed pronouncedly to Akv MLV transcription 
in NIH 3T3 cells lacking DNA-binding ALF1 or HEB and E2A proteins. The Id1
protein was found to repress ALF1 activity in vitro and in vivo. Moreover,
ectopic Id1 repressed E(gre)-directed but not EA/S-directed MLV transcription in 
lymphoid cell lines. In conclusion, E(gre) motifs and interacting basic
helix-loop-helix proteins are important determinants for MLV transcriptional
activity in lymphocytic cell lines.

PMCID: PMC190607
PMID: 8709209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Jul 15;24(14):2813-20.

E2A basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factors are negatively regulated by
serum growth factors and by the Id3 protein.

Loveys DA(1), Streiff MB, Kato GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Id3, a member of the Id multigene family of dominant negative helix-loop-helix
transcription factors, is induced sharply in murine fibroblasts by serum growth
factors. To identify relevant targets of Id3 activity, the yeast two-hybrid
system was used to identify proteins that dimerize with Id3. Four murine cDNAs
were identified in the screen, all of which encode helix-loop-helix proteins:
E12, E47, ALF1 and Id4. Co-immunoprecipitation assays confirm that Id3 interacts 
with E12, E47 and two alternative splice products of ALF1 in vitro. Id3 disrupts 
DNA binding by these proteins in vitro and blocks transcriptional activation by
these factors in cultured murine cells. Additionally, Id3 shows evidence of
interacting with the related proteins E2-2 and MyoD, but not c-Myc. These results
suggest that Id3 can function as a general negative regulator of the
basic-helix-loop-helix family of transcription factors exemplified by the 'E'
proteins and MyoD. Although it was previously suspected that E2A is
constitutively expressed, our data indicate that E2A is induced in quiescent
fibroblasts, by growth factor withdrawal but not by contact inhibition of cell
proliferation. These observations extend the role of Id3 in the functional
antagonism of E2A-class transcription factors, and suggest that E2A proteins may 
mediate growth inhibition.

PMCID: PMC145994
PMID: 8759016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jun;16(6):2898-905.

B-lymphocyte development is regulated by the combined dosage of three basic
helix-loop-helix genes, E2A, E2-2, and HEB.

Zhuang Y(1), Cheng P, Weintraub H.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington 98104, USA.

B-lymphocyte development requires the basic helix-loop-helix proteins encoded by 
the E2A gene. In this study, the control mechanism of E2A was further explored by
disruption of the E2A-related genes, E2-2 and HEB. In contrast to E2A, E2-2 and
HEB are not essential for the establishment of the B-cell lineage. However, both 
E2-2 and HEB are required for the generation of the normal numbers of pro-B cells
in mouse embryos. Breeding tests among mice carrying different mutations revealed
that E2-2 and HEB interact with E2A in many developmental processes including
generation of B cells. Specifically, mice transheterozygous for any two mutations
of these three genes produced fewer pro-B cells than the singly heterozygous
littermates. This study indicates that B-cell development is dependent not only
on an essential function provided by the E2A gene but also on a combined dosage
set by E2A, E2-2, and HEB.

PMCID: PMC231283
PMID: 8649400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mamm Genome. 1996 Mar;7(3):244.

ALF1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, maps to mouse chromosome 9.

Nielsen AL(1), Clark M, Taylor BA, Jorgensen P, Hjorth JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Aarhus University, Denmark.

PMID: 8833258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Gene. 1995 Nov 20;165(2):319-20.

Identification of non-tissue-specific helix-loop-helix genes in Xenopus laevis.

Shain DH(1), Zuber MX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins 80523, USA.

We have isolated four non-tissue-specific helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription
factors from Xenopus laevis (Xl). While some are clearly orthologous to known
mammalian HLH proteins, others have dramatic amino-acid differences in otherwise 
highly conserved protein domains. We propose that these changes arose following
the tetraploidization of Xl approx. 30 Myr ago.

PMID: 8522197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Nov;15(11):6036-44.

Helix-loop-helix transcription factors mediate activation and repression of the
p75LNGFR gene.

Chiaramello A(1), Neuman K, Palm K, Metsis M, Neuman T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins 80523, USA.

Sequence analysis of rat and human low-affinity nerve growth factor receptor
p75LNGFR gene promoter regions revealed a single E-box cis-acting element,
located upstream of the major transcription start sites. Deletion analysis of the
E-box sequence demonstrated that it significantly contributes to p75LNGFR
promoter activity. This E box has a dual function; it mediates either activation 
or repression of the p75LNGFR promoter activity, depending on the interacting
transcription factors. We showed that the two isoforms of the class A basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor ME1 (ME1a and ME1b), the murine
homolog of the human HEB transcription factor, specifically repress p75LNGFR
promoter activity. This repression can be released by coexpression of the HLH Id2
transcriptional regulator. In vitro analyses demonstrated that ME1a forms a
stable complex with the p75LNGFR E box and likely competes with activating
E-box-binding proteins. By using ME1a-overexpressing PC12 cells, we showed that
the endogenous p75LNGFR gene is a target of ME1a repression. Together, these data
demonstrate that the p75LNGFR E box and the interacting bHLH transcription
factors are involved in the regulation of p75LNGFR gene expression. These results
also show that class A bHLH transcription factors can repress and Id-like
negative regulators can stimulate gene expression.

PMCID: PMC230855
PMID: 7565756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. FEBS Lett. 1995 Oct 30;374(2):279-83.

Helix-loop-helix transcription factors regulate Id2 gene promoter activity.

Neuman K(1), Nornes HO, Neuman T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins 80523, USA.

Id-like helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factors are involved in the
regulation of proliferation and differentiation of several cell types. We
isolated 5' regulatory region of mouse Id2 gene and demonstrated that it contains
several E-box clusters. These E-boxes mediate stimulatory effects of basic-HLH
(bHLH) transcription factors ME1, ME2, and NSCL1 on Id2 promoter activity.
Co-expression of Id2 blocks the stimulatory effect of bHLH transcription factors 
which suggests the presence of feedback loops in Id2 transcriptional regulation. 
Overexpression of NSCL1 in F9 cells blocks the downregulation of Id2 gene
expression during retinoic acid induced differentiation. Our data demonstrate
that bHLH transcription factors regulate Id2 gene expression.

PMID: 7589553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Mol Biol. 1995 Jun 9;249(3):564-75.

E-box variants direct formation of distinct complexes with the basic
helix-loop-helix protein ALF1.

Bonven BJ(1), Nielsen AL, Nørby PL, Pedersen FS, Jørgensen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Aarhus, Denmark.

The murine transcription factor ALF1 belongs to the class of basic
helix-loop-helix proteins specific for the NCAGNTGN-version of the E-box. Binding
of homodimeric ALF1 to variants of this motif was studied by a combination of
binding site selection technology and DNA modification interference analysis. The
results showed that substitutions at the non-conserved positions in the E-box
sequence could cause profound alterations in the patterns of specific contacts at
the protein-DNA interface. Thus, both the overall extent of the binding region
and the backbone phosphate contact pattern differed markedly between closely
related E-boxes with similar affinities for ALF1. The identity of the base at the
inner N was an important determinant of contact pattern specification. The E-box 
variants differed in their ability to mediate ALF1 dependent transcriptional
activation in vivo. We discuss the possibility that adaptability in basic
helix-loop-helix protein-DNA interactions can result in complexes with different 
functional properties.

PMID: 7783212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 May 25;23(10):1696-703.

A novel initiator regulates expression of the nontissue-specific helix-loop-helix
gene ME1.

Shain DH(1), Neuman T, Zuber MX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins 80523, USA.

The mouse ME1 gene (HEB, REB and GE1, homologues in human, rat and chick,
respectively) is a member of the nontissue-specific helix-loop-helix (HLH) gene
family that includes E2A, E2-2 and Drosophila daughterless. We have examined the 
factors that control ME1 gene expression. ME1 is a single copy gene that spans > 
or = 150 kb of DNA and contains > 10 exons. Transcription was directed by an
unusual initiator element that contained a 13 bp poly d(A) tract flanked by
palindromic and inverted repeat sequences. Both RNase protection and primer
extension analyses mapped the ME1 transcriptional start site to the center of the
13 bp poly d(A) tract. The ME1 initiator and its proximal sequences were required
for promoter activity, supported basal levels of transcription, and contributed
to cell type-specific gene expression. Other cis-elements utilized by the
TATA-less ME1 promoter included a cluster of Sp1 response elements, E-boxes and a
strong repressor. Collectively, our results suggest that the ME1 initiator and
other cis-elements in the proximal promoter play an important role in regulating 
ME1 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC306924
PMID: 7784173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1995 Mar;29(1):107-18.

Differential expression and distinct DNA-binding specificity of ME1a and ME2
suggest a unique role during differentiation and neuronal plasticity.

Chiaramello A(1), Soosaar A, Neuman T, Zuber MX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins 80523, USA.

Class A basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins have been referred to as
ubiquitous and are believed to have redundant functions. They are involved in the
control of several developmental pathways, such as neurogenesis and myogenesis.
To rationalize the existence of multiple class A bHLH proteins, we evaluated the 
differences and similarities between ME1a and ME2, two class A bHLH proteins,
highly expressed in differentiating neuronal cells. In situ hybridization
analyses reveal that ME1a and ME2 are characterized by distinguishable patterns
of expression in areas of the adult mouse brain where neuronal plasticity occurs.
Also, DNA-binding assays show that both proteins bind to E-boxes as homodimers
and heterodimers, and show differences in their DNA-binding specificities, which 
suggest selective interactions with different binding sites of target genes. In
addition, in vitro DNA-binding assays demonstrate that Id2 forms heterodimers
with ME1a and ME2. As a result of these interactions, their DNA-binding activity 
is abolished. Furthermore, overexpression of Id2 in neuronal cells suppresses
ME1a and ME2 transcriptional activity. Based on our data, we hypothesize that
ME1a and ME2 may activate gene expression of different target genes and therefore
are likely to be differently involved during neurogenesis.

PMID: 7769987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1995;68(3-4):235-8.

Localization of the human HTF4 transcription factors 4 gene (TCF12) to chromosome
15q21.

Zhang Y(1), Flejter WL, Barcroft CL, Rivière M, Szpirer J, Szpirer C, Bina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, W. Lafayette, IN 47907-1393.

Identification and localization of genes that encode regulators of transcription 
could provide landmarks for functional analysis of the human genome. Toward this 
goal, we examined a panel of somatic cell hybrids and assigned the gene (TCF12)
encoding the helix-loop-helix transcription factors 4 (HTF4) to chromosome 15.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization further localized TCF12 to chromosome 15q21.
Northern analysis revealed that the relative abundance of HTF4 gene transcripts
is not constant but varies depending on the human cell-line or tissue examined.

PMID: 7842744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Virol. 1994 Sep;68(9):5638-47.

Basic helix-loop-helix proteins in murine type C retrovirus transcriptional
regulation.

Nielsen AL(1), Pallisgaard N, Pedersen FS, Jørgensen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Aarhus University, Denmark.

E boxes, recognition sequences for basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factors, are detected in the enhancer and promoter regions of several murine type
C retroviruses. Here we show that ALF1, a member of bHLH protein family of
transcription factors, in vitro binds with differing affinities to distinct E-box
sequences found in the U3 regulatory regions of Friend, Moloney, SL3-3, and Akv
murine leukemia viruses (MLVs) as well as Friend spleen focus-forming virus
(SFFV). In NIH 3T3 fibroblasts, ALF1 overexpression elevated transcription from
the U3 region of Moloney MLV and the complete long terminal repeat regions of
Friend SFFV, Akv MLV, and SL3-3 MLV but neither from the U3 region nor from the
complete long terminal repeat of Friend MLV. Introduction of mutations in the Akv
MLV E boxes showed the E-box cis elements to be required for the function of ALF1
as a transcription factor. ALF1 and the glucocorticoid receptor, with overlapping
DNA binding sequences, did not act synergistically with respect to
transcriptional trans activation of expression from the Akv MLV promoter-enhancer
region. We conclude that ALF1 in vivo may be an important transcription regulator
for Akv, SL3-3, and Moloney MLVs as well as for Friend SFFV.

PMCID: PMC236965
PMID: 8057444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 1994 Apr 22;269(16):12099-105.

Distinguishable patterns of protein-DNA interactions involving complexes of basic
helix-loop-helix proteins.

Doyle K(1), Zhang Y, Baer R, Bina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana
47907-1393.

Myogenic factors and TAL1 possess distinguishable DNA binding characteristics
when they form a complex with basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins of class A. 
These characteristics were evident in electrophoretic mobility shift assays
showing that complexes of myogenic factors and HTF4 displayed a relatively high
affinity for the enhancer in the muscle creatine kinase gene, whereas TAL1
appeared to greatly attenuate the interaction of HTF4 with this enhancer. In
addition, by forming a complex with HTF4 in solution, TAL1 could exert a negative
effect on the interactions of HTF4 with elements that include E box motifs of
microE2 (CAGCTG) and kappa E2/microE5 (CACCTG) type. Similarly, heterodimers
containing TAL1 and the DNA binding domain of E47 exhibited a relatively weak
affinity for microE2 and kappa E2/microE5 core motifs. The results of both
studies invoked the hypothesis that in vivo TAL1 might act as a negative
regulator of microE2 and kappa E2/microE5 sequence motifs by forming a complex
with the products of the E2A and HTF4 genes. Support for this hypothesis was
obtained by transient expression analyses where TAL1 was found to inhibit the
activation effects produced by E2-5 and HTF4a on a reporter gene construct
containing repeated microE2 and microE5 motifs, derived from the immunoglobulin
gene enhancer.

PMID: 8163514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Gene. 1994 Jan 28;138(1-2):115-8.

A common multiple cloning site in a set of vectors for expression of eukaryotic
genes in mammalian, insect and bacterial cells.

Pallisgaard N(1), Pedersen FS, Birkelund S, Jørgensen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Aarhus University, Denmark.

Here, we describe the construction of plasmid vectors facilitating expression of 
cloned genes in bacteria and in cells of mammalian and insect origin. Two types
of multiple cloning site (MCS) were designed based on the MCS in the expression
vector lambda gt11Sfi-Not. In the first set of vectors a start Met codon was
included in the same reading frame as in lambda gt11Sfi-Not to support expression
of partial cDNA clones. Thus a cDNA insert of lambda gt11Sfi-Not could be
shuttled among the new vectors for expression. The other set of vectors without a
start codon were suitable for expression of cDNA carrying their own start Met
codon. By Western blot analysis and by transactivation of a reporter plasmid in
co-transfections we show that cDNA is very efficiently expressed in NIH 3T3 cells
under control of the elongation factor 1 alpha promoter.

PMID: 8125287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Sep;13(9):5620-8.

A heterodimer of HEB and an E12-related protein interacts with the CD4 enhancer
and regulates its activity in T-cell lines.

Sawada S(1), Littman DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco 94143-0414.

A T-lymphocyte-specific enhancer located 13 kb upstream of the murine CD4 gene
was recently shown to be required for the developmentally regulated expression of
CD4. We have previously identified three nuclear protein binding sites in this
enhancer; one of these sites, CD4-3, is essential for expression and contains two
E-box core motifs (CANNTG) adjacent to each other in the sequence
TAACAGGTGTCAGCTGGT. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays using the CD4-3
oligonucleotide as a probe, three nuclear protein complexes, termed CD4-3A, -B,
and -C, were detected with nuclear extracts from T-cell lines. CD4-3A, which
involves nuclear protein binding to the 5' E-box, was detected only with nuclear 
extracts from lymphoid cells. Specific antisera were used to show that the CD4-3A
complex contains a heterodimer or heterooligomer of basic helix-loop-helix
transcriptional factors, E12 or a related factor and HEB, which is expressed
predominantly in thymus. Consistent with this finding, in vitro-translated E12
and HEB proteins, as homodimers or heterodimers, bound preferentially to the 5'
E-box. Point mutations in the 5' E-box, but not in the 3' E-box, abolished CD4
enhancer activity. Furthermore, overexpression of Id, a protein that forms
inactive heterodimers with E12/E47, blocked CD4 enhancer activity in T cells.
These results suggest that a heterodimer composed of HEB and E12 or a closely
related protein plays a critical role in CD4 enhancer function by interacting
with the 5' E-box motif of the CD4-3 site in vivo.

PMCID: PMC360288
PMID: 8355705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Biol Chem. 1993 May 15;268(14):10214-20.

The helix-loop-helix proteins (salivary-specific cAMP response element-binding
proteins) can modulate cAMP-inducible RP4 gene expression in salivary cells.

Lin HH(1), Li WY, Ann DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology Medical School, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis 55455.

Salivary-specific and cAMP-inducible expression of the rat proline-rich protein
gene RP4 is dependent on a 28-base pair sequence of a salivary-specific cAMP
response element (SCRE) (Lin, H. H., and Ann, D. K. (1992) Gene Expression 2,
365-377). To unravel its trans-acting factor(s), we used double-stranded
oligoprobes corresponding to the SCRE to screen a randomly primed lambda gt11
cDNA expression library made from RNA of rat salivary cells. In this report, we
describe the cDNA cloning of these helix-loop-helix SCRE-binding proteins (SCBPs)
and demonstrate that there are at least three isoforms in salivary cells, namely 
SCBP alpha, SCBP beta, and SCBP gamma. RNA polymerase chain reaction and sequence
analyses further confirmed the existence of these three different SCBP isoforms, 
which code for putative proteins of 707, 706, and 682 amino acids, respectively. 
Expression of the cloned SCBP cDNAs in salivary cells stimulates the expression
of a cotransfected reporter construct containing multicopies of the SCRE cloned
upstream of the thymidine kinase promoter and the chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase structural gene. This stimulation is much more pronounced in
transfections in which SCBP alpha and SCBP beta are cotransfected than when they 
are transfected individually. Furthermore, when low concentrations of SCBP alpha 
and SCBP beta are cotransfected with the SCRE reporter gene, coexpression of the 
catalytic subunit of protein kinase A is required to efficiently activate the
expression of the reporter gene. These results strongly suggest that the observed
stimulation of the SCRE is achieved through the coordinated expression of the
SCBP alpha, SCBP beta, and protein kinase A activities, perhaps via a direct
association of the two SCBPs and their phosphorylation by protein kinase A. We
conclude that the isolated SCBP alpha and SCBP beta cDNAs encode transcription
activators that participate in the control of the inducible RP4 gene expression
in salivary cells.

PMID: 7683670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Eur J Neurosci. 1993 Apr 1;5(4):311-8.

ME1 and GE1: basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors expressed at high
levels in the developing nervous system and in morphogenetically active regions.

Neuman T(1), Keen A, Knapik E, Shain D, Ross M, Nornes HO, Zuber MX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins 80523.

Several class A basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors have been
cloned from the developing mouse and chick nervous system. The cloned cDNAs (ME1,
ME2, ME3, ME4, in the mouse and GE1, GE2 in the chick) have HLH coding regions
highly homologous to other known class A bHLH genes. The genes corresponding to
ME1 and GE1 are abundantly expressed during development of the central nervous
system. ME1 and GE1 are expressed in proliferating neuroblasts and in cells at
the initial stages of differentiation (for example in the external granule cell
layer of the cerebellum and in the lateral region of the ventricular zone in the 
developing neural tube and cortex). They are also expressed at high levels in
morphogenetically active regions such as limb buds, somites and mesonephric
tubules. The expression of ME1 and GE1 decreases once cellular differentiation is
over. Based on the expression of ME1 and GE1 in regions of active cellular
proliferation and differentiation and on the known role of other bHLH factors in 
development, we suggest that ME1 and GE1 play important roles during development 
of the nervous system as well as in other organ systems.

PMID: 8261111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Virol. 1992 Sep;66(9):5631-4.

Interactions of HTF4 with E-box motifs in the long terminal repeat of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1.

Zhang Y(1), Doyle K, Bina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana
47907-1393.

We have identified three consensus E-box motifs in the long terminal repeat of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1. One of these E boxes interacts selectively
with representative members of the class A group of basic helix-loop-helix
proteins, including HTF4, E47, and their heterodimers. Our analyses implicate the
helix-loop-helix proteins in regulation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC289128
PMID: 1501295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Aug;12(8):3449-59.

Murine helix-loop-helix transcriptional activator proteins binding to the E-box
motif of the Akv murine leukemia virus enhancer identified by cDNA cloning.

Nielsen AL(1), Pallisgaard N, Pedersen FS, Jørgensen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Aarhus University, Denmark.

The enhancer region of Akv murine leukemia virus contains the sequence motif
ACAGATGG. This sequence is homologous to the E-box motif originally defined as a 
regulatory element in the enhancers of immunoglobulin mu and kappa genes. We have
used double-stranded oligonucleotide probes, corresponding to the E box of the
murine leukemia virus Akv, to screen a randomly primed lambda gt11 cDNA
expression library made from mouse NIH 3T3 fibroblast RNA. We have identified
seven lambda clones expressing DNA-binding proteins representing two different
genes termed ALF1 and ALF2. The results of sequencing ALF2 cDNA suggests that we 
have recovered the gene for the basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor A1,
the murine analog of the human transcription factor E47. The cDNA sequence of
ALF1 codes for a new member of the basic-helix-loop-helix protein family. Two
splice variants of ALF1 cDNA have been found, differing by a 72-bp insertion,
coding for putative proteins of 682 and 706 amino acids. The two ALF1 mRNAs are
expressed at various levels in mouse tissues. In vitro DNA binding assays, using 
prokaryotically expressed ALF1 proteins, demonstrated specific binding of the
ALF1 proteins to the Akv murine leukemia virus E-box motif ACAGATGG. Expression
in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts of GAL4-ALF1 chimeric protein stimulated expression from a
minimal promoter linked to a GAL4 binding site, indicating the existence of a
transcriptional activator domain in ALF1.

PMCID: PMC364594
PMID: 1321336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Apr 11;20(7):1805.

CTF4, a chicken transcription factor of the helix-loop-helix class A family.

Tsay HJ(1), Choe YH, Neville CM, Schmidt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, State University of New York,
Stony Brook 11794.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 May 25;20(10):2624.

PMCID: PMC312277
PMID: 1579475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Mar;12(3):1031-42.

HEB, a helix-loop-helix protein related to E2A and ITF2 that can modulate the
DNA-binding ability of myogenic regulatory factors.

Hu JS(1), Olson EN, Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

Proteins containing the basic-helix-loop-helix (B-HLH) domain have been shown to 
be important in regulating cellular differentiation. We have isolated a cDNA for 
a human B-HLH factor, denoted HEB, that shares nearly complete identity in the
B-HLH domain with the immunoglobulin enhancer binding proteins encoded by the E2A
and ITF2 genes (E proteins). Functional characterization of the protein expressed
from this cDNA indicates that HEB is a third member of the E-protein class of
B-HLH factors. HEB mRNA was found to be expressed in several tissues and cell
types, including skeletal muscle, thymus, and a B-cell line. HEB, ITF2, and the
E12 product of the E2A gene all bound to a similar spectrum of E-box sequences as
homo-oligomers. All three factors also formed hetero-oligomers with myogenin, and
the DNA-binding specificity and binding off-rates (dissociation rates) were
modulated after hetero-oligomerization. Both homo- and hetero-oligomers of these 
proteins were able to distinguish between very closely related E-box sequences.
In addition, HEB was shown to form hetero-oligomers with the E12 and ITF2
proteins. Finally, HEB was able to activate gene expression. These data
demonstrate that HEB shares characteristics with other E proteins and show that
HEB can interact with members of both the myogenic regulatory class and the
E-protein class of B-HLH factors. HEB is therefore likely to play an important
role in regulating lineage-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC369535
PMID: 1312219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. DNA Seq. 1992;2(6):397-403.

The nucleotide sequence of the human transcription factor HTF4a cDNA.

Zhang Y(1), Bina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907-1393.

A partial cDNA has previously been isolated that encodes HTF4, a new member of
the basic helix-loop-helix family of DNA binding proteins. We have reconstructed 
a full cDNA, designated HTF4a cDNA, which spans the entire HTF4 coding region.
The 5' end of the reconstructed cDNA includes an open reading frame encoding a
117-residue polypeptide. Three closely spaced ATG codons in the major open
reading frame may potentially serve as sites of initiation for HTF4a synthesis,
to yield proteins that contain 682, 675, and 657 amino acid residues,
respectively. Pairwise dot matrix analysis indicates that there are at least
three distinct human genes which encode proteins related to the Drosophila
daughterless.

PMID: 1446075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Aug 25;19(16):4555.

HTF4: a new human helix-loop-helix protein.

Zhang Y(1), Babin J, Feldhaus AL, Singh H, Sharp PA, Bina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907.

PMCID: PMC328652
PMID: 1886779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


